
                            PROLOGUE

         One Day in January 1992



No one was happy when I was chosen as Nokia’s CEO on 16 January 1992.
   Nokia’s share value immediately slumped by ten percent, ending the day
four percent down. That told us what investors thought of my prospects.
Commentators thought I was too young – I was then forty-one – and too
inexperienced to lead a great Finnish company. Nokia’s employees feared the
worst: a former banker and finance director had been parachuted into the
smoldering ruins to salvage what he could and sell it to the highest bidder.
My family’s view was that I had taken on an impossible task. They expected
it would take over my life completely, so that my three children would be
lucky to see me late in the evening, if then. Perhaps the next time they saw
me would be on our summer holiday. All in all a promising start.
   I have to turn this around, make it positive, I thought as I left Nokia’s
head office that dark evening. I myself was happy, even though others disap-
proved of my appointment. At least there was an end to the dithering and
uncertainty. I had my own ideas on what Nokia’s CEO should do. Even so I
had barely the faintest idea of what I had let myself in for. This made life eas-
ier: I had boarded a roller-coaster whose terrifying swoops, loops, and dips I
could never even have imagined. If someone had jumped into the car beside
me and told me the success story Nokia would be, I wouldn’t have believed
them. If someone had asked me what kind of future I expected for Nokia,
I’d have replied: “I haven’t a clue.” If, that is, I’d been compelled to be honest.
   If someone could have described just how bad my most difficult times at
Nokia would feel, I wouldn’t have believed it. Or if I had believed it, I would
xviii                 Jorma Ollila Prologue
                                   and Harri Saukkomaa


have revoked my decision to take on leadership of a company sinking under
the weight of its financial problems. I was captain of a vessel where only the
bridge remained above the waterline: the hull was already submerged, and
water was coming into the engine room.
   The previous CEO had been sacked after falling out with the chairman,
who had then retired. The chairman before him had committed suicide.
After that there’d been an attempt to sell Nokia to the Swedish firm Erics-
son, which had been wise enough to decline the offer. No wonder then that
morale within the company was at rock bottom. My appointment as Nokia’s
CEO would mark the end of one era in the firm’s history, and the start of a
new one. I did not, however, yet know that back in 1992. I knew only that
the previous generation had tasked me with rebuilding the company they
had all but destroyed.
   Nor of course could I know that I would lead Nokia for over fourteen
years. At that time I didn’t dare think as far as six months ahead. When I was
offered the top job at Nokia, I had remarked to my wife Liisa that it was a
position one could lose at a moment’s notice. The shareholders might have
had enough, the investors could withdraw their money, or the company’s
share price could fall so low that it could be snapped up like a tasty snack.
   Our competitors perhaps were happy with my appointment. They thought
the Nokia story was in its final chapter, otherwise a former finance director
would not have been chosen. The company would quickly be sold, either as a
whole or in smaller parcels. All our competitors had to do was await Nokia’s
disintegration and it would be ready for plucking.
   My compatriots were scarcely happy with my appointment. I had been a
student politician, and after that I had worked in an American bank. These
were not plus points. Student politicians were basically unsound, and it
would have been more patriotic to have worked in a Finnish bank. Many
people in Finland had no idea who I was. My background was unusual for a
chief executive: Finns might well ask what this forty-one-year-old engineer
and economist knew about factories or the lives of the people who worked
in them. It was a good question: in their position I’d have asked it too. I came
across as an impatient, smartly dressed banker with a stubborn look and an
excellent memory for figures. I had so much self-confidence that I had no
idea how many ways there were for me to fail as Nokia’s CEO.
   I was ready to roll up my sleeves and get down to work. Lots of work. I
could do it and I would enjoy it, but on its own it was not enough. I also had
to find something that would enable both Nokia and me to survive. I had to
find good people who would believe in the company. I had to breathe new
		  Prologue
 Against All Odds                                                         xix


life into the company, so that people would believe in themselves. Other-
wise we would be lost in that sea where lie so many shipwrecked companies
whose names no one remembers.
   I and a few other managers of my age at Nokia had a dream. As a dream it
was perhaps a little mundane, of the sort one can actually put into effect. We
looked around us and saw that Finland and the Finnish economy were close
to collapse. We looked at Nokia and we noticed that the company had not
been led properly. Nevertheless we knew that Nokia was a fine company. We
knew that this company, which had been given to us to lead, could clearly
do better than before. We wanted to demonstrate that to the whole world.
   This is an account of our time at Nokia during its transformation from
an old-fashioned Finnish conglomerate to a global enterprise. It’s also the
story of how by chance I became CEO of Nokia, though I should have been
a physicist or an economist. It’s an account of our team, the people of Nokia,
who set out to follow an everyday dream. It’s a story of exceptional success,
but at the same time of the poor judgment we sometimes showed, and the
bad decisions and mistakes that we made.
xx   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa
		
 Against All Odds     1




        PA R T I


  LIFE BEFORE NOKIA
2   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                 Finland
		
 Against All Odds                                                             3




                           CHAPTER 1


         A Small Town in Finland



M        y journey began in southern Ostrobothnia – a rural province on the
         west side of Finland – in the middle of August 1950. The time and the
place are significant. I was an Ostrobothnian on both my mother’s and my
father’s side. My roots went deep into that flat landscape, home for centuries
to stubborn farmers, dogged tradesmen, and fanatical preachers.
   At the beginning of the 1950s Finland had yet to recover from the war
years. We had not been occupied; the country had not been laid waste; and,
above all, we had kept our independence. But things were not easy, either.
Finland had lost a tenth of its territory; and painful memories of war were
still fresh. We had to pay huge war reparations to the Soviet Union. The
country was anything but rich, and indeed famine was still a living memory.
Industry was developing rapidly, but a large proportion of the population
still lived by agriculture and forestry. No one wanted to hang on to the past,
rather everyone was looking ahead. There was no room for freeloaders; ev-
eryone had do their own share and preferably more. The country’s self-es-
teem still seemed rather shaky. No one could be confident about the future,
but every effort went into building it. The war had ended just a short time
before, and it was uncertain whether peace would last. Our political leaders
were trying to make Finland as secure as possible in a world that was any-
thing but secure.
   The whole country was a building site: new houses, flats, little shops, and
workshops. Everyone was in a hurry to move forward after the difficult war
years and the tedious, lifeless period that came after. The birth rate was high.
Poverty coexisted with faith in the future. Everyone was in a tremendous
4                     Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


rush so that children were just left to get on with things. There was no televi-
sion, no computers, no mobile phones, and our days were filled with school,
sport, housework, and homework. Our world was small, the size of a village.
Everyone knew their place, and life felt secure.
   The Ostrobothnian landscape was one of large fields and meadows dot-
ted with barns and divided by riverbanks, as it remains today. In the winter
snow would cover the fields, where clumps of trees would stand like black
islands. In spring, when the snow melted, the rivers would swell and flood
the fields and roads. There wasn’t much forest by Finnish standards, but the
fields and cows produced enough for expanding families to feed themselves.
If you couldn’t survive from your smallholding, you had to try something
else. For that reason there were many small businesses in Ostrobothnia: in
Kurikka where we lived there were a sawmill, a textile works, metalworks,
dairies, and various other factories. Around 10,000 people lived in this typi-
cal small town, whose center consisted of a church, schools, sports fields,
banks, shops, and a factory with a tall chimney. On the short cold winter
days grey smoke would rise from this chimney and freeze into little clouds
of red against the brilliant sky.
   I was born into a family that was not poor, but not rich either. My grandfa-
ther Kaarlo (Kalle) Ollila had set up an electrical goods business in Kurikka.
His great-grandfather had bought a farm called Hiiripelto – “Mousefield”
– in the village of Vähäkyrö. This became the Ollila farmstead. My grandfa-
ther’s father did not stay to take over the farm, but moved to Copper Cliff,
Canada. Two of his three sons died in infancy. The only survivor was my
grandfather, who came back to Finland and attended the commercial school
in Raahe, a port on the northern coast of the Gulf of Bothnia. He was known
as a man who could do complex calculations in his head.
   My grandfather was a tall, wiry, headstrong man, who didn’t do small talk.
He was widowed young and did not marry again. This left its mark on his
life. Through a child’s eyes granddad seemed a stern and somewhat mysteri-
ous man. Kalle fought in three wars: the Civil War, the Winter War, and the
Continuation War. He took part in the siege of Tampere in 1918, fighting on
the White side. This was the worst battle of the Civil War, and at that time
the biggest to have taken place in the Nordic region. But to this day I can’t
find out anything more about my grandfather’s role in these wars. The siege
of Tampere was an especially closely guarded secret in our family, and I only
learned of it while going through my late father’s papers. At my grandfather’s
funeral we – his grandsons – went through his desk drawers, and in one of
them we found a loaded pistol. We had no idea why Kalle Ollila had retained
		
 Against All Odds                                                               5


his weapon; but at the very least it posthumously augmented his aura of a
man apart.
  My father, Oiva Ollila, returned from the war, completed his studies, and
graduated in engineering from technical college. He met my mother in Hel-
sinki. Her name was Saima Elisabeth Kallio – she was always called Liisa –
and she had studied agriculture and forestry at Helsinki University. They lost
no time in starting a family. My mother broke off her studies and returned to
Ostrobothnia with my father.
  My mother was enchanting, beautiful, and clever. She had large, soft, in-
quiring eyes, a high forehead, and dark wavy hair. Her bright smile lit up
the whole world, though now and then she would gaze yearningly into the
distance. She didn’t look Finnish: she seemed to have a drop of Italian blood
and a dash of Mediterranean warmth. I was the eldest and a boy, so I had no
need to compete for my mother’s favor: I was always the apple of her eye, the
focus of love, and her trusty helper. My sister Leena was born two years later,
but I didn’t have to compete with her because she was a girl. I was very much
my mother’s boy, from the beginning and right up until her death.
  As the eldest I naturally had responsibilities as well as privileges. I not only
had to look after myself, but my younger siblings, too. My parents didn’t al-
ways have much time to spare for me, and it was assumed I could look after
myself. I had family responsibilities: I had to organize the other children
to do their chores, and it was assumed I would speak up for them with our
parents. And I was expected to set a good example.
  Our mother exuded a quiet charisma, which I have come to appreciate
more and more over the years. She always made me do my best and expected
good results, though these demands were never spoken. I understood them
perfectly well from her demeanor and solicitude. I realized I was expected
to do well, and I tried to live up to those expectations. My mother accom-
plished that. She supported me in my studies; she respected knowledge and
education, and she had her own reasons for that.
  My mother’s family was from Isokyrö, not far from my father’s family
home. Generation after generation had lived in the area. So my entire clan,
as far back as the sixteenth century, was of Ostrobothnian farming stock.
My mother grew up in modest surroundings with seven brothers and sisters.
Her father was Isak Isakinpoika Kallio, a fantastically obstinate farmer who
hated the gentry and all its works. He had decided that none of his children
should go to secondary school because they would be exposed to bad influ-
ences there. My mother was the second youngest child, and her father died
before she reached school age. So my mother did after all have the chance
6                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


of an education. She became the first of her family to graduate from high
school. She would certainly have graduated from university had she not met
my father and started a family with him.
   My father was tall, lean, and hard-working. He was a little unusual be-
cause he talked a lot – except about the war, on which he was silent. He was
a war hero who had received medals for his part in the battle of Taipale. He
had served as a field artillery officer but he never talked much about that
time, and certainly never boasted. It wasn’t until his grandson – my son –
came along that he opened up about his experience of war. For decades after
the war it was simply not the done thing to talk about it. And it was not in
my father’s nature to do so: he had done his duty on the Front, and there was
no need to go on about it.
   My father worked non-stop, planning and building. He always had many
irons in the fire. Through him I became interested in a thousand different
things, which caused problems in later life when I had to focus on just one
thing at a time. Where we lived men had the right to take an interest in what-
ever took their fancy, while women were expected to clear up after them. My
mother did all the housework, as was usual in Finland in the fifties. When I
was born, my mother was twenty-four and my father twenty-eight years old.
We all lived at my grandfather’s house in Kurikka, where the growing family
had to squeeze into two rooms. We shared the ground floor with some other
relatives while my grandfather lived upstairs. My father began work in the
family electrical business, which my grandfather must have expected him to
take over eventually.
   There was a real sense of purpose. My home background taught me that
one must work, and work hard, if one intends to succeed in life. My grand-
father worked very hard in his business, and my father worked seven days
a week. My mother toiled at home looking after our growing family, and
she taught in the village school as well. As well as his paid work, my father
devoted a lot of time to his own projects. He designed the electrical wiring
for other people’s houses, and built houses and summer cottages. There was
enough work to fill every waking moment, and every waking moment was
filled with it.
   Working was as natural as breathing. Leaving work undone or enjoying
moments of creative leisure was considered unnatural. That was laziness,
the start of a slippery slope. It might lead to vodka-drinking, which was one
of the deadliest sins (village brawls and domestic violence were common to
Ostrobothnian life). People were judged by their ability to work. “A good
worker” was the finest compliment you could pay someone. Working well
		
 Against All Odds                                                             7




Sitting on my father ’s lap with my sister Leena in Kurikka 1954.


was linked to another value: autonomy. People should stand on their own
two feet and make their own way in life.
  The people I grew up with thought you could never do too much work,
while leisure time was a potentially fatal menace. It was just this mindset that
enabled Finland to become a developed country. There are parallels with the
developing economies of Southeast Asia. I see there a mindset familiar from
my childhood: work enables one to get on in life, to achieve prosperity, and
to educate one’s children for a better life. I learned this from my parents. And
when life is full of things to be done, at least it isn’t dull.
  My mother believed in God. Some of her family were Pietists who wore
black and sang psalms. I remember as a boy in short trousers taking part in
Pietist meetings. God wasn’t really mentioned at home, though. We went
to church at Christmas, for christenings, and for funerals. My parents were
more interested in natural history than in religion. There were many books
about geography and natural history on our shelves, and we had encyclope-
dias and maps and illustrated books of natural wonders, but the family only
began to read novels in the 1960s. We read the literary classics, but science
books were regarded as a better use of time.
  Arithmetic and math were part of everyday life, and our family regard-
ed them as positively virtuous. My parents always assumed their children
would have no difficulties with math. They didn’t even bother to look at the
8                     Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


grades we got for math, for they knew they would always be the top scores.
My grandfather’s skill with figures had been passed down to my father and
then to me and my siblings. And my mother was also known for her math-
ematical ability. I was keen on mathematics from a very early age, and I
demanded high standards of accuracy from myself. Later I demanded them
from others. “Surely you know your own numbers,” I would say to subordi-
nates who got their figures mixed up when reporting results.
  Numbers revealed a much wider world. Numbers meant things, and
things could be very important, indeed. If I understood the numbers, I
would understand things as well. If I understood things, I could control the
world. When the numbers were clear, I could concentrate on the reality they
represented. Then I could achieve something new. All this became clear to
me much later, but without the respect my father and mother showed for
mathematics I would not be the person I am now.
  We lived in that small apartment in my grandfather’s house until I was
four. Then we moved to a bigger space, a flat above a bank in the center of
Kurikka. That’s where my childhood memories begin. We rented our new
home, where we children had our own rooms – there was quite enough
space in this old stone apartment block. From home it was a short trip to the
shops and schools. This was the first of many moves – I lived in at least seven
places before I was seventeen years old.
  My own world. That’s what I had as a four-year-old in Kurikka. It com-
prised our new home above the bank, my parents and siblings, and lots of
interesting things in the buildings around. Next to the bank building there
were wooden buildings in a regular pattern. In our part of the world houses
were built in orderly rows. Everything had to be properly organized.
  Summer was of course the nicest time. I rode my bike and swam in the
river, since there weren’t really any lakes where we lived. I also did my bit
to feed the family, catching little perch and carp from the river and looking
after grandma’s cows and sheep. My mother made wonderful sandwiches
and buns and the hot chocolate was the best ever.
  My mother and father didn’t have much time to spare for playing with me,
so I could explore in peace. One of the most interesting places was a store a
few hundred yards from home. Agricultural machinery was kept there: ma-
chines for threshing corn, for shredding straw, for ploughing fields, and for
mowing meadows. They were all brand-new, positively gleaming. I found
them truly enthralling.
  They had red-painted metal parts and bright yellow wooden boards pro-
tecting the heart of the machines, where there were motors, blades, belts,
and axles – everything that excited me.
		
 Against All Odds                                                              9


   Together with my friend Heikki Sillanpää I found one especially fasci-
nating machine. Heikki grabbed the handle. On the other side was a hole
through which I could see the blades as sharp as knives shredding straw for
the barns. The machine was new and splendid. We must have seen at once
how it worked. I decided to look at the mechanism from the other side when
Heikki experimented with turning the handle.
   The experiment was a roaring success: I thrust my hand inside the ma-
chine and Heikki turned the handle. The blades started rotating quite fast
and one of the blades cut off the tip of my finger. When I pulled my hand out
the end of my finger hung by a thread of skin. The blood spurted all over the
place, and I ran toward home, the safest of places, as if possessed. The pain
must have been terrific, but oddly enough I don’t remember much about it.
My sister Leena was in the yard and when she saw blood spurting from my
finger she started screaming. Her cries were much louder than mine, since
I had managed to control myself. She ran upstairs to get my parents, while
I followed up the stairs, bleeding profusely. My blood left permanent traces
on the walls of the stairway. Somewhere along the way the tip of my finger
had fallen off and couldn’t be found even though my parents went out and
looked for it.
   In the hospital they did the best they could without the missing bit. I will
never forget that summer’s day in 1955. On that day I learned that while the
world may feel safe, it is in fact full of danger. Even curiosity has its limits,
if you want to hang on to your hands, fingers, feet, and toes till the end of
your natural life.
   About that time my father decided to build a new house for his family.
Renting the flat above the bank had gone on long enough. Having our own
house would tell the world that the Ollilas now lived an independent life,
free from undue dependence. Building one’s own house was a matter of hon-
or. The previous winter my father had fetched the timber from my mother’s
family’s woodland. The trees had been cut down with handsaws. Then the
logs had been dragged out of the forest on a horse-drawn sled and cut down
in Kurikka to the right size for building. My father had designed the mod-
ern, roomy house himself. He planned every detail meticulously; even the
door knobs of cast metal were beautiful examples of craftsmanship. Behind
the house was a garden and in winter a skating rink.
   I remember carrying bricks and mixing cement when the house was being
built. I spent the summer of 1957 on the building site and was proud when
I heard passers-by whispering to each other that the Ollila house would be
the finest on the whole street. And so it was, and what was best of all was that
we children got more space, which was what we needed, for there were now
10                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


four of us. I would start school in the autumn and would need space for my
books and to do my homework. My mother had started work teaching in a
middle school, and she too needed room to work at home.
  This was the first house that Father built. After that he built one after an-
other and in the end there were seven. He wanted to move to new places
and get on in life. He wanted his family to be prosperous and to live a more
comfortable life. This meant that we were moving all the time. Just when I’d
gotten to know my new classmates, we would move again and I would find
myself once more among new faces. I had to build my own world ever more
robustly so I could withstand those changes. I turned into a boy who played
and studied with others, but who at heart knew he had his own life to lead.
		
 Against All Odds                                                            11




                           CHAPTER 2


    Where Does Self-Confidence
          Come From?


A     seven-year-old boy is perhaps a little young to follow world events.
      Nevertheless they impinged on the life of every child in Finland in the
1950s. Finland was looking for its place in the world.
   Helsinki should have hosted the Olympics in 1940, but war had inter-
vened, and we hosted the 1952 Games instead. They certainly raised Fin-
land’s profile. Along with the Games both Coca-Cola and black athletes
came to Finland for the first time – the athletes were almost a tourist attrac-
tion in themselves. There’s even a picture of me, taken a few years later, on
the edge of the athletics field, posed in the lap of a black runner. I’m perhaps
five years old.
   A boatload of Coca-Cola was imported especially for the Olympics and
sold in aid of Finnish war veterans. A whole family would often share a sin-
gle bottle between them. After the Olympics Coca-Cola disappeared for a
few years, and it was still a precious beverage when I was a teenager. It was
expensive, it came in little bottles, and one sipped it sparingly.
   My own self-confidence and self-esteem grew because they had to. Al-
though our home was a secure place to grow up, there was more than enough
change to contend with. Just when we had settled into our fine new house,
my father decided that we should move to Turku, a city on the Finnish south-
ern coast. He had decided to give up his job in my grandfather’s electrical
business. This was a disappointment to my grandfather, who closed the shop
soon after and found other work. My father got a new job at a larger electri-
cal business in Turku. He wanted bigger challenges and a better standard of
living. He was advancing at the same rate as Finland was industrializing. The
12                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


whole country was a building site. Electricity and electrical equipment were
needed more and more. There were still places in Finland waiting for their
first electrical cable.
   My parents were seeking a new life and a better future, but they also
yearned for freedom, to break away from their families and the obligations
and preordained future they entailed. My father and mother wanted to cre-
ate their own life with their own hands, which meant risk, change, and hu-
mility. There wasn’t much money and every penny had to be earned, so my
father worked every day of the week. Mother again looked after the family.
We moved to our new home, a wooden house in Turku, in 1959. Our house
in Kurikka was sold, and I had to get used to a new school class once again.
I left my friends in Kurikka with a heavy heart, and only ever received a
couple of letters from them. We didn’t waste words, at least not on writing
superfluous letters when we were still in primary school.
   In Turku I was an ordinary, diligent, well-behaved boy. I was lonely and I
wanted to go back to the people and places I knew. I pedaled my bike around
the streets of my new home town, trying to make sense of the strange dialect
my classmates spoke. The city was much bigger than Kurikka, and my old
home seemed a long way away.
   My classmates had decided I was a country boy – a yokel – and they let
me know all about it. I found it difficult to make friends, not least because
I had been to three schools by the time I was ten. I can’t regret that I was
constantly changing schools. I had to find new friends and conquer my lack
of confidence by hard work and good grades. I learned to fit in with all sorts
of other people.
   Sometimes I look at a school photo from that time. I remember how it was:
you had to at least try to smile. The photographer had come to the school
with his big camera and a black cloth. He cracked a joke, which should have
made the children laugh, and at the same time his flash went off. Everyone
sat and looked into the camera. And many did smile, though the teacher
remained serious. In the photo I look unsure of myself. My head is sunk into
my shoulders and I seem to be seeking reassurance. I had decided to show
everyone and be the same as them in the picture. But I didn’t begin to smile.
   The youngest child in our family, my little sister Sirkku, was born in Turku.
Now there were five of us: me (born 1950), Leena (1952), Harri (1954), Yrjö
(1956), and Sirkku (1959). My mother’s time was spent looking after my sib-
lings, especially when there was a baby in the house. Nevertheless, our home
was always spotless. There was always an aroma of freshly baked buns and
bread, despite the babies. In our semi-detached house our big family had
two rooms and a kitchen and also an attic.
		
 Against All Odds                                                                   13




Ollila family Christmas in Vaasa in the mid -1960s (left to right): father Oiva ,
Sirkku , Leena , Yrjö, mother Liisa , Harri, and I am standing in the back.

   The house had been built just after the war, so badly that it seemed about
to fall down. Cold water came in and went out again. It was heated with logs.
I slept in the attic room with my sister Leena.
   We moved to the western part of Turku and this was an improvement.
Now we had three rooms and central heating. The rooms were heated by oil,
so no one had to fetch logs any more. The windows were no long iced up on
cold mornings. The rooms were upstairs; on the ground floor was a dairy.
Town and country were still intermingled in 1950s Finland. Our house
opened straight on to fields. There we grew spinach, which I helped to pick.
   One day when I was about ten I found a little growth on my neck, which
required surgery to remove. There was nothing dangerous about the opera-
tion, which was a routine matter, and I wasn’t scared of blood or hospitals.
My parents had just given me a proper, grown-up bike as a present – I kept
it for years until it was stolen when I was a student. That morning I packed
my rucksack, hopped on the bike, and cycled over the hill and then along
narrow streets for a couple of miles to the university hospital, a big white
building. I checked in for the operation. It went well and I spent a week con-
valescing in the hospital. My parents came to see me there once. In the next
bed there was a very pleasant girl, who asked me something in her Turku
accent that sounded like “ain’t it tough?” Only later did I realize that she was
asking me if I had any toffee, rather than offering a comment on life.
14                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   When I left the hospital a few days later I went home the same way I had
come. The experience was vivid, but not particularly scary. Back at the turn
of the 1960s it seemed perfectly normal for a ten-year-old boy to go to the
hospital on his own.
   In spring 1961 my father announced another move. He had already
changed employer in Turku, and his new company was transferring him to
Vaasa. We were returning to Ostrobothnia.
   Because we moved so often I had developed my own interests and activi-
ties. One of the most important was tennis. It was a breath of air from a bet-
ter world. Tennis is more often associated with large towns than with remote
villages. It originates in the Anglo-Saxon world, where the more fashionable
people play in pure white kit. Finnish sporting life consists of skiing, skat-
ing, running, the high jump, baseball, weightlifting, wrestling, and the shot
putt – but not tennis. My father, however, was an exception: as well as houses
he had decided to build a whole world. He played tennis. I don’t know what
attracted him, whether it was the sport’s image or the technical skill it de-
manded of its players. Either way, he passed his enthusiasm on to me, and
tennis became my lifelong friend, my therapist, and a way to work off the
pressures of the day.
   When I was eleven I wrote a letter to my mother. She was at home in town;
I was spending the summer at my grandmother’s farm. My large, carefully
formed letters are easy to read. Even so, I nearly put the pen through the
paper. I had just learned that we were to move again, to Vaasa. I had done
my research and found out that tennis was played in Vaasa. “There’s a tennis
course for beginners starting today,” I wrote. “When I can I am going to join
the tennis club, whose name is Tennis-61,” I wrote solemnly. I folded the
letter into an envelope, wrote mother’s address with care, and took the letter
to the post office, which was next to the shop. Mother opened the letter the
next day, saw my message, and was delighted. Nor was tennis the only rea-
son I was glad to be moving to Vaasa. As I wrote: “It is indeed nice to move
back to one’s birthplace.”
		
 Against All Odds                                                          15




                           CHAPTER 3


         The Birds and the Beatles



M       y school – Vaasa High School – educated the doctors, lawyers,
        clergymen, and engineers of the future. Many boys went into their
fathers’ professions, but I had no idea then what my future might hold. We
didn’t discuss it at home. My father had had enough of electrical installation
and had become a factory manager. As for myself, I had made just one deci-
sion and I intended to stick to it: there was no way I was going into indus-
try. Factories and workshops seemed dirty, and the work was monotonous.
What was more, my father was at work every single day. I doubted whether
I wanted such a tough career.
   My father never had enough time for me, and everyone else seemed to be
in a hurry the whole time, too. Days were full of work and bustle. Everyone
was on a journey somewhere, onwards or upwards. No one had time for
frivolity, feelings, or fretting. We had a new home on account of my father’s
new job, a large and light wooden house next to the factory. At home the
only thing expected of me was that I would do well at school. This was no
problem. Besides, our parents had somehow made me believe that by study-
ing, working, and researching one could meet challenges that at first seemed
impossible. By preparation and careful consideration one could get the bet-
ter of any opponent.
   Knowledge was power, by which one could transform one’s destiny. With
the help of knowledge one could advance and do great things. With knowl-
edge one could compete and never be limited.
   I really don’t know where this optimistic view of the world came from.
Perhaps my parents were drawing on their own disappointments to moti-
16                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


vate their children. They had both been compelled to give up studying early.
Both had been the first in their family to matriculate from high school, but
neither had ever graduated from university. They really wanted their own
children to have a chance to study and eventually to graduate.
   For my mother the decision to abandon her studies in order to establish
a family had been a painful one. It was never openly discussed because it
would have hurt my mother too much. It was only by good fortune that she
had gone to secondary school after her father’s death and fought for a place
at university, but she had never had the chance to show how far her intel-
lect and talent would have taken her. I assume she would have gone far. My
mother was bitter about her fate, and the bitterness gradually changed to a
sort of gray cloud that everyone noticed but no one mentioned. That cloud
acted as a silent demand that her children study and take the opportunities
denied to her.
   My mother’s experiences came to mind much later, when I met Chinese
president and Party Leader Jiang Zemin in 2002. My mother had died by
then, so I couldn’t talk to her about my conversation with Jiang. The dis-
tinguished chairman and president wanted to know what I thought about
setting up a stock exchange in China. My view was that the Chinese could
indeed set up a stock exchange, but the most important thing was to take
care of education. The country needed good engineers, lawyers, and indus-
trialists in order to remain competitive.
   When later in the business world I encountered situations that seemed
impossible, I went back to the lessons learned at home. Everything is pos-
sible, if only you research, study, and do things right.
   Nokia was full of people who thought the same way as me. We couldn’t
accept that anything was impossible. Everything is possible for those who
know what they’re doing. But without thorough knowledge, educated hu-
mility, and close attentiveness, nothing good will come. I have never been
terribly good at improvising. I have always wanted to prepare for everything,
both the expected and the unexpected. I am at my best when I know I am
well prepared, whether the matter in question is a speech, a deal, or even a
routine meeting.
   Of course I still knew nothing of this in Vaasa High School at the begin-
ning of the 1960s. There I sat in class with the other boys. Sometimes the
teachers were boring and narrow; sometimes they set my thoughts racing.
For example, Raimo Teppo’s history and social studies lessons were spell-
binding, so that every boy listened as quiet as a mouse. Teppo took a keen
interest in the economy and in society, and he transmitted his enthusiasm
		
 Against All Odds                                                            17


to his pupils. Once we debated which of Finland’s banks was best. It was
from him that I learned what a stock exchange is and why the value of shares
fluctuates.
   I was not the sort of boy who would have been voted form captain. I didn’t
tell anecdotes or jokes, I didn’t organize parties, and I didn’t experiment with
alcohol or tobacco. Girls liked me, but I wasn’t a heartthrob who received
a constant stream of secret love letters during boring lessons. I had been
taught to behave well. At home it was emphasized that everyone was equal
and we should all have the chance to develop our talents. No one should
need to look up to other people, nor should anyone be allowed to look down.
   I was in school to learn, not to enjoy myself. Many of my classmates en-
joyed themselves at our teachers’ expense. Some of them were fun to tease.
Our scripture teacher was so absent-minded that he could never remember
where he had left his car; sometimes he even forgot which day it was. Some
teachers would find wet mushrooms or sharp tacks on their chairs. I didn’t
take part in these activities, and I’m sure many of the other boys thought I
was a bit of a prig. I certainly seemed more mature than most. Perhaps today
I’d be called a geek – nörtti in Finnish.
   In those days I often used to cycle to play tennis in the evenings. In the
winter it might well be twenty degrees below zero. I took my tennis racket,
put on a thick winter jacket and a woolly hat, and rode along Vaasa’s dark
and slippery streets to the other side of town. The front wheel never seemed
to keep straight, and cycling was rather like skating. I would play for hours
with my friends in the tennis hall. If I lost I would go home quiet and de-
jected. Tennis had become a serious contest, like so many other things. But
above all I competed with myself, and in myself I encountered a tough op-
ponent.
   Besides tennis my recreations were the scouts and a nature club. At that
time almost every secondary school in Finland had a nature club. At Vaasa
High School it was called Reviiri – the Finnish word for territory. It had
members from every class in the school and some former pupils as well. I
joined when I was about twelve and later I became the chairman of the club.
We focused on ornithology because we lay under one of the major avian
migration routes. For many a nature club member the hobby was the spark
for a career as a biologist or nature photographer.
   Through the club I also got to read some fascinating books, such as Rachel
Carson’s Silent Spring. The book’s title refers to the dying away of birdsong
because the over-use of DDT had disrupted the food chain, and bird popula-
tions were in decline.
18                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   As the eldest child I was expected to behave better than my brothers and
sisters. And we didn’t do silly things in our family – we didn’t get up to
pranks we could all laugh at together. Life wasn’t solemn, though, even if it
was earnest at times. We didn’t broadcast our emotions, either joyful or sad.
My mother’s family in particular valued silence above great emotional tem-
pests. Everyone in our family kept themselves under control, and our par-
ents were a model for this. I grew up to be a polite, reserved, hard-working,
eager-to-please, and ambitious young man.
   Global politics intruded on Finland when in November 1963 President
Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas. I read this in a newspaper, but many of
my fellow students learned about it from television. We had watched televi-
sion at a neighbor’s on a few occasions, but our parents were in no hurry
to acquire this new and revolutionary device. In conservative Ostrobothnia
television was feared as likely to ruin family life, to destroy children’s chanc-
es of success at school, and to spread subversive leftist opinions.
   We finally got a television in 1964. My schoolmates had convinced me of
its advantages. I told my mother that I wouldn’t do so well at school if we
didn’t have one. I really needed to follow world events. My mother told my
father, who bought a set the very next day. Television or no television, how-
ever, we had to keep order in the family. To do that I gathered all the children
and my parents round the table and set out rules in writing for watching
television. According to these, we could only watch it at a certain time, only
after homework was completed. It would be turned off by ten at the latest.
There were exceptions for news and sports, which my father could watch in
the middle of the night – for example if a boxing match with Cassius Clay
(who had yet to become Muhammed Ali) was broadcast then. Then we boys
too would be woken up and would come down and watch. Otherwise the
rules I had set out were to be followed.
   In 1963 and 1964 something crackled over the airwaves that changed the
world for my whole generation. “All my loving, I will send to you / All my lov-
ing, darling I’ll be true,” announced a group of mop-haired Brits. In my mind
I bawled the words of “Eight Days a Week,” even though I didn’t understand
them. I was fourteen, it was summer, and I was again in the country, where
there were some cows, sheep, and chickens in the barn. It was a long way
from Liverpool, the launchpad for the Beatles’ attack on the Finnish coun-
tryside. Our cows didn’t seem in the least bothered by their brilliance.
   In my enthusiasm I introduced the Beatles to my mother as well, and she
tried to understand them on the radio. My sister had a tape-recorder on
which to capture new Beatles recordings. It wasn’t only the Beatles’ music
		
 Against All Odds                                                         19


that inspired the world’s youth: their haircuts did, too. The Beatle cut was
a novelty and an act of rebellion against the older generation. My own hair
remained respectably short, but otherwise the Beatles were part of every-
one’s life.
   The upper floor of our school offered an excellent viewing platform for
the yard of the girls’ high school. Many of my classmates already had a girl-
friend. We both envied and teased the boys who had girlfriends. One of my
classmates began going out with a girl when he was fourteen and ended up
married to her for many years. But this was an area where I was far from pre-
cocious: I was perhaps too shy, too reserved, always in control. Or perhaps I
just wasn’t sufficiently interested in girls.
20                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                           CHAPTER 4


     The Day that Changed My Life



S    chool was not a problem for me, so I was pleased to see in the news-
     paper an announcement that Atlantic College, an international school on
the coast of South Wales, intended to recruit some Finnish pupils. I knew at
once I wanted to go there. The following day the Rector of the High School,
Olavi Niemi, stopped me in the corridor and suggested that I apply. I told
him that I’d already sent off for the application forms. I wasn’t sure I’d get
in because the college required language skills and other qualifications, but
I was sure I would do well. In March I submitted the papers to the Finnish
Cultural Foundation, which ran the selection process in Finland. In April
ten promising candidates were invited to an English-language interview in
Helsinki. I spoke stuttering school English. I had never been abroad. I had
never used the language anywhere. I had heard people speak English on
television, but otherwise I knew nothing of international life.
   On the last day of April but one I rang the Finnish Cultural Foundation.
I asked if I’d been accepted. The telephone tingled in my hand as I was told
that I had. I would leave for the Atlantic coast of Wales the following au-
tumn. My heart jumped for joy. I told my parents the news and they con-
gratulated me. My father slapped my back. My mother conjured up a dinner
excelling even her high standards. That meal, which started at five, lasted for
hours as we discussed everything that lay ahead. It was one of the happiest
days of my life.
   I didn’t know then that the whole course of my life had changed. But look-
ing back I’m absolutely certain that it did. Some seemingly random events
do change the direction of our lives. We don’t realize it at the time, only in
retrospect. My acceptance at Atlantic College was precisely such an event.
		
 Against All Odds                                                           21


   Atlantic College was established to bring together students from different
countries to study together for two years. The school was academically am-
bitious: gifted pupils were chosen on the basis of references and interviews
to see how well they would fit in. This year two of us from Finland would go.
A stipend from the Cultural Foundation would cover our tuition costs. You
could also reach the school by a different route: rich parents could pay the
school fees, but their offspring still had to pass the entrance tests. Atlantic
College was thus a combination of a high-pressure school and an interna-
tional organization that was trying in the 1960s to educate the first global
generation. The experiment was not a bad one, and in my case at least Atlan-
tic College achieved its goals.
   In the summer of 1967 I awaited with mounting excitement the journey to
my new school. In Vaasa strange stories were circulating of what the future
held for me. The cause of the greatest amazement was that I would not sit my
school-leaving exams at the prestigious Vaasa High School, but would move
to somewhere in Wales, wherever that was. This seemed to upset everyone’s
deepest feelings. My mother, too, was in her heart sad that her eldest child
would not graduate from high school in his home town.
   After a flight on a Finnair Caravelle I arrived in London, where I took the
train to the industrial town of Bridgend in Wales and then went by bus to
Atlantic College. The school had chosen for its location a gray mediaeval
haunted castle that had stood guard for centuries. Around the ramshackle
castle there was a sprinkling of new buildings where the students lived and
worked. The area was surrounded by fields where sheep grazed. Around the
castle was a garden with well-tended slopes sweeping down to the sea. The
Atlantic’s endless horizon floated above the bright green meadows and dark
green trees. Fog rose from the sea and a cold wind blew, though there was
nothing new about that for anyone from Finland. The new landscape blew
my mind. This was a different world, bigger than Finland. The sea was sea
here, too, but it was bigger than the Gulf of Bothnia, which I knew had only
Sweden on its other side. Here whole new continents awaited conquest from
this strip of shore. Here I could see as far as my eyes would let me.
   The library in the arched vaults of the castle took my breath away. So many
interesting books, so much to study. My curiosity was already boiling over
with the thought that I would get my hands on all this new knowledge be-
cause of the great opportunity that by chance – in the form of a newspaper
announcement – had come my way.
   We Finns were an ambitious crew who had started coming here only the
previous year. So we had to show the others that we could handle it. In pre-
vious years the Germans had been the best-performing nationality in terms
22                     Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




The Finns at Atlantic College in 1968 (from left ) Pentti Kouri, Martti Salomaa,
Mika Reinikainen, Eero Nurminen and me.

of academic grades. We decided it was now the Finns’ turn. The brightest
star in our group was Pentti Kouri. Pentti was two meters tall and brimmed
over with self-confidence and a broad general knowledge – his results were
the best in Atlantic College’s entire history. I saw a good deal of him over the
years. He became a brilliant macroeconomics expert, and also a venture cap-
italist who had varying success. His self-assurance and genius brought him
not only friendship but also envy and enmity. Pentti got me ever more inter-
ested in macroeconomics. Other students included Martti Salomaa, who be-
came a gifted physicist and mathematician and later professor of theoretical
physics at Helsinki University of Technology. And Seppo Honkapohja went
on to hold the chair of macroeconomics at Cambridge University and sit on
the board of the Bank of Finland.
   At Atlantic College no one spoke of a profession they might follow or what
the future might hold; but it was clear to all that our future would in some
way be academic. Hardly any of us imagined we would become captains of
industry, bankers, or leaders of political parties. We were simply enjoying
our exploration of the Milky Way of knowledge.
   Four boys slept in our dormitory. The metal-framed beds practically
touched each other, so we had to learn to put up with the odors and cus-
toms of different cultures. I quickly learned who washed their feet and who
didn’t. I myself was the same conscientious boy I was growing up in Finland.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          23


I wanted the room to be kept straight. When I was sent a food parcel from
home, I made sure all my roommates received a share. Some of my new
friends came from a similar background to mine, such as my Norwegian
roommate. Others came from so far away that I really had to come to grips
with a new culture. For example, Lu Pat Ng came from Malaysia, where he
belonged to the Chinese minority. If I had not met him when I was young,
I would certainly not have gained the understanding I needed later of how
things worked in Southeast Asia.
   Atlantic College made its students study hard right from the beginning.
Every student had to specialize in three subjects: I chose economics, physics,
and mathematics. In all three subjects I would be able to use my mathemati-
cal gifts. Economics had begun to interest me back in Vaasa – my brilliant
teacher Raimo Teppo had made the subject seem fascinating. At Atlantic
College it became my passion because there too we had an outstanding
teacher, Andrew Maclehose. He made me look at the links between eco-
nomics and economic policy. He made us put ourselves in the Chancellor of
the Exchequer’s place. We had to decide: was this the right time to devalue
or not? I enjoyed this enormously. My self-confidence grew: I learned that
with every piece of knowledge one might influence the world. Knowledge
was power.
24                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                           CHAPTER 5


              International School



M       y new school compelled even me, a shy country boy, to take a
        stand on the great issues facing the world. We had to defend our
views every day in class, and once a week we had a debate on current events.
There you had to be ready to put your arguments forward and give good
reasons for them. I remember the heated discussions that events in 1967–68
provoked.
   Czechoslovakia was one flashpoint. The Prague Spring in 1968 gave its
people greater freedom to express their opinions and greater control over
their own lives. In August a surge of Soviet tanks crushed the country’s em-
bryonic democracy. There were a couple of boys from Czechoslovakia at
Atlantic College, one of whom went on to Harvard. In the school debate we
were divided into two camps: those who defended the occupation and those
who opposed it. The division was of course artificial: I am sure that none of
us really supported the trampling of democracy. But everyone was expected
to have a view, and it made for an intense atmosphere.
   For my first six months I was the same reserved and rather shy boy who
had left Vaasa in Finland on his first foreign trip in order to spend two years
here. But then my shyness disappeared and I began to be more assertive.
Discipline at Atlantic College was not as strict as in ordinary British board-
ing schools. It says something of the spirit of the age and the prevailing
open-mindedness that we didn’t have to wear school uniforms. Jeans were
perfectly acceptable as long as they were clean, as was a clean shirt without
a tie. For dinner we were expected to don a blazer, tie, and straight trousers.
   Atlantic College tried its best to inure us to regular habits. The morning
swim took place at a quarter past seven every day until November. The heavy
		
 Against All Odds                                                            25


British breakfast came only after that. The
swimming season resumed somewhere
around April. You certainly knew you
were awake after that morning ritual. The
school’s other recreations also toughened
me up. My studies included life-saving,
sculling, and other healthy activities. In my
first few months I and another pupil built
our own seaworthy boat out of rubber and
wood. Apart from a little help from a car-
penter the boat was entirely our own work.
We also made our own wetsuits from rub-
ber. When I lugged the heavy outfit back
to Finland it really gave my brothers and
sisters something to marvel at. There was
however rather less use for it in Vaasa than
on Wales’s stormy Atlantic coast.
   I put a great deal of energy into my One of the most important activities
schoolwork. In addition to economics I throughout my life has been tennis.
                                                   I’m seen here at Atlantic College,
was keen on physics, which was taught by South Wales, in the summer of 1968.
Miss Adams. She was young and beautiful
and I always took the seat in class where I could see her figure to best advan-
tage. Despite my rather wandering attention I got top grades in physics, too.
   I also did some travelling. In the first Easter holidays I took the boat over
to Ireland, from Fishguard to Rosslare. Ireland in those days was by no
means the mainstream European country we know today. It wasn’t exactly
a third-world country, but it didn’t feel like part of the first world, either. I
took the train up the coast to Dublin and then hitchhiked to the little town
of Strabane, which straddles the border between Northern Ireland and the
Republic of Ireland. There I stayed for three days with the family of a boy I
had met at a scout camp in Finland the previous year. They were a prosper-
ous, middle-class family, but they were Catholics in Northern Ireland where
Catholics were treated as second-class citizens. They spoke passionately of
their desire to see a “Free Ireland.” I could sense from talking to them that
something was not right in their lives. I was too polite or too tactful to probe
them on the matter, though I knew nothing then of the ancient, almost tribal
conflicts that divided Northern Ireland. About six months later the Troubles
there ignited.
   At Atlantic College I learned to live and work with people from differ-
ent cultures, which wasn’t common for young Finnish men in the 1960s.
26                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


There were of course opportunities to go abroad as an exchange student,
to Britain or the United States, for example. But this didn’t guarantee expo-
sure to the richness of many cultures as Atlantic College did. Finland was a
monocultural country in the 1960s, or at least that’s how it felt in Ostroboth-
nia. The generation of corporate executives before mine never learned what
real multiculturalism is. On the other hand, for generations younger than
mine multiculturalism is one of the necessary conditions for work. Without
a multicultural attitude one cannot work in an international company. At-
lantic College helped me understand what real multiculturalism is, and why
it’s essential in a globalized world.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          27




                           CHAPTER 6


                    Back to Finland



E     verything comes to an end. My “escape” concluded in the spring of
      1969. I graduated from Atlantic College with excellent marks in both the
International Baccalaureate and in my A-levels, the British school-leaving
exams. I returned to Finland, as did the other Finns. The Finnish Cultural
Foundation, which had funded our studies, expected that of us. I suppose,
though, that we would have all returned home anyway because a peculiar
emotion had developed within us. It would perhaps be too solemn to call
it patriotism, while homesickness sounds a little too frivolous. It was some-
thing between the two, for which there isn’t really a word in either Finnish
or English. We had had to represent Finland, which was scarcely known at
all in the rest of the world. Now we wanted to come back to our own country
and continue our studies and work in Finland.
   When I came back to Finland I had to go to the university to sit entrance
exams. I was applying for Helsinki University of Technology, which did not
recognize the A-levels I had taken at Atlantic College, or indeed give me any
credit for them. The university assumed that a student with an international
background would sit its tests and so confirm that they would get through
the course of study. A week after I’d finished my exams in Wales I once again
found myself in the exam hall. It was tedious. Anyone who has ever taken en-
trance exams for university will know how important it is to prepare properly,
and I have always believed in preparing myself thoroughly for everything I
do. Now I was sitting exams I hadn’t had a single day to prepare for.
   I walked across the grass and along the gravel path to the main building of
the university. I had to sit the exam in the big auditorium, along with hun-
28                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


dreds of other applicants. Apart from the holidays from Atlantic College, it
was my first contact in a long time with my Finnish contemporaries. They
were hunched over their exam papers, their hair flopping over their ears.
Their shirts had wide collars, and a mixture of nylon and tension was mak-
ing them sweat. The scratching of pencils was the only sound in the room.
The tests covered math and physics. Fortunately the grounding I’d received
at Atlantic College was so thorough that I knew as soon as it was over that
I’d done well. I felt at ease with the way I’d been able to respond to the ques-
tions and challenges.
   The Finland to which I’d returned had grown economically. Politically,
Finland, like other countries, had moved leftwards at the end of the 1960s.
The threat of socialism seemed real again, since support for the social demo-
crats and communists was growing, especially among students. In Finland
the left-wing student movement was turning into a repugnant form of com-
munism, a species of Stalinism that blindly idealized the Soviet Union. In
the early 1970s this strange phenomenon was influential – indeed almost
hegemonic – in student organizations and cultural and political life.
   Many of my contemporaries were enthusiastic about left-wing or com-
munist thought. Good relations with the Soviet Union were the bedrock of
Finnish foreign policy. This meant maintaining good relationships between
individuals, and so the closest friends of our strong neighbor also enjoyed
the fruits of this policy. The Soviet Union took the lion’s share of Finland’s
foreign trade. For this reason many companies and “capitalist” organizations
became participants in Finland’s “official” foreign policy. At the same time,
of course, Finnish businesses wanted Finland to be open to the west, where
Finnish industry’s export markets had traditionally been, and where there
was real money rather than funny non-convertible rubles. We had tradi-
tionally exported tar, butter, and paper and, in recent decades, increasing
volumes of machinery and electronics.
   In the spring of 1969 I was a very different sort of boy from the one who
had left for Atlantic College nearly two years before. I had certainly grown
a little taller. I was gangly, long-haired, and fully familiar with the latest pop
music from Britain and the States. In the spirit of the age I wore trendy
jeans, and my English was fluent, though apart from Finnish and English
I didn’t really know any other languages. I was still working to fill this gap
when I was at Nokia. But the most important thing was that I had grown in
self-confidence and self-esteem. I had gone abroad for two years on my first
foreign trip. I had survived, indeed flourished, though from time to time I
had missed Finland and my family.
		
 Against All Odds                                                           29


  Now however I was back home where I spent the summer helping with the
hay on my uncle’s farm. At the end of the sixties the region was prosperous
and lively, although the farm was small and old-fashioned and relatives were
the main source of power. Just a little while back at Atlantic College I’d been
working with pen and slide-rule; now I was holding a pitchfork or a scythe.
That summer was the last extended period I would spend in Ostrobothnia,
though I didn’t know that as I slogged away in the fields. I felt neither sad
nor nostalgic; rather I had a sense of excitement and expectation. When Neil
Armstrong and Apollo 11 were approaching the moon, and Armstrong took
the first steps on its surface, his progress was continuously monitored from
my uncle’s traditional little farm.
  Atlantic College had made me independent of my parents and cut me free
from the place where I grew up. My world was open. My parents were no
longer much in my thoughts and I certainly didn’t listen to them as I had
when I was younger. The self-sufficient child had grown into an indepen-
dent young man in a single bound. It had been stressful; but it had also been
necessary.
  While many of my generation interested themselves in Soviet collective
farms, the Communist Party, and Five-Year Plans, I had moved west to join
the wider European and global conversation. At a key phase of intellectual
development, my world view had diverged from many of my contempo-
raries. I had studied and also seen how the world worked, how capital-
ism worked. At the same time that many of my friends had cleansed their
minds of independent thinking in favor of party propaganda, I had pain-
fully learned to think for myself, to put together my own viewpoints, and
to defend them against intelligent criticism. This experience built up my
self-esteem, but it also made me an outsider in Finland, where activists in
political parties seemed to be gaining the upper hand and taking ever-more-
important positions at an ever-younger age.
  Leftism – the adoration of the Soviet Union and the German Democratic
Republic – had assumed the nature of a group psychosis in Finland. The
movement reached its peak in 1970, when universities ground to a halt as
students boycotted lectures to go on strike alongside the workers. The stu-
dent organizations had become party political machines issuing statements
on the situation in the Middle East, poverty in Africa, or the dangers West-
ern imperialism posed to the cosmos.
  I didn’t have a dream profession, but I had a hunch I’d find a niche in
academia – I thought I might perhaps be a good professor of physics at a
university or polytechnic. I thought, too, that I might continue my civic ac-
30                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


tivities, which I had begun in the inspiring environment of Atlantic College.
As a nineteen-year-old I found myself analyzing the Finnish government’s
economic policies, using the broad experience I had gained from Atlantic
College’s economics courses and from reading The Economist every week.
Perhaps a professor of physics could benefit from these activities to some
extent? And weren’t physics and economics all about calculation and mathe-
matics, which just got easier and easier for me? That was my train of thought
as I made hay on holiday that summer.
   In August the post brought the sort of letter Finnish families long for: I
had been accepted to read applied physics at Helsinki University of Technol-
ogy. I went with my father to the bank in Vaasa, where I’d had an account
since childhood, to apply for a student loan. This was before the state au-
tomatically guaranteed such loans. So there we were in our suits and care-
fully ironed shirts. My father guaranteed the loan, and the following day I
received the soothing news that the loan had been approved – my university
years could begin.
		
 Against All Odds                                                         31




                          CHAPTER 7


              Engineering Student



T    he 1970s have been called the brown decade. They began for me
     on 1 September 1969, when I enrolled at the University of Technology. I
went to live in an apartment in a student block next to the university, which
had been built to house athletes at the time of the Helsinki Olympics. It
can’t have changed much since then. The dominant colors were brown and
dark blue. During my first year I shared my bedroom with another first-year
student. (In the tradition of student banter one could say he hasn’t got very
far since: Matti Juhala is now professor of vehicle technology at Helsinki
University of Technology.) We each had a narrow bed, a desk, a chair, and a
wardrobe. There was a basin in the corner for us to brush our teeth and wash
our hands, and a communal area with a bathroom, kitchen, and living room.
In my second year I had a room to myself in the same block.
   Helsinki University of Technology was an almost instinctive choice for
me. There have always been lots of engineers in my family, and after me
many an Ollila has studied to become a chartered engineer. For my major I
chose applied physics, one of the more demanding and theoretical courses
on offer. I liked the challenge and hoped the bar would be high enough. My
fellow students were clever and had demonstrated as much in their exams.
They came from all over Finland, though the Helsinki region was the most
strongly represented since that’s where the best high schools were. I knew
only a handful of the other students beforehand.
   The university had moved to its campus in Otaniemi a few years earlier. It
was the first American-style campus in Finland, with the whole area given
over to university departments and student accommodation. Some of the
32                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


services left something to be desired, such as the modest shop and post of-
fice, but Helsinki was close by.
   Study was intensive. There were twenty-five to thirty hours of lectures a
week. The rhythm of work I had got used to in Wales continued naturally. In
my first two years I only remember studying physics and math. It required
work, but Atlantic College had furnished a firm foundation. As well as study
the autumn offered new leisure opportunities –social evenings on Tuesdays
and dances at weekends. I was especially pleased that meals were provided.
I’ve never been much of a cook, though I can boil potatoes and eggs. I’d been
living on packet soups and sandwiches in my room, so a student canteen was
a great advance.
   The twelve trainee engineers who shared our apartment came from every
year of the course. We made a good group and our communal life was very
agreeable. Rather than barricade ourselves into our own rooms we spent our
free time in the living area, making coffee and discussing current events. The
two and a half years I spent in this group were one of the best things about
university life. We’ve often gotten together since.
   Engineering students sometimes talk these days of becoming “Otaniemi-
fied.” This is a particular way of becoming institutionalized, of rarely leav-
ing Otaniemi. It never happened to me. I used to play tennis in downtown
Helsinki. I didn’t often join in with the organized activities of the other stu-
dents, though I led an active life. So active, in fact, that even tennis became
a seasonal sport. This was the only time in my life I have taken breaks from
this important pursuit.
    I met my first Stalinists at Otaniemi. They held strong opinions. “The
problem for the Social Democrats, the Centre Party, and the Conservatives
is that they don’t have a society to model themselves on – a pattern for living
that would work all over the world, better than Finland. We, on the other
hand, have both the GDR and the Soviet Union,” they would say.
   From today’s point of view it’s difficult to appreciate just how over-politi-
cized the seventies were. Everything, and I mean everything, was political. I
began my political career as a candidate in student elections, which in 1969
had been openly party-political for the first time. I chose to stand as a Con-
servative. Where I came from we had a two-party system, and everyone I
knew voted either for the Conservatives or for the Centre Party. I imagined
the Conservatives would be the choice of the thinking person whom social-
ism didn’t attract, in the way it didn’t attract me. It rapidly became clear to
me that Conservative policy in these elections consisted entirely of opposi-
tion to socialism and had no other content. A positive alternative seemed to
		
 Against All Odds                                                            33


be lacking: the party’s policies seemed entirely negative, with no construc-
tive element. This wasn’t enough for me. After the first year I moved to the
Centre Party group, where there seemed to be people who could think.
   Just as I grew impatient with politics so I began to tire of a wholly techni-
cal education. I had no cause for complaint with my studies, but differential
equations alone didn’t open up the world as much as I wanted. I hankered
after a broader education, with a greater focus on social issues. I had studied
economics in Wales and I wanted to continue that study at the university
level. I had friends in the political science department at Helsinki University,
so I applied and was accepted there in 1971. This time I didn’t have to sit
the entrance exams since to my surprise I was accepted on the basis of my
results from Atlantic College.
   The economics department was in central Helsinki. I enjoyed it immensely
– the atmosphere was agreeable and the discussions and teaching provided a
new angle of entry to social issues. The department had some smart people,
and I received excellent guidance from them on what I should study. Study
was not very sociable, however – I didn’t attend a single series of lectures,
and just a few seminars. For the most part I had my nose in the books for the
examined courses, making up for lost time as fast as I could.
34                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                           CHAPTER 8


             Liisa Changes My Life



O      ne February evening in 1970 changed all my plans once more. I was
       with my friends at a student dance, and so was a young woman with
her friends from the Helsinki School of Economics.
    I was queuing to buy a beer when my eyes fell on a beautiful, blonde, and
clever-looking girl. She seemed to be looking to see who was in the queue.
I learned later that this was just a little way she had that didn’t really mean
anything. Anyway, when I’d bought my beer I asked her to dance. I used my
powers of attraction to the full, and later we left together to continue the
evening with our friends back at the residence hall. There I asked for her
telephone number, which she wrote on a slip of paper.
   “Are you sure this number is right?” I asked again at the end of the eve-
ning.
   “I wouldn’t give you a number if it wasn’t the right one,” she replied. There
was decisiveness in her voice, and perhaps a touch of invitation too. I rang
her as soon as I could. I thought she might have found me too talkative and
eager. My stalking brought a result, however, and I soon met her again.
   The girl in question was Liisa Metsola, who had qualified as a nurse and
was already working, while I was still studying. We were soon spending a lot
of time together. We went to the cinema, to the theatre, to concerts, and to
student parties. In other words, we did what young couples do. Liisa came
from a family with roots in eastern Finland and Karelia. The eastern Finns
are much better at showing and acting on their emotions than we western
Finns. Liisa thinks things through for herself in a straightforward way, and
isn’t afraid to disagree with me.
		
 Against All Odds                                                            35


   The first summer we were a couple we had to spend apart, since I had to
go back once more to Vaasa. There I had to undertake a placement in an en-
gineering workshop as part of my degree. A place had been arranged in the
factory where my father worked, where I did maintenance work and some
plumbing jobs. The atmosphere was very different from what I was used to
at Atlantic College and the University of Technology, but I got on fine with
my workmates. We talked men’s talk – of work, of women, of football. (Vaasa
FC was then playing in the top division, as I’m proud to say it does today.)
My time in that factory taught me some crucial lessons for my future career
about the internal dynamics of a workplace and the difference between good
and bad line management. I can’t exaggerate the importance of one’s early
work experiences.
   Liisa and I were engaged on the May Day holiday in 1971. I approached
her father and told him of my intention to marry his daughter. He replied
positively to my polite request, although she and I disagreed with him on
practically everything else. We argued about politics so furiously that at
times it felt like a family feud. He had been an evacuee from Karelia when
the Soviet Union had invaded Finland in 1939–40, and his family home
had been razed to the ground. His hatred for the Russians wasn’t a political
stance but something much deeper. He was out of sympathy with the central
aim of the Finnish government, which was to achieve friendly relations with
the Russians through an active foreign policy. Our arguments were repeated
in many Finnish families where memories of the war years were still fresh.
   We were married on 25 March 1972 at a little chapel in Otaniemi. The
building was surrounded by forest, though it was just a few hundred yards
from where I lived on campus. There were about forty guests: a large class-
room’s worth of relatives, fellow students, and friends. The unique feature
of the chapel was its altarpiece. There wasn’t one: its place was taken by the
Finnish forest landscape, seen through a huge window taking up the entire
wall. So it seemed as if the wedding were taking place in a wintry forest.
We held our reception in the student restaurant where we had first met.
Ostrobothnian weddings are meant to be wild and boisterous, but ours was
calm and civilized, with many warm and well-made speeches. The occasion
was made in our image.
   At the beginning of the 1970s we weren’t worried about the future. We
were moving so fast that not everybody could keep up. My parents thought
we shouldn’t have married because I hadn’t yet graduated from university nor
had I taken my bride to meet my mother. Our marriage was a quick student
affair – we didn’t have a sound financial base or any clear plans. But I had al-
    36                     Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


                                              ready moved on from my family and
                                              wanted to live my own life.
                                                Liisa soon noticed she’d married a
                                              man whose diary quickly filled up.
                                              One day she brought out her own
                                              diary. She announced that she didn’t
                                              intend simply to adapt to whatever
                                              plans her new husband happened
                                              to make – she had her priorities,
                                              and I would have to learn to adapt.
                                              “Let’s see when we can find a time
                                              that suits us both,” she said brightly.
                                              Her attitude has not changed in for-
                                              ty years, which has helped keep us
                                              together. I’ve tried to be as flexible
                                              as I can in my own arrangements,
                                              though with varying success.
Liisa and I celebrated our engagement on
May Day in 1971.                                We were both ambitious people.
                                              We were also both self-sufficient: I
     was the oldest child in my family and used to looking after myself; Liisa
     was her family’s youngest, but her mother had had a serious illness, which
     had compelled the children to take care of themselves. Although our per-
     sonalities were different we understood each other instinctively. It was easy
     to build a marriage on this basis. (Well, honestly speaking, I can’t say it was
     always easy, but it was possible because we understood each other.)
        We moved to a rented two-bedroom apartment about ten miles west of
     Helsinki. By that time the brown decade must have been approaching its
     end, because the walls of our new home were plain white. Ever since then we
     have wanted to live in houses where the walls are either white or off-white.
        There was no Ikea in those days, and our furniture was hand-me-downs
     from our families or bought secondhand. The area around our home was
     growing rapidly: new houses, new schools, new shops.
        With our modest income we couldn’t imagine moving to the center of
     Helsinki. Many young couples began their married lives as we did, in rapid-
     ly-built apartment blocks in new suburbs. During the 60s the old road into
     the city had been turned into a modern motorway, which was convenient
     for us. In the mornings we would jump on the bus. The trip took about
     twenty minutes, though I soon took a break in my studies and went to work
     in Helsinki.
		
 Against All Odds                                                           37




                           CHAPTER 9


                     Student Leader



I  n the autumn of 1972 I attended the annual conference of the National
   Union of Students in Finland, the SYL. I was elected to the board and ap-
pointed president. We gathered on Friday, held our conference on Saturday,
and on Sunday we wondered what on earth we had decided. Formally we
were there as representatives of our individual student bodies; I represented
the students of the University of Technology. But the elections were nakedly
political, as everything was at that time. The talk in the corridors was that a
centrist candidate should become president, because neither a conservative
nor a leftist would receive broad enough support. The night before the ac-
tual elections was key because the crucial politicking took place in the small
hours. The search was on for a centrist candidate for president who would
be acceptable to everyone. I fitted the bill. Also during that night we drew
up an outline program for the coming year, so there were arguments about
that as well. It was like drawing up a government program in the space of
an evening.
  On Sunday I set off on the long journey home knowing my life was about
to undergo a major change. I had been elected president of the National
Union of Students at the age of twenty-two. I had been the chairman of the
National Union of Technology Students, so I had some idea of how to run
things. I had for example helped organize boycotts of lectures, intended to
encourage the modernizing of university governance. As students we de-
manded that we should be directly represented on the governing body.
  Now I would be advancing students’ interests full-time. My new role had
a significant international angle, so my studies abroad and language skills
38                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


certainly helped. When I was appointed I felt the glare of publicity for the
first time: the selection of a new student president made the news in the big
dailies and even on television. Suddenly I was a figure of national signifi-
cance. My parents were bemused; they didn’t feel this new career path was
either desirable or suitable.
   Just half a year into our marriage Liisa had to adapt to the fact that her
husband was no longer a student. As president I received a small salary,
which largely went on rent. The SYL was based on the fifth floor of a fine
building in central Helsinki called the New Student House. It opened on to
Mannerheimintie, Helsinki’s main thoroughfare. For the first time I had my
own room to work in.
    I went into the office in the morning and came home in the evening,
just as in any job. My studies were on hold. I still have two exercise books
from that time and the pages are blank: no academic studies for four terms.
I wore a suit and tie every day and carried my briefcase to the office and
back. Many evenings were taken up with negotiations, meetings, and travel.
Everything was in earnest and over-politicized. I took myself very seriously
and it seemed as if I were aging very fast in my role. The union was well run,
both bureaucratically and financially. The secretaries were highly profes-
sional and kept youthful enthusiasm in check, whereas the executive board
was of variable ability.
   At that time the SYL was seen as a natural springboard to a career in na-
tional politics. For example, Tarja Halonen – later president of Finland – had
been on the board only a couple of years earlier and later moved via the
trade union movement into Parliament.
   I wanted to be a student leader, and I enjoyed my work. I often used to
travel to universities around the country. I was constantly in meetings with
senior officials and government ministers. But I never actually saw myself
as a politician, rather as someone whose role was to speak up for students.
   I enjoyed working in an organization with a small group of people. I want-
ed to lead it effectively. Meetings should have an agenda, objectives, and a
clear timetable. I wasn’t interested in publicity and I didn’t seek it, though
I did get my first taste of it, which came in handy later. I learned to make
speeches entirely spontaneously, which hadn’t been among my strong points.
I also learned to write long, carefully considered speeches whose official line
corresponded with Finnish foreign policy. I have never liked compromises,
but as a student politician I had to make them every day – a tedious but also
educational side of the job.
   Sometimes my impatience rose to the surface. Even on a good day, run-
ning the National Union of Students in Finland was a constant defensive
		
 Against All Odds                                                            39


operation: the rise of the communists and the growth of their power had to
be stopped. Although the Left didn’t have a majority, at that time it felt as if
there was a real danger that it would take over the entire student world. In
many European countries student bodies had become radicalized, and the
majority of students were alienated from them. That was what happened in
France, for example. Preventing it happening in Finland became a mission
for the Centrist group in Finland at the SYL.
   As the representative of the Centrists I also had to cooperate with the Con-
servatives, though many issues were resolved with the Left. The Left and the
Centre formed the so-called pan-democratic front, which held power. Even
so, while I was its president the SYL never signed the declaration against
the Free Trade Agreement with the European Economic Community. There
were strident demands for the agreement to be rejected – people who would
later hold important positions such as Tarja Halonen (later president of Fin-
land), Erkki Tuomioja (later foreign minister), and Erkki Liikanen (gover-
nor of the Bank of Finland) all actively opposed it. In important questions
of foreign policy, where relations with the West were at stake, the SYL stayed
firmly behind agreed national policy.
   I learned the rules of the political game. I had been the agreed choice of
the Centrists and the Left for my role. In some issues, after careful delibera-
tion, I voted with the Conservatives to promote what I believed were sen-
sible policies. This irritated the Left and some Centrists too and gave rise to
accusations that I was an opportunist and a turncoat.
   Learning politics from the inside was an enormous help later on: leading a
student organization in Finland in the 1970s certainly taught me what poli-
tics, discussions, rhetoric, horse-trading, and opportunism are. A CEO has
to understand what politics is all about, otherwise the company will start to
misinterpret its environment, which is the society it operates in. The conse-
quences could be fatal to the company because you usually can’t change your
environment – you have to adapt to it instead.
   The main reason the president’s job was energy-sapping was the Stalinists.
They were self-assured and knew what they wanted. Others piled in behind
them. They followed a twin-track policy. On the one hand they took the par-
liamentary route, actively and aggressively exploiting the SYL’s position and
resources. On the other hand they were trying to bring about a revolution.
This pincer movement was very hard to fend off. Relations with the Soviet
Union were ruthlessly exploited as a pretext for change at home. My own
attitude took their support as its starting-point. When a group has about
15 percent support, an organization like the SYL has in fairness to give it a
hearing.
40                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   It’s good to remember that the Stalinist movement received more attention
than its level of support merited. In parliamentary elections it received only
a few percent of the vote, though the figure was higher in student elections.
   Finland was led by Urho Kekkonen, who had been in office since 1956. He
was the chief architect of the country’s foreign policy and the guarantor of
Finnish independence vis-à-vis the Soviet Union.
   The popularity of his policy was growing in the early seventies, both
among the electorate and in political circles. It was largely thanks to Kek-
konen that Finland had been able to negotiate a Free Trade Agreement with
the EEC; this was important for Finnish export industries. In January 1973
Kekkonen’s term of office, due to expire in 1974, had been extended by an
exceptional act of parliament to run until 1978. This was no foregone con-
clusion, since it required five-sixths of the members of parliament to vote
for it. It was intimately linked with the EEC Agreement and new laws ex-
tending the state’s regulatory powers, which the Left in particular supported.
   Kekkonen and Finnish foreign policy also enjoyed respect in the West.
Finnish neutrality was widely recognized, but many western politicians and
journalists never fully understood just what a tightrope Finland had to walk
during the Cold War. The president had bitter enemies back home as well,
who publicly accused him of kowtowing to Soviet wishes and thus of Fin-
landization.
   I met Kekkonen a number of times. Most of these meetings were formal
occasions, but I also went to his official residence to discuss issues such as
the reshaping of university governance. We explained the SYL’s standpoint
to him. Kekkonen’s position in Finland was so dominant that people in-
volved him in issues that weren’t really his responsibility. He was vigilant
and engaged and concerned above all with power politics. How did the par-
ties divide over the issue? How did politicians’ public statements reflect their
personal goals? These were some of the questions he put to me during our
discussions.
   My most memorable meeting with him was at the Independence Day re-
ception in December 1973. It was the custom for the Students’ Union to
present its greetings to the president before the main event. I had prepared
a few words requesting the president to focus attention on the serious short-
age of student housing. As I walked toward the Presidential Palace it felt as
if the damp Helsinki streets were soaking up all the light, despite the Christ-
mas decorations in the shop windows.
   We met the president at half past six, half an hour before the official re-
ception started and a stream of guests would flow into the state rooms. Our
		
 Against All Odds                                                              41




Liisa and I at the Independence Day reception in 1973 with Finland’s finance
minister Johannes Virolainen and his wife Kaarina.

meeting was naturally a terrifying prospect. First there was the age differ-
ence: Kekkonen was fifty years older than me – a very fit seventy-three, and
he didn’t show any sign of the dementia that would afflict him a few years
later. Secondly there was Kekkonen’s unassailable position, which younger
generations find impossible to understand. He had been president since I
was five and would carry on until I was thirty-one. It was almost unthink-
able that anyone else could be president.
   We were a small delegation who arrived at the gates of the Palace and were
directed inside. The others, in the spirit of the age, were wearing lounge
suits, but I was correctly attired in full evening dress. Frankly, it wasn’t all
that comfortable. The walls were hung with fine art depicting Finnish forests
and wildlife and historical battles, though this wasn’t the moment to embark
on a course in art history.
   We entered the room self-importantly and in line with protocol. The pres-
ident stood waiting for us with an array of decorations pinned to his chest
– Finland, perhaps surprisingly to some, has a flourishing honors system.
He looked at us fiercely through his large, intimidating spectacles. He had
an adjutant on either side. As one president to another, it was my duty to of-
fer him our salutation. “Mr. President of the Republic, Happy Independence
Day,” I began. We also offered him a little bouquet of lilies for his wife Sylvi.
The president accepted the flowers and I thought I saw the ghost of a smile.
42                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


“Thank you, I shall make sure immediately that these reach their intended
destination,” he replied. It broke the ice. After that I made my little speech.
  As the SYL president I had also been invited to the real reception. So after
our brief meeting one of the staff guided me around the side of the Palace to
join the queue to shake hands with the real president, while he went through
the state rooms to the head of the receiving line. There Sylvi, whose health
was already starting to fail, was sitting waiting for him. He gave her the flow-
ers and started to shake the hands of his guests for the evening.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          43




                         CHAPTER 10


                      East and West



A     part from our defensive battles we looked after mundane but
      nevertheless important matters affecting students. Our responsibilities
were greater than those of student leaders elsewhere, since student unions
in Finland are property owners on a grand scale. Halls of residence were
built. Student health services were developed. University governance was
overhauled.
   Though my main focus was domestic I spent a lot of my time on interna-
tional issues. Twice a year there were meetings of Nordic student leaders, for
example. Finnish student organizations also had good links to student orga-
nizations in the Soviet bloc. As president I travelled many times to Moscow
and to Prague, where the headquarters of the Communist student organiza-
tions were located. I learned how to operate within the confines of Finnish
foreign policy, and that international meetings have their own special usages
and rituals.
   Home-grown Communists often came along on these excursions. I re-
member one occasion when we were travelling by train behind the Iron
Curtain. The conductor kept a visitors’ book, where travelers inscribed their
names and a few fraternal words. A select group of Stalinists left this mes-
sage: “My homeland is Finland, but my Fatherland is the Soviet Union.”
   I had visited Moscow for the first time in 1970, when we concentrated
chiefly on investigating the quality of Soviet beer, which seemed well up to
standard. Otherwise I found nothing to celebrate in the Soviet Union be-
cause the gap between its super-power status and its level of technological
development was clear. But the Russian student politicians we met radiated
44                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


intelligence and talked readily about international affairs. It was easy to dis-
cuss the dollar exchange rate, the oil crisis, or U.S. economic policy. But de-
spite these conversations the Russians remained products of the communist
system. They were always aware of the party line, and no one could officially
cross it; but in the small hours, after a few vodkas, they might say what they
thought. Sadly, genuine friendships were not possible because everyone was
stuck with a role. Several of the Russians later found a place in the Gor-
bachev, Yeltsin, and Putin governments.
   The level of education in the Soviet Union was high: student politicians
knew mathematics, economics, and international relations. But when, for
example, I went on a guided tour of the collective farms in Moldova (then
part of the Soviet Union) I saw how the country’s logistics let it down. A
crop of peaches was left to rot when it should have been sold in Moscow.
Their own efforts did not make people richer, and there were no incentives
for work. Time after time I returned from the Soviet Union with a feeling of
relief: this economic system could never beat a market economy.
   The market economy however had problems of its own. Just like com-
munism it contained the seeds of its own destruction. In practicing mac-
roeconomics I had learned to see an economy as a system that moved from
disequilibrium to equilibrium and back again. At the beginning of the 1970s
it was shifting rapidly toward disequilibrium. At the end of 1973 the oil-
producing countries decided to press the western world to change its policy
toward Israel. The oil price went up by 70 percent; some oil shipments were
sold for ten times or more than what they’d have fetched a year before. The
world economy was suddenly hostage to the oil producers, and international
recession was a fact.
   The world recovered from the oil crisis, but it left an enduring mark on
economic thinking. A debate started about energy conservation and alter-
native energy sources, which is still very much with us today. The Middle
East and OPEC became a permanent part of the political agenda. Our whole
world changed. In spring 1972, even before the energy crisis, a group of ex-
perts and futurists working at the Club of Rome had published a book called
The Limits to Growth, which warned that the world’s resources could no lon-
ger sustain constant economic growth. Thus the world’s economies had to
change: growth had reached its limits. Now the Club of Rome was proposing
that zero growth should be the target so that the world with all its natural
riches could survive. When the oil crisis burst upon us the warnings given
by the Club of Rome were taken seriously. They became the theoretical base
for the policies of those political groups, such as my own, that occupied the
		
 Against All Odds                                                          45


center ground between the hard Left and the dogmatic Right. While these
political groups supported capitalism and the market economy, they also
wanted economic development to respect the constraints imposed by nature
and natural resources.
   I read the Club of Rome report closely; I had, after all, been a member of
a nature club at school. I was also a student of macroeconomics and I un-
derstood a little about politics. On top of that, technological development
interested me even then. I tried to understand the logic of the Club of Rome,
but I couldn’t believe that they were right. To my mind, zero growth was a
superficial target – a figure plucked out of nowhere. I had learned in eco-
nomics lectures that economic growth was necessary for human well-being
in a growing population. I haven’t wavered in this belief since.
   The Club of Rome didn’t take into account technological developments,
which enable the same output to be produced using less energy and fewer
national resources.
   With hindsight the Club of Rome report was far too pessimistic about
technology. The report warned that copper or silver might run out by 1990,
but nothing will ever run out in a properly functioning market economy.
For example, if there were a risk that paper might disappear, new alterna-
tives would become available because paper would become unaffordable.
The world’s known oil reserves are much greater now than at the beginning
of the 1970s, and oil can be extracted in much more difficult conditions than
it could then.
   The Club of Rome thought in the 1970s that the market economy had an
innate tendency to run out of control. But the global economy has shown
itself much more flexible than anyone dared imagine.
   No one believed in the seventies that the world could adapt to oil crises.
The crises of 1973 and 1979 produced a global recession, but they also gave
impetus to the technological development that has seen us through. Cars
are now much more environmentally friendly, and more nuclear power has
come online. Thus the world gained at least thirty years of extra time. None
of this would have happened without the oil crises or the Club of Rome’s
warnings. They asked the right questions, even if they couldn’t offer answers.
   In the 1970s many young and even older politicians would meet Soviet
representatives and visit the Soviet Embassy more often than they went to
their corner shop. I went there chiefly for set-piece receptions: my contacts
with officials were few and formal. As a counter-balance to the Russians
it was important to look westward as well. In May 1973 I travelled to the
United States for the first time. There was a U.S. Information Service office
46                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


in Helsinki, which sent two to four student politicians across the Atlantic
each year to get to know the American political system and way of life. Our
program took in Washington, Denver, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Las Ve-
gas, New Orleans, and lastly New York. We stayed in hotels, but we met
local people in every town we went to, who played the part of host families
showing us how Americans lived. Compared to seventies Finland, let alone
the Soviet Union, I was struck by the sheer prosperity. There was as much
Coca-Cola as you could drink, whereas in my teenage years in Finland it
had been sold in parsimonious little bottles. T-bone steaks were the size of
children’s flippers. Car seats were more comfortable than the sofas in our
student rooms. It was a solid introduction to America.
   In Washington we visited Congress, where we were given an explanation
of the American political system, though there was really only one theme to
the discussions: what would happen to the hapless Richard Nixon? During
our visit the Watergate scandal was going through one of its most hectic
phases and divided America down the middle. The Republicans claimed
that the Washington Post didn’t have the right to humiliate Nixon as they
had, while the Democrats were overjoyed that “Tricky Dick” was now on
the run. Despite its disagreements over Nixon, the country was by no means
as politically polarized as it has since become. We had lively discussions of
what was healthy about the whole affair, and what wasn’t.
   The trip to the United States and the Watergate scandal were an excellent
opportunity to study Cold War positions and the Americans’ sincere belief
that they ruled the world. Many people in Europe, where Social Democratic
support was strong, thought it obvious that the United States had had its day.
   American leadership had been discredited by Vietnam, the dollar was
shaky, and the first oil shock was just around the corner.
   There is documentary evidence from those years. One of the better-
known treasures from the vaults is a clip from a television program of a
grave, longish-haired, gangly, serious student leader on a trip to the World
Youth Festival in Berlin. He boldly condemns the growing power of imperi-
alism in the world. Yes, folks, that was me.
		
 Against All Odds                                                         47




                         CHAPTER 11


                 Home and Family



O     n the first day of July 1975 Liisa and I received the keys to our new
      home. We had bought a two-bedroom apartment in a four-story 1950s
block in Herttoniemi, a hilly, wooded suburb on the east side of Helsinki.
Not much had been done to it: the original bathtub and kitchen cabinets
were still there, and it badly needed a makeover. A decorator friend came
down from Ostrobothnia to lay new floors and give the place a lick of paint.
We got rid of the bath and installed a shower. My parents came for three days
to sand down the window frames and kitchen cupboards. I spent six weeks
working alongside various workmen. I like carpentry and doing things with
my hands; I always got top marks in school for woodwork. I laid a new tile
kitchen floor under the decorator’s direction. He explained how the tiles
were to be laid and what sort of adhesive you should use. I also painted the
cupboards my parents had sanded.
   I had finished my time as SYL president at the end of the previous year.
But in a way I took part in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe (CSCE), which took place in Helsinki in 1975. This was Kekkonen’s
most visible foreign policy achievement and an important occasion for the
world’s media. I listened to the speeches on the radio as I painted the cup-
boards in our new flat. The reports resounded in the empty, echoing rooms.
I could follow every twist and turn in the CSCE process long after the con-
ference because I had heard every speech while I was doing up our flat.
   Buying our flat had not been entirely straightforward. Liisa had qualified
as a nurse, but she was continuing her studies at Helsinki University, major-
ing in social policy. There was no sign I would ever have a career. We went
48                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


with these recommendations to see the bank manager, who happened to
be an acquaintance. We promised to scrape together a deposit; the rest we
would borrow from the bank. My father lent me 3,000 marks (about $3,200
at 2016 prices) which was the only loan my parents ever made to me. We
also agreed to use our student loans to increase our share of the capital. The
housing market had a growth spurt and house prices rose in its wake. We
absolutely wanted to own our own home. Liisa and I were reckless, as were
many others, and we believed we would manage. The oil crisis helped us: the
Finnish economy had slipped into such a deep bog that rampant inflation
seemed to pay off our loan for us very quickly. For once macroeconomic
theory was a practical help in our life: we had taken on the loan at just the
right time.
   I had gone back to studying macroeconomics. I wrote my master’s thesis
chiefly in the faculty library. I often found myself alongside another student
politician who had put his studies aside for a while – Erkki Liikanen, who
was my age but had been a member of parliament since 1972. When he be-
came Finland’s youngest-ever MP Erkki was a politics student and president
of the Teiniliitto – the League of Teenagers. We used to see each other during
coffee breaks, where we’d put the world to rights.
   I completed my thesis in spring 1976. It was entitled “The Theory of Inter-
national Trade under Uncertainty” and I received a prize for the best mas-
ter’s thesis in macroeconomics that year. I couldn’t have known that, decades
on, I would be working on the very same subject in a very practical way.
It’s probably fair to say that Erkki Liikanen’s current work also has a mac-
roeconomic theme, given that he is governor of the Bank of Finland and a
member of the board of the European Central Bank.
   But even more significant than my graduation was the birth of our first
child, our son Jaakko. Liisa and I knew we were ready to be parents, though
by present-day standards we were very young.
   Becoming a father was a tough job. I was present at the birth and for our
son’s first ten days at home, when I gave him a bath every day. The birth was
also something of a watershed. Life seemed to have become organized: I had
my own apartment, I had graduated, I was a husband and father.
   Student and housing loans were not enough to keep a family. I had worked
as an assistant lecturer in the economics department for a few months and
I wanted to continue at the university, but there weren’t any openings there.
So I accepted more short-term work. The Centre Party and its youth organi-
zation needed someone to look after its international affairs. I went to work
as International Affairs Secretary at the party office in Helsinki, intending to
stay for about half a year.
		
 Against All Odds                                                             49


   I looked after international correspondence, I organized visits for delega-
tions and I wrote speeches. From time to time the party chairman would
call and ask me to explain something. I had to take care to respect the party’s
foreign policy line, which was pretty easy: it was the same as President Kek-
konen’s and Finland’s. My work did at least provide a salary and a peaceful
place to pursue my studies.
   When the office closed for the evening I went to the library to study math-
ematics. I had decided I would also graduate from the University of Tech-
nology, though I did not finally do so until 1981.
   I still hadn’t the faintest idea what I would do. I had the bright idea that I
should stand for parliament for my home region of Ostrobothnia. I wasn’t
at all enthusiastic. I’d had a bellyful of politics, and I doubted I’d get enough
votes to be elected. I’ve never been a popular favorite, and I would have
hated the electioneering and hand-shaking. The foreign ministry might have
been an interesting alternative, but the life of a civil servant seemed a little
slow for my restless nature. I had to come up with something, though – I
was the twenty-six-year-old father of a family, with a great deal of education
and a certain amount of experience and knowledge of the world, but no idea
what profession I wanted to follow. It’s no wonder that my parents were be-
mused by my activities. They told me it wasn’t for this that they’d sent their
son off to study.
50                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                          CHAPTER 12


     Escape from a Troubled Land



B    y March 1977 I had made my decision. I had talked things through
     over with Liisa and we decided we would leave Finland.
   The intellectual atmosphere in Finland made the decision easier. Kek-
konen was still the country’s sovereign leader, who sniffed the way the winds
were blowing and tailored his skillful rhetoric accordingly. He had recently,
in front of television cameras, forced on the country an “emergency govern-
ment” in which the Communists had a central role. They did not, however,
want to accept that responsibility, so the government quickly disintegrated
into a minority coalition. The economy was in chaos. For several years infla-
tion galloped at around 15 percent. As a man with a mortgage I benefited
from the melting away of my debt, but high inflation was a sign of an un-
sustainable economic policy. In April 1977 Finland was forced to devalue
its currency again. At that time the future of the communist system seemed
reasonably promising. Cultural life, the universities, and the intellectual at-
mosphere were largely in the grip of the Left. There were demonstrations in
support of the Soviet Union, Cuba, and the German Democratic Republic,
and against capitalist plots, rapprochement with the West, and NATO. In
spring 1977 alone over 750,000 wage-earners took part in strikes – about
one worker in three.
   In the seventies Finnish critics of the Soviet Union did not progress in
their careers. At the same time Finnish firms did profitable business with the
Soviet Union. Goods that could not be sold on western markets were good
enough for the Soviet Union. Finnish products gained a formidable reputa-
tion for quality there. Finnish construction companies grew fat on exports
		
 Against All Odds                                                          51


over the eastern border, and the sales of Finnish textile and shoe factories
were guaranteed. The company chiefs who depended on Soviet trade teamed
up with politicians to form a dominant group that didn’t bother Soviet poli-
ticians with difficult questions – otherwise trade might have suffered.
   I respected Kekkonen’s achievements and I supported his policy. Never-
theless I felt uneasy about the atmosphere in Finland at the end of the 1970s.
I was bothered by the intellectual dishonesty, the rigid resistance to change,
and the politicians’ ineffectuality. Like many other Finns I feared for my
country’s future. I saw that Finland had to find a way of moving closer to
western Europe: there was no alternative for the Finnish economy if it were
ever to thrive. I believed that western democracy and capitalism were prac-
tically and morally superior to socialist economics and communist politics.
But I wanted to know more about economics; I wanted to learn, so that my
thinking would be more firmly grounded and more convincing.
   And Helsinki was a dull, gray town. Dining out was grim, with no ethnic
food apart from Chinese, or perhaps I should say “Chinese.” It was as hard
to find a decent bottle of wine in Alko, which had a monopoly on the sale
of alcohol, as to find an authentic sauna in Tuscany. The range of clothing
in the department stores was very limited, and the fabrics and designs were
old-fashioned. The best hotels would have rated perhaps three stars. There
wasn’t a shred of optimism. And everything was regulated; it seemed as if
the state or the local council made all your decisions for you.
   In the autumn of 1976 I began to consider new options. At the start of
1977 I saw in a newspaper that the British Council was offering stipends
for study in the United Kingdom. It was practically a rerun of the events
that had taken me to Atlantic College exactly ten years earlier. Liisa and I
sat at the kitchen table in our little flat and talked things through. Staying
in Finland might not be the smart thing to do. We planned how Liisa might
continue her own studies in London. I decided, after a few seconds’ careful
consideration, that my new place of study should be The London School of
Economics. It was a well-known and highly regarded university that trained
economists, social scientists, and philosophers – and rock stars (Mick Jag-
ger is also a graduate). I thought it might suit me well, too. I applied for a
grant for postgraduate study at the LSE, and to undertake a doctorate. I was
invited to interview and I got the grant. By April I had the funding for my
new escape.
   My decision caused astonishment, and even amusement. At that time
many people abandoned their studies halfway through and became journal-
ists, politicians, or activists. I had already graduated and yet I had decided
52                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


to continue my studies, and many people found this absurd. Also it was
unusual then to study abroad. Those who did went mostly to neighboring
Sweden or to the United States. And many leftists wanted to reinforce their
faith in the achievements of scientific communism by studying in Moscow,
the German Democratic Republic, or even Warsaw.
   I told my colleagues in the Centre Party office that I’d be leaving. I sat in
a nearby café, where I was joined by two of my colleagues. We ordered pea
soup for lunch. “Now, as we discussed earlier, this is a temporary job for me,”
I began. “At the end of the summer I’ll be going to London to study. I’ve got
a grant to complete a doctorate.” My colleagues’ soup remained untouched.
One of them might have dropped a spoon. “So you’re really going for a long
time? And giving up politics for good?” “Yes, I am. I’m really not sure what
I’ll do in the long run, but for the moment I’m focusing on an academic
career,” I replied.
   By August 1977 we were back in London. The choice of London was partly
a matter of chance and partly a matter of careful deliberation. As a former
pupil at Atlantic College I loved British culture, the way of thinking and liv-
ing. I had gotten to know how British schools worked, and I knew I would
adapt well to a British university. The other option would have been the
United States, because English was the only language I really knew apart
from Finnish. But that would have been much more expensive. It also
seemed to me that the LSE was better suited to my perfectionist streak. I
wanted to go to a university where expectations were high. And, last but not
least, London suited our family life down to the ground. I liked the thought
that our son Jaakko, now a year old, would soon become a little Londoner.
   In London I would again follow global politics and economics from a
splendid vantage point. We socialized with diplomats and dons. Our little
boy spent his days at the LSE kindergarten, while Liisa studied Health and
Social Policy and Administration. A few years later she would become the
first Finnish woman to take a degree at the LSE graduate school. I supported
Liisa’s studies and believed they would open new doors for her on our return
to Finland. Or perhaps we would not return, but would stay and build inter-
national academic careers.
    London was not at its best in 1977, but it was much livelier and more vi-
brant and dynamic than Helsinki. The economy was in a mess, and the Labor
government found it hard to control the demands of the trade unions. While
I spent my time studying the theoretical differences between Keynes and
Friedman, Britain was on a crash course in reality. Margaret Thatcher would
be elected prime minister in May 1979, against a background of skepticism
		
 Against All Odds                                                            53


and hostility. Soon she would become the pre-eminent politician of the west-
ern world, so well-known that British psychiatrists had to abandon the ques-
tion they traditionally used to check if their patients had any grasp of reality
at all: “Can you name the prime minister?” Everyone knew who she was.
   The LSE really was a return to the classroom. I left home at eight and I
was in the university until no later than nine in the evening. I sat in lectures
hour after hour. In between we spent time in small groups doing calcula-
tion exercises. And of course I did some independent study in the library.
The teaching was a preparation for continuing academic study. It was very
high-level and intellectually challenging. I was finishing off my M.Sc.; if my
studies went well, I would continue to a doctorate. For my specialist field I
had chosen the theory of the international monetary economy.
   There was strong support in academic circles for ideas that would be im-
plemented in Finland in the 1980s, such as the liberalization of currency
markets and the introduction of floating exchange rates. Even in 1977 I had
had to fill in a form and send it to the Bank of Finland so I could exchange
Finnish markka into pounds before we left for London.
   London was also the most important foreign outpost of the Chicago school
of neoclassical economics, whose most famous representative was Milton
Friedman. He was a stern critic of the prevailing Keynesianism. Friedman
and his followers believed that growth in the money supply would revive the
economy in the short term, but in the longer term would make itself felt as
galloping inflation.
   Fiscal policy – that is, demand created by public authorities – was irrel-
evant to long-term economic success. The role of government in economic
policy should be strictly limited. Conversely, central banks had a crucial role
regarding the money supply. These views were the opposite of the prevailing
wisdom in Finland. I was interested in the Chicago School’s research find-
ings, though chiefly as a vehicle for academic reflection. In my mind it had
surprisingly little connection with practical economic policy.
   Life in London was international, inspiring, and intellectually interesting.
We lived in Akehurst Street in southwest London, where we rented a fur-
nished flat on the upper floor of a detached house. We had brought with us
from Finland only our stipends and our housing loan. We didn’t have the
money for any luxuries, and usually we ate our lunch in the student canteen.
Sometimes we met up with my friends from Atlantic College from ten years
back.
   When I had gone to school in the United Kingdom in the sixties, the Bea-
tles had been the big thing, not least for me. Now in the seventies it was
54                     Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


the era of heavy rock, such as Led Zeppelin and Deep Purple, whose music
wasn’t for me at all. Liisa and I started to attend classical concerts instead, for
which London offered an inspiring atmosphere.
  I studied diligently and with burning ambition. I submitted my final thesis
within a year. In August 1978 I received a letter from the university that told
me my thesis was good enough for me to move to the doctoral program,
which I might complete in two years. My dream of an academic career was
coming true. I began to see myself as a professor at Helsinki University or in
some respected international institute, as some of my friends from Atlantic
College already were. However I still lacked a doctoral dissertation, and the
London School of Economics offered a unique opportunity to make that
dream a reality.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          55




                         CHAPTER 13


    The Hardest Choice of My Life



I  n August 1978 I reached the age of twenty-eight. I had in my hand
   a letter from the London School of Economics practically guaranteeing
me the Ph.D. in economics that would launch me on an international aca-
demic career. At just that moment fate or chance intervened and changed
my life.
   At a lunch given by the Finnish-British Trade Guild I met some executives
from Citibank, which was expanding rapidly throughout Europe, setting up
new offices as it went. Of course I knew Citibank’s operations in London,
and I knew that it was a well-run global institution. At the LSE I had famil-
iarized myself with the growth of international capital markets. I knew that
the liberalization of the capital markets would have a greater global impact
than just about any other conceivable peaceful event.
   International banks had a major role in this. Citibank was doing in prac-
tice what I had studied in theory.
   Citibank offered me a job. I would work first in London, where I would
study the workings of the international money markets while also learning
how the bank operated. After that I would move to Helsinki, to Citibank’s
new office there. Citibank offered a salary, real work, and the opportunity to
learn new things in an international environment. The bank was recruiting
young people from good universities in various countries. I had been picked
for the team just as the whistle was blowing for the first match in a new
tournament. Citibank reckoned that we young professionals would repay
its investment within ten years, though an active system of training brought
this down to five or six years. So from the bank’s point of view the training
56                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


system was a profitable investment in the future and in growth in new mar-
kets. It also brought Citibank credibility in countries where it was just open-
ing up, such as Finland. Without local expertise the American banking giant
could scarcely have competed with the established national banks.
   The offer from Citibank compelled me to make the most difficult deci-
sion of my life. Many of my contemporaries had already found their niche.
They had studied effectively, graduated, and could provide for their families
and pay off their mortgages. I wasn’t a bohemian – far from it – but I had
nevertheless contrived to live my twenty-eight years without serious consid-
eration of what profession I should follow. When I went to London I only
knew it would be something in the academic line. It was the same dream I
had taken to Atlantic College ten years earlier. That was perhaps part of my
nature.
   According to one popular analysis people can be divided into four groups:
achievers, explorers, socializers, and killers. The names are more or less self-
explanatory. Socializers, for example, enjoy doing things together. For them
the company is more important than the results; the common good and a
feeling of well-being are the most important things. With all due respect
one might say that many people from the Mediterranean region belong to
this type. I am one of the achievers. Achievers enjoy getting things done. We
always want to take on a new project, see it through to its conclusion, and
move on to the next. We get enjoyment from working, doing, and study-
ing. Our relationships with other people come through our work. We gath-
er around us the sorts of people we can work with toward common goals.
Achievers are always aiming toward something bigger, something better,
toward the next project. We relish every success, but our minds are already
focusing on something else.
   In London back in 1978 I didn’t analyze myself in this way. It was only
later that I discovered these categories, and Liisa agreed that I was definitely
one of the achievers. Of course we all have elements of each personality type;
nothing is purely black and white. And fortunately people can take on new
qualities.
   Although I was only twenty-eight I had already experienced a lot of power
games. I had led a student organization, I had negotiated with the Russians, I
had become familiar with party politics. I had not, however, enjoyed it; and
I was not sociable enough to go out and win votes from strangers. Nor did
power structures or power itself interest me enough for me to crave a seat
in parliament or a job in the foreign ministry. I simply wanted to achieve
things – I wanted good things to happen. I was always delighted when the
		
 Against All Odds                                                           57


National Union of Students won better financial terms or living conditions
for its members. If I could say to myself that I had done things right, that
was enough for me.
   An achiever must always have something to do. Achievers are usually cu-
rious about things, because new knowledge makes new achievements pos-
sible. An achiever doesn’t need too much social life or external recognition
– the achievement is its own reward. However, the achiever will be deeply
hurt if the value of his or her achievement isn’t recognized or if it’s dispar-
aged. Achievers keep the promises they make to others, but also the ones
they make to themselves. And it’s the ones they make to themselves that are
the most difficult. In 1978 I had promised myself that I would complete my
final dissertation at the University of Technology and then go on to do my
doctorate at the LSE. The promise to the British Council weighed on me a
little, but not as much as the promise to myself.
   Thinking about it now, in my sixties, I think that there may also have been
a subconscious debt to my mother, who had never had as much education
as she would have liked. I think I wanted to show her that I could become a
doctor of economics.
   Before the offer from Citibank I had had no experience of business life. I
had seen my father’s endless and onerous work in the factory, which didn’t
hold much appeal for me. I had learned how, in theory, businesses should
operate in an economy. I was a firm believer in the capitalist system, though
I recognized its weaknesses. Finland was dominated by the big banks, the
big forestry companies, and a few firms in the metal industry. The power of
these enterprises was exerted in a few private dining rooms where the lead-
ers of the banks and insurance companies made decisions on the future of
industry – decisions that industrialists should have made.
   The Bank of Finland regulated the capital markets, and companies had
to apply to it for foreign exchange credit and other financing. The Finnish
economy was a club, run by a handful of major companies and closed to new
members. But Finland lived by exporting: there was the profitable Soviet
trade and the traditional exports of paper, wood products, and machinery to
the West. Some Finnish firms had opened up new areas: a company named
Nokia had decided at the beginning of the 1970s to start making telephone
exchanges, and the firm had also sold some big computers to the banks. I
hadn’t known anything about this in London.
   My understanding of the way companies actually worked, both in gen-
eral and in Finland, was vague. I had never set up my own company. I had
neither bought nor sold. I had never marketed anything and neither had I
58                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


developed new commercial products. But, in principle, I did have some sort
of idea of how businesses operated. I doubted, with good reason, whether I
would get along at all in the business world. Though I had learned to make
presentations, I was highly analytical and an expert by nature. I loved study-
ing things, especially as part of a larger whole. I rather dreaded joining an
organization that existed solely to make money for its shareholders – I wasn’t
sure if I would find intelligent life there. I looked at the heavyweights among
Finnish business leaders, and the question seemed all the more pressing:
Did I want one day to be an authoritarian leader who made decisions after
five glasses of cognac in some private dining room? Did I want to stop think-
ing and become a sleek merchant, whose discussions with party hacks from
the Soviet Union went on week after week? To that question I certainly knew
the answer.
   Wasn’t there something a little too easy about business life? And wouldn’t
I have to give up my theoretical musings if I chose “the practical life” in its
place? What would I say to all my friends who were advancing in their aca-
demic careers? How would I explain all this to myself, if business life turned
out just as I feared: mind-numbing, even mindless, profit-making spiced up
with opportunistic power games?
   The offer from Citibank compelled me to examine closely my dream of an
academic career. Did I want to continue my research work on a small salary,
when we already had our first child and more would surely follow? Could I
endure waiting a decade for my first professorial appointment? And at heart
was I really interested in an academic career? Wasn’t I rather a practical per-
son who wanted to spend his whole time doing something useful? Was the
lonely toil that was part of a scholar’s life really for me, when I had always
enjoyed the bustle of working with others? Was my academic career a castle
in the air, when in reality I wanted something different?
   The questions tore me apart. And if I had known then how decisive the
conclusion would be as far as my future was concerned, I would have surely
deliberated even longer. As it was I considered my options throughout Au-
gust. My nights were sleepless. I talked it through with Liisa, who doesn’t
remember ever seeing me so torn by a difficult decision.
   Never since have I made a decision that would have such a big impact
on my life. On 20 August 1978, five days after my twenty-eighth birthday,
and following another sleepless night, I made up my mind – I would accept
the Citibank offer. In business life I would perhaps do better on account of
all my studying. I would become part of a team and perhaps eventually its
captain.
		
 Against All Odds                                                            59


   Only much later did I realize how big that decision really was for me. All
major decisions demand sacrifices. In making this decision I sacrificed my
dream, but I have never regretted that: the coming years showed my deci-
sion to have been right, but those August days in London were full only of
uncertainty. That, too, is invariably an element of big decisions. You can’t
plan your life, even if you want to. I’m an instinctive rationalist, but I must
nevertheless concede that, without a chain of many random events, I would
never have become a chief executive. I could have made a different choice in
London, in which case I would now certainly be a professor of economics,
perhaps in a world-class university. My life would have been different, at the
very least.
   Although I had to look at many fundamental factors, there was one practi-
cal point that made it easier for me to reach my decision: I still hadn’t done
my military service, but now I couldn’t put it off any longer. I had to join the
army before my thirtieth birthday, which would interrupt the writing of my
doctoral thesis. Citibank said they would let me take nearly a year’s leave of
absence for my military service. The following day I told John Quitter, who
was responsible for Citibank’s Scandinavian affairs, that I would start as a
trainee in London just over a week later, at the beginning of September. And
I put the LSE’s offer concerning my doctorate into a plastic folder and then
into an envelope. I would keep it safe against the months and years ahead, in
case I came to regret my choice. I had “academic life insurance” if business
life disappointed all my expectations and made my nightmares come true.
The LSE’s letter is still in safekeeping in my personal archive, but I haven’t
needed to use it.
60                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                         CHAPTER 14


              International Banker



C     itibank was my university as far as business life was concerned, and
      also my first proper place of work. It was a demanding environment for
a young economist. I had researched the bank’s history. It had been founded
in 1812 as the City Bank of New York with an initial capital of $2 million.
By 1894 it was the biggest bank in the United States, and by the turn of the
century it had started to expand internationally. It operated in Asia, Europe,
and India, and its branches stretched from Shanghai to Manila.
   Citibank undertook foreign currency transactions earlier and more wide-
ly than any other bank in the world. In the year of the Great Crash, 1929,
Citibank became the world’s largest commercial bank. By World War II it
had one hundred offices in twenty-three countries. Citibank was a formi-
dable international financial institution; perhaps that was what interested
me most. I knew I could learn from Citibank everything there was to learn
about international banking. It was also a prototypical global enterprise,
with structures designed for effective international operations. Perhaps only
IBM, which also began international operations much earlier than other
companies, could compete with it in terms of effectiveness. In fact IBM had
been the first company to design its organizational structure rather than let
it grow organically. Its ideas were later widely copied.
   When I joined the ranks of Citibank it was led by the legendary Walter B
Wriston. He ran the bank for seventeen years, first as chief executive, from
1967 to 1970, and then as chairman of the board from 1970 to 1984. Wriston
reinvigorated banking. His powerful and far-reaching vision encompassed
internationalism and a strong belief in new technology and new services for
		
 Against All Odds                                                           61


customers. Some regarded him as too radical; for example, he foresaw the
use of automated teller machines and everyday electronic transactions when
these ideas must have seemed to belong to the world of science fiction. Back
in the 1970s not everyone saw how prescient Wriston’s vision was.
   I would never have been invited to join Citibank if it hadn’t been strongly
committed to international expansion – the bank was looking to establish
itself in Finland. Until then its London office had taken care of all its Nor-
dic business. Now it was headhunting promising young professionals. There
was just one condition: Citibank had promised not to poach people from
the big Finnish commercial banks, which didn’t want the American giant to
pay excessive salaries to young bankers. Citibank politely kept this promise.
   I don’t know exactly why Citibank approached me. I suppose someone
at the Finnish Embassy may have suggested me. I was interviewed by the
experienced banker John Quitter, and the interview went well. I was sure I
would get into the training program if I wanted to. Citibank was a respected
American banking institution. Good manners and a smart appearance were
highly regarded there, even if it was more dynamic and aggressive than Eu-
ropean banks.
   The decision to join the ranks of Citibank changed the direction of my life.
But the change also had a more immediate impact: Liisa and I at last had
some money. Citibank paid a salary positively ducal compared to student
loans. We quickly gave up our student flat in Akehurst Street and moved just
half a mile or so to our very own house in Larpent Avenue, baronial in scale
to match my new salary. There was plenty of space, and we could entertain.
It was our home in London from 1978. We weren’t sure that we would find a
place equally splendid when we returned to Finland.
   I had nothing against a regular monthly income. I had received a small
amount as head of the National Union of Students, and when I worked for
the Centre Party I had been paid enough to get by. I wasn’t a big spender, but
I naturally wanted to be sure that our little family would have enough. We
started to take in London in great gulps – we met people, went to concerts,
made long expeditions on foot. The change in circumstances was welcome.
I didn’t really own anything, just a debt-laden apartment in Helsinki, and
there were some student loans. I didn’t own any shares, and I knew noth-
ing about investing because I had never had any money to invest. I hadn’t
inherited any. When I went to Citibank I started to earn a proper salary.
For the first time I felt that my income was in line with my abilities. To be
properly rewarded for my efforts was a good feeling and one I have enjoyed
ever since.
62                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


  Shaping the future with one’s own hands and through one’s own labors was
part of my inheritance: my father had built his life and his own house; his
father had built his own business; and my mother’s father had cleared fields
in order to grow food for a large family. My family background, stretching
back for hundreds of years, was made up entirely of people who had labored
long and hard.
  I had many preconceptions about Citibank’s work. I had long wondered
whether banking could possibly be intellectually stimulating. I also brooded
on Citibank’s position in Finland. If the head of a Finnish commercial bank
had been asked about Citibank, he probably would have said that working
for it was a strange choice, possibly even an unpatriotic one. Foreign banks
weren’t then allowed to disturb the peace of the big Finnish banks.
  Only at the beginning of the 1980s did the barriers begin to crumble, when
three foreign banks were given full permits to operate in Finland: the French
Indosuez; Chase; and Citibank, which received its permit on 27 November
1981. Until then foreign banks had been allowed to practice in Finland only
through representative offices that marketed their services. The actual trans-
actions were carried out elsewhere, often in London.
  Citibank was my business school. In London I concentrated on studying
two things: the analysis of individual firms and how an international bank
worked. Once again studying satisfied my ambition. With every atom of my
being I soaked up international banking, accounting, analysis, and every-
thing else I imagined I would need in my future work. As well as formal
training I also learned how work was done in the bank. Everyone was at
their desk by eight at the latest, and we went home at seven or eight in the
evening. The office culture was very different from Finland’s. We sat in an
open-plan office where we heard our colleagues’ telephone calls. That too
was a new and educational experience.
  In Finland the big banks were used to waiting for their customers to come
to them, to humbly beg for loans for their projects. Bankers sat on com-
pany boards and took care that those companies applied to the right banks
for their loans. The banks owned large chunks of industry, and all compa-
nies had to live with credit regulation. At Citibank we looked at business
cold-bloodedly on the basis of company analysis. I learned the methods for
analyzing individual elements of a company, its position relative to its com-
petitors, and its future cash flow and overall prospects. When we concluded
from our basic analysis that a project was sound, we started to consider what
products we might sell the customer. In the Finnish market the idea of sell-
ing banking products to corporate customers was new. Finland’s big banks
		
 Against All Odds                                                            63


didn’t need to waste their time on marketing since their customers were
already at their mercy.
   Citibank made a salesperson of me. I didn’t find it easy at first. I was an
analytical person, and through my education and experience I had set out
to become the sort of expert who didn’t have to worry about customers.
And my Finnish and Nordic nature didn’t give me a head start in taking
on the role of a sleek salesman. But Citibank’s global organization was a
good teacher. I learned how to approach customers and how to put together
proposals that were hard to refuse. I learned, too, how customers should be
taken care of at every stage. You must persuade customers that you really
care and are ready to do pretty well anything for them. And I learned the
subversive truth: businesses, even international banks, live or die by satisfy-
ing their customers. If I hadn’t learned about customer service at Citibank I
could never have succeeded at Nokia, where I always regarded myself as the
company’s most senior salesperson.
   Citibank also became for me the model of a global organization. It had a
matrix structure, which worked efficiently and well. A matrix organization
is one where management takes place across both functions and business
groups, and an individual has more than one reporting line. A matrix struc-
ture is seen as the natural and, indeed, only practical model for an interna-
tional company operating in several areas.
   I understood that a strong company must have a strong culture. Back then
I had no idea that companies had cultures. But I saw in practice how a strong
culture influenced the way Citibank looked after its business and its custom-
ers. This hadn’t happened overnight. What’s more, the bank’s culture and its
leadership model were interlinked. The head office and the front line had to
understand each other, and this required continuous effort. Excellent two-
way communication was essential. Citibank wanted to be the front-runner
in all forms of new technology and communication. So in 1982 I was already
using an email system developed for internal use. I joined Nokia in 1985,
but the company used email only from the end of that decade. Citibank de-
veloped its internal technical abilities while selling its customers a vision of
making money electronic.
   My Citibank training turned my own thinking upside down. Only later
did I realize how widely what I had learned could be applied. I drew on
this new knowledge both consciously and subliminally at Nokia in the late
1980s and early 1990s. When I joined Citibank I was an economist, pure and
simple. I knew nothing of balance sheets, for example. Everything I learned
about how to analyze a company I learned from Citibank.
64                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   I also learned a great deal about how to manage people in large organiza-
tions. Earlier I had thought that organization meant a diagram made out of
boxes joined to each other by thin lines. I thought that the leader’s job was
to lead this “organization.” At Citibank I learned the revolutionary truth: the
leader does not lead boxes or an organization, but people. A leader, even in
a big organization, has to be interested in the people whose efforts create the
results. Good leaders must know their people. A good leader must also be
ready to promote some surprising people within the organization, without
regard to the official boxes. At Citibank it was understood that the organiza-
tion had to be clear but must allow flexibility, for which good internal com-
munications and respect for people were essential.
   My role model was John Quitter, a well-informed, civilized, able, and pro-
fessional American banker. He travelled constantly and knew the Nordic
region and its key people well. He was good with figures and was supremely
good at asking trainees the sorts of questions that would help them refine
their calculations. John was also very gifted socially: he could chat as easily
with someone on the shop floor as with the chairman of the board. He was
experienced, far-sighted, and cultured. Since then I have met countless cap-
tains of industry, and John could bear comparison with any of them, even
though he never quite reached the top of the banking world. John became
my exemplar, my coach, and my mentor, and I often sought his advice, even
after I’d moved to Nokia.
   That fertile year in London, from autumn 1978 to autumn 1979, passed
quickly, even too quickly. I had made the biggest decision of my life, I had
studied, learned a great deal, and become a businessman, or at least a banker.
Liisa had completed her dissertation at Helsinki University and also gradu-
ated from the LSE. We had both done a great deal of work. Even our little
son Jaakko had spent his time in London productively. He had been able to
speak Finnish by the time we went to London, then he had stopped speak-
ing altogether, and as a three-year-old he returned to Finland speaking both
Finnish and English.
		
 Against All Odds                                                            65




                          CHAPTER 15


                    Military Service



M       y time in London was drawing to a close. I had to come back to
        Finland for two reasons. First, I had to do my military service. After
that I would work at Citibank’s Helsinki office, which was still awaiting its
official license from the Finnish finance ministry.
   In Finland all men had to join the army or begin their civilian service be-
fore their thirtieth birthday. They still do. At the end of the 1970s the army
was extremely popular. Even extreme communists joined up with enthusi-
asm, apparently to learn leadership skills in preparation for the revolution
and its aftermath. I didn’t have strong feelings about the army, for or against.
I respected the need for national defense and I wanted to do my duty as a cit-
izen. In going to London I had of course taken the army into account in my
plans. It would have made completing my dissertation a little more compli-
cated, but I couldn’t do my military service in London, by correspondence
course. I would have to spend some time crawling about in the woods, and
I would need to come to grips with the basics of Finnish defense strategy.
    Liisa had found a job at the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health. She had
to be in Finland a few weeks before me to start work, so she and our three-
year-old son flew home ahead of me. We had bought our first car in England
and wanted to take it to Finland. So when the time came I got behind the
wheel of the Audi 100 and drove across Europe. From London I drove to
Dover, took a ferry to Oostende, and drove on to Travemünde, where I took
the Finnlines ferry to Helsinki. During my journey I crossed the Belgian,
Dutch, and German borders. At each border the guards took an interest in
me. They understood why my passport was valid for only a couple more
66                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


days: I was on my way to the army. Whenever I crossed a border I had to
put up with taunting: “Ah, you’re in a hurry to get home, are you? It’s a date
you mustn’t be late for.” I reached Finland on 14 October, and my passport
expired the same day. I really had left things to the last moment.
   Private Ollila reported for duty at Hyrylä barracks, just north of Helsinki,
the following day. Since I had studied physics and math, and so was ob-
viously good with figures, I was dispatched to the air defense regiment. A
month earlier I’d been sitting in an office in a pinstripe suit crunching num-
bers. Now I was in a barracks, in the Finnish army’s everyday gray uniform,
learning how to dismantle and reassemble an assault rifle. There were twelve
men in our hut, most of them between eighteen and twenty years old. Our
conversations lacked a certain finesse. The men were from the Helsinki area
and seemed a sensible bunch. The barracks block was a sixties box, already
in poor shape. The dominant internal features were linoleum, gray concrete,
and an endless row of notice boards. Beside the doors the duty officer sat at
his desk, controlling the flow of people into the barracks and, more impor-
tantly, out.
   In the evenings the blue-and-white-checked bedcover had to be folded as
neatly as possible into a square and placed on a stool at the foot of the bed.
If the bedcover hadn’t been folded crisply enough the corporal would notice
and it would have to be folded again. My personal diary had been replaced
by a schedule pinned to the notice board that told us when we needed to
muster for drill, when we needed to be on the firing range, and when we
could go to the mess. My life was as tightly timetabled and programmed as
that of . . . well . . . the chief executive of Nokia. (Though I had more free
time in the army.)
   We spent a lot of time out in the open practicing maneuvers. We dug our-
selves little foxholes, practiced throwing grenades, and tried to put up our
tents as fast as we could. Fortunately the ground hadn’t yet frozen for the
winter. The contrast with my previous life couldn’t have been greater. But I
couldn’t complain. I had postponed the army as long as I could, and now I
had to get it over with. When I had done that I could pick up the threads of
my real life. Since I had to spend time in the army I should regard it as a mix
of experience and sporting achievement.
    Liisa lived in our old home in Herttoniemi. Our stuff had been in storage
for two years while we were in England; now we were putting things back
in their place. Liisa was delighted with her new role as senior advisor in the
Ministry of Social Affairs and Health, from where she recently retired as
Deputy Director-General of EU and International Affairs. We adapted with
		
 Against All Odds                                                           67


fresh optimism to life in Finland: our feelings were very different from when
we had fled the country two years earlier. We had enjoyed a close family
life in London, which my time in the army forcibly interrupted, and which
wasn’t nice for anyone. But I returned to Herttoniemi every few weeks,
whenever I had leave.
   Within a month of joining the army I’d applied to become an officer. I had
graduated, after all, and I wanted to make use of my abilities in the army. A
few weeks later I was told I’d been accepted. So after two months at Hyrylä
I went straight to the Reserve Officer School in Hamina, on the south coast
near the Russian border. I left the sixties barracks behind and went to live
in the nineteenth-century main building at Hamina. The atmosphere there
was very different from Hyrylä – the officer cadets were ambitious and mo-
tivated.
   I was elected the chairman of our cohort. The rival candidate was Lauri
Kontro, whom I had gotten to know when we were studying, and again later
in the Centre Party office, when he had worked in the party’s youth organi-
zation. Lauri later became a journalist, a diplomat, and a newspaper editor.
Since the army and the Reserve Officer School were my point of re-entry
into Finnish life, and particularly to ordinary Finnish male life, it felt good
to receive a vote of confidence from my peers.
   Kontro was elected our secretary and everything ran smoothly. The ca-
dets took care of many of the practical aspects of the course. Social events
were important too; indeed for many they seemed to be the high point. In
previous years a star performer had sometimes been hired. We decided to
dispense with this expensive intrusion into the evening, to widespread relief.
Instead the cadets, some of whom were very gifted performers, would take
care of everything. We began a new trend.
   In Hamina I learned what the Finnish Army’s professional officers thought
about defense and about society more widely. I met generals and other se-
nior officers, who had to be careful what they said on account of the Cold
War but were generally open on their views about the future. The Reserve
Officer School was a good experience.
   The real world was a more chaotic place than it had been for a long time.
Fundamentalists had seized power in Iran. The staff of the U.S. Embassy
in Tehran were held hostage and the world was following their fate closely.
President Jimmy Carter ordered a rescue attempt, which failed; the Ameri-
can prisoners were not freed until 1981. Finland was still dependent on the
Soviet Union and on Soviet trade. The signs of President Kekkonen’s illness
were becoming apparent and people were starting to discuss who would
68                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


succeed him. Uncertainty was growing, and many well-educated service-
men had to prepare themselves for unemployment, which was something
quite new in Finland.
   In my last months in the army I held an office job in Helsinki, at the Na-
tional Board of Economic Defense. I prepared a study of the economics of
Finland’s defense at a time of crisis. In the evenings I sat in the library and
worked on my dissertation for the University of Technology; the subject
was “Economic Growth as a Theoretical Problem of Regulation.” It applied
systems theory to economic growth. I received the best possible grades for
it. I suppose it came in useful later on, too, when I had to understand the
processes at work in a large enterprise. At least it helped me develop useful
ways of thinking.
   Both my dissertations had been thought experiments that proved useful
later. But the greatest benefit of my time at the University of Technology was
practical: I learned how Finnish engineers think, and I gained credibility in
their eyes. They saw me as one of themselves, though my qualifications for
that status were rather slender. Much later, at Nokia, I desperately needed
that credibility.
   Thanks to the army I received a crash course in what Finland was all about.
Up until then I had lived an elitist life, isolated and insulated from my fellow
Finns. As a student leader I had spent my time in agreeable surroundings
with other student leaders. Before that, Atlantic College had taken me away
from the everyday reality of Finnish life and installed me in a British board-
ing school. After the students’ union I had briefly dabbled in politics. Then
we had moved to London, again away from everyday Finland. My employer
was an American-owned international bank, which certainly didn’t offer a
panoramic view of Finland. Without the army I wouldn’t have known much
about what went on in Finland or how Finns think.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          69




                         CHAPTER 16


              A License to Finance



T     he 1980s began for me over half a year late, in the autumn when
      I left the army to return to Citibank and the real world. The atmosphere
was now quite different from the over-politicized seventies. New routines
and challenges awaited me, and the change was welcome. I became an ex-
pert on company finance. I was the new boy in the Helsinki office and natu-
rally I had to deal with the most awkward customers.
   These difficult customers were Finland’s major companies, who had close
links to Finland’s big banks. From the forest industry there was Enso-Gutzeit.
I also tried to sell our services to Rauma-Repola, Wärtsilä, and Nokia. Fin-
land was still a country where forestry reigned supreme, but in reality there
were few investments where Citibank was in a position to add value. State
enterprises were out of reach for American banks. We were never the bank
of choice for Nokia. Rauma-Repola, for its part, was looked after by the Bank
of America. Even so I rolled up my sleeves and got down to work.
   I now had to put into practice everything I had learned in London about
customer care and negotiation. I mostly dealt with finance directors of my
age or a little older. They certainly saw how the world was changing and
wanted to know how to change with it. Usually their problem was a fifty-
five-year-old finance director, stuck in his ways and unable to manage his
ambitious subordinates effectively.
   I went assiduously to cocktail parties. I forged links with economic edi-
tors, which would stand me in good stead later. Citibank usually got curi-
ously positive publicity because in the Finnish finance world it seemed to
have expertise and to be both small and challenging. Citibank could offer a
breath of fresh, global thinking to the Finnish banking world, which was just
70                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


opening up. Three small foreign banks were a modest example of the direc-
tion Finnish banks would have to take.
   Finland’s big banks did their utmost to protect their domestic market
from their competitors. The Soviet Union too was interested that Ameri-
can banks were setting up shop in Finland. The Soviet Union had its own
banks, which had also set up offices abroad. The Soviet Union would surely
expect to receive a license for its own banks to operate in Helsinki to ensure
balance. But officials also had many good reasons to open Finland up to
international banking competition. The international capital markets still
had a slightly vague picture of Finland. We Finns paid a high price for Soviet
neighborliness, in a literal sense, because the Soviet Union was known to
have an influence on Finnish policy. We had to pay a premium for a politi-
cal risk that was practically non-existent. But then the markets have never
been particularly good at distinguishing details. Besides, the Soviet Union’s
share of Finland’s foreign trade was so great that it posed a risk to Finland’s
economy as a whole. And Finland was one of those dubious Nordic social
democratic countries whose commitment to capitalism seemed a little un-
certain, at least in the eyes of American investors. Finnish politicians and
officials must certainly have expected American bank offices in Helsinki to
send home the right signals about Finland and Finnish companies as a des-
tination for investment, as indeed they did.
   Officials also wanted to open up competition and compel Finnish banks
to modernize. Foreign banks had less overhead than the big Finnish banks
and could offer finance to companies more cheaply. Finnish banks’ balance
sheets were simply too small for the international credit system. Foreign
banks were also more efficient than Finnish banks in foreign exchange deal-
ings and the securities market.
   Citibank received permission to begin operating in Finland in November
1981 and started the following year. The conditions of the license were strict:
the bank could not establish any additional branches, its share capital was
limited to a small sum, competition on interest rates was restricted, and Ci-
tibank and the other foreign banks could not get involved in the financing
of the lucrative Soviet trade.
   Although the foreign banks did not grow very large in Finland, they
changed the banking system there for all time. The big Finnish banks were
used to financing, owning, and governing Finland’s major companies; they
burbled happily of their “responsibilities to society.” This meant that the
banks and their related insurance companies looked after companies’ affairs
in good times and bad.
		
 Against All Odds                                                            71


   The banks lent their favored customers money even when they didn’t need
it for business purposes.
   Company investment policies were decided at board meetings where bank
executives sat in. The forestry industry in particular was the banks’ special
stomping ground: approval for the companies’ purchases, sales, and major
investments rested with the banks’ boards. Young executives at the big Finn-
ish banks quickly learned to flex their muscles in issues of management and
finance. They might even imagine that they could run a forestry company
better than the company’s own CEO.
   The foreign banks’ arrival in Finland was like a small crack in the wall
of a house, a sign of a distant earthquake. But those who looked ahead un-
derstood that the relationship between the banks and other businesses in
Finland just couldn’t carry on as it had. Wise bank directors also foresaw
that international competition would reduce the profits and profitability of
Finnish banks, which depended on a close relationship with their custom-
ers.
   I myself had no experience of the Finnish banking system since I had
undergone Citibank’s American education instead. I thought that a bank’s
job was to offer effective financial and capital services, often against tough
competition, rather than to own, manage, or sell its customers’ businesses.
   Customers should be able to do that for themselves. If their business went
well, our customers would be sure to make money for Citibank, too. At Ci-
tibank we believed strongly in banking competition because we were used
to operating in the world’s most competitive markets. With every Finnish
customer we were the competitor, the challenger, and the alternative to the
Finnish banks. In Citibank’s Helsinki office I built up my own team, respon-
sible for half of Citibank’s corporate financing in Finland. I was happy with
them. One of my best recruits was a young economist from eastern Finland,
Kari Jordan, now the president of Metsä Group, one of Europe’s biggest for-
est industry groups.
   I met many interesting senior people at that time, whom I got to know
better later on. For example, I met Pekka Herlin of Kone over lunch in the
early 1980s. Herlin was a taciturn and grumpy figure, but he conveyed au-
thority and gravitas. It wasn’t his role as the owner of a major company that
gave weight to his words, but his vision and his grasp of the issues. The gruff-
ness of his persona added its own mystique. There was a lively discussion at
the lunch table of the international economic situation, high interest rates,
and the sustainability of the finance system. Herlin made sure he was always
the hub of the conversation.
72                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   Liisa and I had settled down on the coast a few miles west of Helsinki, in
a pleasant modern terraced house. We had two more children now: Anna,
born in 1981, and her brother Matti, two years younger. I was present at the
birth of all three of our children, though I am sorry to say that I was five
minutes late for Matti – we had a lively discussion about that. Most of the
housework fell to Liisa, even though she was building her own career as a
civil servant. But I ironed my own shirts up until the beginning of the 1990s,
when we finally started to employ someone to do the cleaning and ironing.
Our lives were full with work, family life, and children. Around this time
we also acquired a summer cottage in Orivesi, a beautiful small town (or
large village) about two hours away – not far from the original Nokia, as
it happens. There we did odd jobs, fished, and met our friends. We had an
ordinary Finnish life, in short.
   Patience has never been my strong suit, and particularly not in the early
1980s. Though I would never go back to being an academic, I had to keep
going forward. Or perhaps it was because I had left my academic roots be-
hind me that I wanted to face the next challenge. I was now thirty-four, and
as I looked around Citibank I saw lots of eager professionals, many of whom
were ten years younger than me. That made me want to accelerate my career.
I wanted to get on a faster track, one that offered broader vistas than Ci-
tibank’s little Helsinki office. I had really enjoyed London, where the world
was big, the work international, and I could feel I was developing the whole
time. I didn’t feel that in Helsinki. Once I had my feet under the desk there,
and established my team, it was natural to start looking for the next thing.
   Citibank had been my school of leadership. I’ve noticed since that leaders
learn to lead between the ages of twenty-five and thirty-five. It’s a critical pe-
riod, the time when you need a good model of leadership if you’re to become
a leader yourself. The model sticks in the mind and helps you create your
own style of working and also your own expectations of what others can of-
fer. If leaders are bad, lazy, or dishonest, they will pass on the wrong model
of leadership to the next generation, who will turn out suspicious, cynical,
or downright incompetent. They may become people who are always on the
lookout for conspiracies or gratuitously engage in corrosive office politics. If
a crooked leader deceives his subordinates, the iron will enter their soul. They
will find it difficult to recover or to believe in any leader ever again. So good
role models are a matter of life and death for every enterprise. Indeed, I be-
lieve that in the worst case a company can die if the model of leadership fails.
   Citibank didn’t supply a unique model of leadership, but it offered an ex-
cellent example of corporate culture. The bank was international and had
several sets of values – to the point where some found it chaotic. But it had a
		
 Against All Odds                                                           73


large measure of that dynamism that I both valued and had lacked, as well as
a strong sense of shared purpose. Its top management were marketers for the
bank, who promoted their products and met with clients. Not even Walter
Wriston could close the door to his office to enjoy an exalted solitude. The
American culture demanded that everyone throw themselves into the job in
order to achieve the bank’s goals.
   I learned this way of thinking at Citibank and took it with me to Nokia. I
compelled myself and my senior team to travel the world, meeting custom-
ers, learning new things, and selling our products. Perhaps I would have un-
derstood all this without Citibank, but I wouldn’t have seen how a business
culture affects the way one works. Of course Citibank made mistakes, and I
tried to learn from those as well.
   I wasn’t an easy subordinate for anyone. When John Quitter came from
London to visit the Helsinki office I arranged a private breakfast with him. I
tapped on the table with my fingers, as I sometimes do, and told him I wasn’t
happy with the way my career was developing. I lacked opportunities to get
ahead. Liisa, who was working at the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health,
had been offered an international job in Geneva, but Citibank had nothing
to offer me there. It was a disappointment for both of us.
   John Quitter listened to my outpourings sympathetically but didn’t say
much in response, because he surely understood that I wouldn’t be at Ci-
tibank for much longer. I often used to talk things through with him later,
after I had left Citibank. I knew that if I stayed there I would be offered the
opportunity to gain experience in a larger market – perhaps in another Nor-
dic country, the United States, or Latin America. But in Citibank’s structure
in Helsinki I was at the third level down. Even if I had gone abroad and
returned to Finland, the best I could hope for was to become second-in-
command. That wasn’t enough for me. I knew my worth and I was impatient
to get on. I was already over thirty and had no time to squander.
   And there were other things on offer. The powerful chairman of one of
Finland’s biggest banks and his deputy responsible for international affairs
invited me to their bank’s head office. In their ceremonious way they an-
nounced they had chosen me to lead their daughter bank in Singapore. We
discussed the question and I promised to consider the offer. A couple of
weeks later I told them I didn’t wish to pursue it. One of them told me later
that my response had caused great consternation: in the Finland of the early
1980s one didn’t lightly refuse such offers.
   I received another offer, too. This came from EVA, a think tank established
to put the case for the market economy and to counter the simple-minded
leftism I mentioned earlier. EVA was politically influential, undertook re-
74                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


search, and worked to make public opinion more favorable to business. At
that time the head of EVA was Max Jakobson, a former senior ambassador
and a foreign policy heavyweight – he came close to becoming the secretary-
general of the United Nations, but Kurt Waldheim got the job instead. We
had a couple of discussions about a possible move to EVA, which led to a job
offer, but again I didn’t take it.
  Looking back, that was fortunate for me and indeed for EVA, too: I was
just about to move into the “right” line of business. That’s where my future
lay, though I have never ceased to follow politics or try to influence develop-
ments in society; it’s just that I’ve done so in my role as a business leader. My
path did eventually lead me to EVA: since 2005 I have been chairman of its
board.
  By my own reckoning I had achieved a great deal at Citibank. The cor-
porate finance portfolio had grown. More and more major Finnish firms
came to us. We were trusted; my little team understood the customers. I had
learned important things about myself: the world of business really was the
place for me.
  Though I wasn’t entirely happy at Citibank, I had nevertheless made the
right decision in London. I still had that yellowing piece of paper, which
guaranteed the chance to return to an academic career and to complete my
doctoral dissertation. I buried it deeper in my archives.
		
 Against All Odds                                                            75




                          CHAPTER 17


                    I Move to Nokia



D      epending on your world view you may see life as a matter of chance
       or of destiny, or you may even detect the hand of God. My view is
that everything affects everything else, although I also believe that people
can help shape their own destiny. It was purely by chance that I became a
businessman, a banker, and an executive at Citibank. That wouldn’t have
happened if I’d followed my original plans.
   In the autumn of 1984 I intended to spend one more year at Citibank. I
wanted to leave the bank with the title of vice president, which would require
further arduous training and the achievement of set objectives. I would then
leave Citibank and find something else to do. I assumed that would be some-
thing to do with corporate finance. No power in the universe could have
interested me even then in any opening at a Finnish bank. I could see all too
easily that life for the big Finnish banks would soon become rather more
problematic.
   In September 1984 my phone rang. At the end of the line – it must have
been a landline – was the personal assistant to the CEO of Nokia, Kari Kai-
ramo. She had rung to invite me to meet him and his colleague, Simo Vuo-
rilehto, president of Nokia.
   A few days later I sat in a private dining room in a Helsinki restaurant with
Nokia’s two top men. They were well-known figures in Finnish industry,
though I didn’t know either personally, and both were about twenty years
older than me. By the time our chat was over Kari Kairamo was clearly fret-
ting that we’d failed to meet before. Vuorilehto said scarcely a word, while
Kairamo talked non-stop. He was a wonderful salesman, and now he was
76                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


selling me a job at Nokia. He said he’d heard a lot of good things about me.
Nokia wanted to hire some promising younger people, to bring new blood
and new ideas into the company. Later on we would see just how the com-
pany actually made use of those people.
  Kari Kairamo was every inch the charismatic leader. His gaze was pierc-
ing, but he barely seemed to have the patience to stay in one place. He wore
spectacles with large frames, and his hair was receding from his temples,
though it had not yet gone gray. He liked to dress tastefully and stylishly, but
in a hurry he forgot to tuck his shirt in. He ran Nokia in his shirtsleeves, and
he detested all other formalities as well. Kairamo had no need to emphasize
his own position: he came from a famous family of Finnish industrialists,
which guaranteed a certain degree of self-assurance.
  I was interested in his offer, because Citibank’s Helsinki office had nothing
more to teach me. Until I received Nokia’s offer the alternatives facing me
were either to go abroad or perhaps to develop investment banking services
in Finland. The Finnish capital markets were just opening up. The services
offered by banks were changing rapidly, and individual wealth was growing
too. But then I would be doing what I had already done for years.
  I was ambitious and wanted to go somewhere where I could achieve more.
Nokia was just such an enterprise. Although it was a mixed collection of bits
of different industries – a conglomerate – it was a Finnish company stepping
on to the international stage. Kari Kairamo ran the business briskly.
  There was much that needed updating at Nokia, but that would give me
the chance to make changes there.
  Of course I knew Nokia as a customer. I had studied the company, I had
sold it financial services, and I had had frequent discussions with its finance
people. I knew its strengths and weaknesses. One friend recalls me banging
on about how Nokia could never hope to thrive while it had so many dif-
ferent divisions in such varied fields as mobile telephones and toilet paper. I
knew that Nokia had to decide what it wanted to focus on. But that insight
was essentially a banker’s theoretical musing – I really didn’t know what
went on inside the company or what its top management thought.
  In the early 1980s Nokia had grown to become Finland’s most impor-
tant electronics company. It made televisions, telephone exchanges, mobile
phones, and computers. I instinctively thought that its future should lie
somewhere other than in making paper, rubber boots, or cables. I genuinely
thought that Finns too could conquer the world with new products. And for
my own part, which would not initially be a large role, I was ready to join
this great adventure. I did not yet see the risks Nokia would later encounter.
		
 Against All Odds                                                        77


Nor did I see that Kari Kairamo himself would become a risk to the com-
pany. On the contrary: Kairamo was the most dynamic figure in Finnish
business life. His company was the product of his international vision. He
tried to fend off the power-hungry Finnish commercial banks. I agreed with
him on practically every major issue. And he was regarded as an exception-
ally inspiring leader, an assessment I found it easy to agree with after our
first meeting.
   The more I thought about it, the more attractive a move to Nokia seemed.
I signed the contract between Christmas and the New Year. Before that I had
told my boss at Citibank about it. I also rang John Quitter in London. John
listened calmly, and then he politely but determinedly tried to persuade me
to change my mind. He didn’t have much to offer, however. I didn’t want my
future to be up for auction. John was sorry, but he wished me good luck. I
promised to keep in touch.
   My move from Citibank to Nokia made Nokia my life’s work. That move
was partly a matter of chance and partly a planned operation. Nokia pro-
vided the chance element by getting in touch with me. It might just as eas-
ily have been a forestry company, a metals firm, or another conglomerate.
But it was Nokia, where I was known because I had handled their account
at Citibank. The fact that my friend Pentti Kouri sat on the boards of both
Citibank and Nokia might also have had something to do with it, but I don’t
really know.
   Early in February 1985 I started at Nokia, on a journey that would last
twenty-five years.
78   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa
		
 Against All Odds       79




         PA R T I I


  A CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S
      EDUCATION
80   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa
		
 Against All Odds                                                           81




                          CHAPTER 18


                    Fresh and Eager



M       y first office at Nokia was in a rather shabby office block opposite
        Helsinki railway station. I was a young, new, and enthusiastic Nokia
man. My fifth-floor room looked out over the station square, one of the larg-
est open spaces in central Helsinki. My first task was to find a desk and chair
from somewhere. My arrival seemed to come as a surprise, as the arrival of
new workmates often does. “Who on earth is this guy and what on earth are
we going to do with him?” seems to be a common reaction.
   There were some at Nokia who made it clear that there was no red carpet
for me. I must have seemed very fresh and eager, full of myself and what I’d
learned at Citibank. As a newcomer I had to show I was useful; only then
would I be accepted. There were weaknesses in my CV. I came from a bank,
and Nokia had no particular fondness for banks. One of Kari Kairamo’s
main goals in life had been to win Nokia’s independence from the banks,
which had been among the company’s major shareholders and had thrown
their weight around on the board.
   In the 1980s Finland was a country governed by banks, and Nokia had
declared its own uprising against this system. At least I had not come from
either of the main Finnish banks, which were two of Nokia’s main share-
holders. They kept a close eye on each other at Nokia. The only decisions
made were those where the two banks agreed, so decision-making was oner-
ous, complicated, and full of suspicion. The men who ran Finland’s banks
had little understanding of what it meant to run an international technology
company, for they had grown up in a regulated market where they could be
confident of their power. For them the customer was servant, not king.
82                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   Most major Finnish companies belonged to one of the groups of big banks
and insurance companies. This was very different from the United King-
dom or United States, where different financial institutions weren’t so close-
ly linked. Perhaps it was more like Japan, which has also effectively been
owned and run by financial conglomerates. It’s important to know that these
groups were held together by more than just ownership. The major Finnish
firms were debtors, and the financial groups guided them on the handling
of their debt. Directors of banks and insurance companies sat on company
boards and often made decisions without the necessary expertise. At the end
of the 1980s the two banks where power was concentrated fought a bloody
battle between themselves.
   The banks naturally got into difficulty, and the whole system changed in
the 1990s. The historical irony is that one of the two main banks collapsed
and was forced to merge with the other. The merging of the two giants would
have been utterly unthinkable in the 1980s.
   Nokia’s chairman, Kari Kairamo, loathed the Finnish banking system and
the banks’ power over industry. He thought industrialists should run in-
dustry themselves. He gave public speeches demanding laws to restrict the
banks’ rights of ownership. Kairamo was right. In the Anglo-Saxon world it
was industry that made the world go round. The bank’s job is to provide the
finance, not to wield power within the company. Nevertheless there were
many at Nokia who thought Kairamo was gambling. The banks wielded so
much power that some of Nokia’s board feared the empire might strike back.
   Another shortcoming in my CV was an absence of shop-floor experience
at Nokia. I hadn’t set foot in a factory since my summer job in Vaasa at
the end of my first year as a student. I was an engineer, but I didn’t design
telecommunications networks, mobile phones, or new types of cables. And
I had been very active in the field of student politics, which was another
black mark. In Finland student politics was often a launch pad for a politi-
cal career, and that was where my new colleagues thought my ambitions lay.
But I’ve never really spent too long worrying about what other people think
of me. I believe in getting things done, in achievements and results. Beyond
those, people can think what they like about me.
   I had learned how to analyze a company. In my previous job I’d had to as-
sess whether it was worth lending, say, 100 million dollars to some Finnish
forestry company. Would the company be able to repay the loan? What was
the company’s real profitability? Did the managers know their jobs? At Citi-
bank, companies were not analyzed solely on the basis of the figures – the
company’s management and culture were also factored in. Nokia seemed to
		
 Against All Odds                                                            83


employ lots of good people, but the company’s management was hidebound
and old-fashioned.
  The Nokia I joined in 1985 claimed to be an international company. That
was certainly the reputation it enjoyed in Finland. It could boast that it oper-
ated in twenty-four locations around the world.
  Kari Kairamo’s stance as an internationalist certainly attracted many
young and able people to Nokia, because at least the company wanted to be
international. Of those who would be my closest collaborators in the coming
years, Sari Baldauf had joined the firm in 1983; Pekka Ala-Pietilä joined in
1984, the same year Matti Alahuhta returned to the company after several
years away; Pertti Korhonen joined the company in 1986; and Olli-Pekka
Kallasvuo was already there, having started as a lawyer back in 1980.
  The company was still dependent on its trade with the Soviet Union, as
were many other Finnish firms. It had been agreed within the European
cartel that cable trade between Finland and the Soviet Union belonged
to Nokia. This guaranteed Nokia a profitable relationship with the Soviet
Union – as long as the country continued to exist.
  Nokia didn’t lack global aspirations. Its wall map of the world map lots
of little pins in all sorts of places. The company’s leaders had distinguished
themselves by the competitive acquisition of large and small enterprises, but
no one had ever assembled all the bits into a coherent whole. Some of them
were insignificant sales firms – little more than corner shops – while others
did sensible things.
  My first task at Nokia was to bring some order into this chaos. I sat in my
room and collected files that told me about Nokia’s international subsidiar-
ies. I tried to work out what they really did and why, and how they fit into
the bigger picture. Some of them were complete catastrophes – for example,
Nokia had an IT company in England whose losses greatly exceeded its rev-
enue. I asked to see the papers on which Nokia’s investment decision had
been based; reading them was so sad it was funny.
  Files and papers flooded my desk, and I tried to get rid of them as quickly
and efficiently as possible. I didn’t really have anyone working for me, but I
was at the center of power because I answered directly to the company CEO
and the president. I was a staff officer whose job was to prepare the compa-
ny’s international projects. I was also expected to consider how the compa-
ny’s leadership structure should be developed. Developing the international
side of Nokia’s operations was a further apprenticeship for me. In my discus-
sions with Kari Kairamo and Simo Vuorilehto I had been promised a place
at the company’s front line one day. This was important at Nokia – those
84                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


who had managed an area of business and brought in money were regarded
more highly than those who had stayed at headquarters. This ethos has pre-
vailed at Nokia, and in many other companies, up until today. I lacked front
line experience and passionately wished to gain it. I knew, too, that without
it I wouldn’t get very far at Nokia.
		
 Against All Odds                                                           85




                          CHAPTER 19


     The Last Days of Drowsiness



O      nce again fate intervened. When Nokia’s lightbulb subsidiary Ai-
       ram became part of a management buyout, a vacancy for a finance
director arose. Simo Vuorilehto wanted me to take it. I knew about finance
from Citibank. I was a professional, and Nokia’s ambitious European plans
demanded a new approach to finance. As well as looking after its acquisi-
tions Nokia needed a higher profile on the stock markets and among inves-
tors. I took on this new role with enthusiasm.
   At this time – 1986 – Kari Kairamo embarked on a radical restructuring of
the company’s governance. Powerful figures such as the chairman and dep-
uty chairman of the board had to yield to Kairamo’s wishes. The board that
had represented the shareholders became the supervisory board. In practice
this meant that the actual owners of the company were moved further away
from everyday activity.
   When this change was made it was stated that the supervisory board
would retain the key responsibilities of the previous board. The firm’s lead-
ing executives would form the board of directors. Kari Kairamo would lead
this body in his role as the chairman and CEO.
   Kairamo also established an executive committee to oversee Nokia’s day-
to-day operations. I sat on this in my new capacity as finance director. It was
presided over by Simo Vuorilehto, which gave him greater responsibility for
operations. Kairamo used his role to concentrate more on making Nokia’s
influence felt in Finland and more widely in Europe. His most important
vehicle for this was the Confederation of Finnish Industry, where Kairamo
was chairman from 1985 to 1987.
86                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   Nokia’s complex governance model turned out to be a millstone around its
neck at the end of the 1980s. The company couldn’t deal promptly or deci-
sively with the many issues it was facing. The difficulties with this mixed-up
management model were among the reasons Nokia’s management was made
much simpler in the 1990s.
   In financial terms Finland was a highly regulated and almost closed econ-
omy well into the 1980s. After World War II there had been a dearth of ev-
erything. Imports were controlled, as was foreign exchange for decades after
the war. Companies couldn’t take out long-term foreign loans without per-
mission from the Bank of Finland. Foreign investors could invest in Finnish
firms only within strict limits. Capital couldn’t move freely either into or out
of Finland. The exchange rate of the Finnish markka was administratively
determined.
   The Bank of Finland also influenced lending in another way: the central
bank set the commercial banks’ quotas for loans. If the banks exceeded their
quotas they had to pay an additional premium to the central bank for their
loan capital. The Finnish financial world wasn’t subject to conditions set by
the market but to those set by the Bank of Finland. Politicians ruled the
Bank of Finland, and the governor of the Bank of Finland was one of Fin-
land’s most powerful men.
   Exchange rate fluctuations were an instrument of economic policy. When
Finnish industry, especially the forestry industry, found itself in difficulties
abroad and needed help, the cry went up for the Finnish government to
devalue the markka. Then industry would gain some breathing space while
others had to suffer the negative consequences of devaluation.
   Devaluation helped Finnish exporters, which chiefly meant the timber in-
dustry. Finnish exports became more competitive on world markets as their
prices fell in line with the Finnish markka. Devaluation was paid for by the
sectors that relied on imported raw materials and of course by individuals
who had to pay more for imported goods.
   Finland devalued its currency in 1949, 1957, 1967, 1977, 1978, 1982, and
again in 1991. The money markets however began to shake off the hand of
regulation in the mid-1980s, when all the rules of the game changed. Major
firms had begun to get around the supervision of the Bank of Finland by
lending money to each other. Currency controls were abolished. Compa-
nies were allowed to import capital to Finland. In 1984 the Bank of Fin-
land opened the floodgates and money started to flow into a country that
had been deprived of capital for many decades. Suddenly record amounts
of foreign money were sloshing around. Companies invested and individu-
als consumed: Finland felt as if it was getting richer by the day. In Helsinki
		
 Against All Odds                                                           87


shops selling expensive designer goods sprouted overnight, smart and fast
new cars appeared on the streets, and hardly a week went by without the
opening of a new gourmet restaurant. The media started to talk of “yuppies,”
whose lives revolved around shameless consumption.
   A finance director in a Finnish company could achieve brilliant results
by one simple method. All you had to do was borrow foreign currency and
invest it in the Finnish markka. Foreign interest rates were much lower than
Finnish ones, so even the dimmer finance manager could easily make a good
profit. The only threat to this automaticity was the next devaluation. But you
could predict this to some degree.
   A devaluation was proposed in 1986, but it didn’t happen. Instead Finnish
monetary policy at last began to be liberalized. Companies were now free to
take out long-term loans in foreign currency, and the regulation of commer-
cial bank interest rates was abolished. Genuine international money mar-
kets, which would benefit Finnish firms, had at last reached Finland. And
with their arrival devaluation disappeared as a reliable option. Now Finnish
firms would have to learn to compete by other means.
   Finnish companies had done overseas business for many years. The
country had lived by its exports: the forestry industry had sent its prod-
ucts abroad for centuries, and strong metals industries had sprung up in the
1950s. Finnish ships and paper-making machines were known the world
over. And Nokia, along with many other firms, had started to develop an
electronics industry. Foreign trade had taught Finnish companies to look
after their foreign exchange skillfully. Forecasting and anticipating the con-
stant devaluations had kept financial managers on their toes. But in many
other matters Finnish companies had known very little about how inter-
national finance operated. They weren’t listed on foreign stock exchanges.
The money they borrowed had mostly come from Finnish banks, which also
owned and ran the companies. This was barren soil for genuine competition
and financial efficiency to take root in.
   Nokia wanted to be a different sort of company, free of the influence of the
banks. We wanted investors from around the world, from Europe, from Fin-
land, from wherever we operated. From that ownership base we wanted to
make Nokia an international company. This was our dream at the end of the
1980s. It became a reality only in the 1990s, when over 90 percent of Nokia
was owned by people outside Finland. But we had to start somewhere, and
one of our first foreign investors was a man named George Soros.
   I didn’t know much about George Soros back in 1985. I knew he had fled
Nazi-run Hungary at the time of World War II and that he had studied phi-
losophy at the London School of Economics, where I too had been a student.
88                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


The book he was writing then, which would appear the following year, was
called The Alchemy of Finance, and it applied various theories of physics to
financial investment. His Quantum Fund was already known for its skillful
operations on the markets for foreign exchange, shares, and raw materials.
   George Soros’s link to Finland was my old friend from Atlantic College,
the economist and investment expert Pentti Kouri. Pentti sat on the Nokia
board at Kari Kairamo’s invitation – Kairamo had been captivated by Pentti’s
sparkling intellect and also his contacts in the U.S. market. Pentti was a ris-
ing star in Finland. He went around telling the leaders of major companies
where the world was heading. As a young economist he had already made a
theoretical contribution. He had risen via the International Monetary Fund
to become a professor at one of America’s leading universities. He came
from Finnish Lapland, was around six feet, six inches tall, and never really
bothered to disguise his own brilliance.
   Kouri had recommended some Finnish firms as possible investments for
Soros; one of these was Nokia. Kari Kairamo had quickly taken to the idea,
because if Soros invested it would help reduce the company’s dependence
on the banks both as owners and financiers. Kairamo was presumably also
looking ahead: if a well-known investor liked the look of Nokia, it would be
easier to persuade others to trust the company.
   In December 1985 I travelled to New York to sell Nokia shares to Soros
and to meet American investment bankers. Soros met me at his office in
Columbus Circle, which had a stunning view northward over Central Park.
On the streets of downtown Manhattan Christmas carols were already play-
ing in the shops and a queue many yards long wound around FAO Schwarz,
the famous toyshop. The carols were fortunately inaudible from the offices of
Soros’s Quantum Fund. Soros sat with his advisers on one side of the table. I
sat with Pentti Kouri facing him.
   I had done my homework carefully. Soros looked at me closely from be-
hind large spectacles and fired questions at me in English with a strong Hun-
garian accent. His aides asked even sharper questions: “Why are you in this
business? Will mobile telephones ever be profitable? Why haven’t you sold
your cable division?” I replied clearly to each question. I knew every figure
inside out, for that had always been easy for me. I wasn’t tense or nervous, at
least not very. I was well prepared for this presentation, what one might now
call a road show. On this occasion, however, the road show had an audience
of just one investor. After the meeting Pentti Kouri was ecstatic. He told me
I’d done rather better than the typical Finnish finance executive.
   To me Soros didn’t seem to be an especially tough, impressive, or char-
ismatic man. Many bankers I had known at Citibank were much quicker
		
 Against All Odds                                                            89


and sharper. I wouldn’t have guessed in 1986 that I would encounter Soros’s
name so often in the 1990s, when the great investor would upset the Euro-
pean exchange rate mechanism, rescue east European culture, and try to
improve American society still further.
   In Manhattan we tentatively agreed on the price Soros would pay for the
Nokia shares. The preliminary agreement was signed at the beginning of
January 1986. Everything should have been fine: George Soros would have
made a sound investment, and Nokia would have received fresh capital to
the sum of 238 million markka ($97 million at 2016 prices). But in a few
months nothing was fine. Nokia’s shares had begun to rise briskly. We sus-
pected that someone might deliberately try to ramp up Nokia shares. We
had agreed with Soros that the two categories of Nokia share he was buy-
ing should be priced at 380 and 350 markka ($155 and $143 respectively at
2016 prices). But, given the rise in Nokia’s value, the correct prices for these
shares were now 473 and 468 markka ($188 and $186 respectively at 2016
prices). Soros the great investor was making an even better deal than we had
thought.
   The Finnish banks on Nokia’s board were furious. They gave notice that
they wanted to subscribe for shares at the same price as Soros. The chairman
of Nokia’s board, Mika Tiivola, said my preliminary agreement with Soros
could be revoked at any time. Finally I went to meet George Soros, at his
Manhattan residence, on my way to a seminar in Colorado. I sat with him
at breakfast, and tried to explain the views of Nokia’s Finnish proprietors.
Soros appeared seriously irritated when I suggested that we review the price.
   “In that case I will have to reconsider all my investments in Finland,” Soros
announced. He had invested and was investing in about five other compa-
nies. His interest had encouraged many other international investors to take
an interest in the Helsinki Stock Exchange. Finnish companies could not
afford to lose Soros just then.
   When I returned to Finland Kari Kairamo informed Soros that the shares
had to be repriced. A new price was proposed to him based on Nokia’s value
in the spring of 1986 reduced by eight percent. Soros accepted the offer, and
the planned share issue to the Quantum Fund took place in May 1986. In
honor of his investment Soros paid a visit to Finland, where he was accorded
the welcome due to a statesman. He met the prime minister, gave a long
interview to the country’s largest newspaper, and attended a dinner in his
honor at Båtvik, a historic seaside villa that Nokia owned. He also saw how
mobile phones were made at Nokia’s Salo plant.
   For me Operation Soros was important. I handled it pretty much by my-
self from start to finish, and I got Nokia to take a big step toward the com-
90                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


munity of international investors. If Soros believed in Nokia many other
investors were bound to follow. I had gotten to know the big investors’ smil-
ing faces, but I had also seen an angry Soros, who believed the Finns had
deceived him.
  But things turned out satisfactorily for Soros after all. Nokia shares contin-
ued their rise in 1986. By September 1986 Soros’s investment, made just that
spring, already showed a profit of 71.4 percent. If I had been him I would
have uncorked the champagne then and there and felt a glow of satisfaction
as I looked out over Central Park. George Soros later encapsulated his own
philosophy well: “Leave the last 10 percent for the next guy.” He has made
billions using this recipe. He became famous for knowing when to sell. Deals
that stick are those in which both sides benefit. He followed his own advice
in our negotiations, too.
		
 Against All Odds                                                            91




                          CHAPTER 20


                      Black Monday



I  ’m an Ostrobothnian, from western Finland. People from western
   Finland come across as straightforward but taciturn and a little brusque,
but we keep our promises. We tend not to reveal our real feelings: these are
hidden below many layers deep down in the soul, and show themselves in
deeds rather than in words.
  For many years Nokia was a global company run by people from western
Finland, with a handful of people from other provincial places. Our bucolic
backgrounds greatly amused the Finnish press, while in the wider world no
one understood what the fuss might be about – though in every country
larger than Luxembourg there are regional differences, and people in the
big city always regard themselves as more sophisticated. These things are
significant. I strongly identify with my roots. For me people from western
Finland are usually the easiest to get along with. I say this with a degree of
caution: my wife Liisa’s roots are in eastern Finland, and I’ve been getting on
with her for over forty years now.
  When I started at Nokia its management was divided into factions that
fought each other. I tried to avoid being drawn into these battles. In any case
I was hardly part of the inner circle that orbited Kari Kairamo. I kept a little
to one side, though I did my job conscientiously, as I have ever since my first
class at primary school nearly sixty years ago.
  I soon got to know a lawyer in Nokia’s legal department named Olli-Pekka
Kallasvuo. He stood out from the crowd because his opinions were always
analytical and very much his own. In spring 1986 I requested that he be
transferred from the legal department to the finance department, which
92                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


I had taken charge of. I could discuss finance with him as part of Nokia’s
broader strategy since he had been closely involved in much of Nokia’s ac-
quisitions and financing.
   Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo also came from western Finland.
   I was a banker by background and very familiar with international fi-
nance. But in the mid-1980s no one at Nokia was very interested in that.
Olli-Pekka had studied law and had gained practical experience in econom-
ics and finance at Nokia. He was a cast-iron finance professional, and I rated
his skills highly.
   One October Monday back in 1987 Olli-Pekka and I were sitting in my
office in Nokia’s old headquarters. We were staring at a Reuters computer
screen, which nowadays would seem just as clumsy as a 1960s black-and-
white television. The terminal displayed green numerals that told us that
the New York Stock Exchange was sinking rapidly and inexplicably. The fi-
nancial panic spread from New York around the world. This was our stock
exchange crash, the 1929 of my generation. We stared at the figures, but we
didn’t understand what was happening. We tried to call people we knew to
find out firsthand what was going on, but it wasn’t easy to get through to
New York.
   Nokia wasn’t listed on the New York Stock Exchange, but we knew this
would impact the company’s share price in London and Helsinki, where
the company was listed. That spring, with Kari Kairamo’s support, we had
floated Nokia on the London Stock Exchange, a courageous step for a Finn-
ish company and a vital one if Nokia was to transform itself into a company
attractive to international investors. It would guarantee the company access
to new finance and make it more independent of the micro-management of
the Finnish banks.
   Now we stared at the little green numbers darting across the screen and
tried to work out whether our dream was over. Were the stock exchanges
of the world entering a lasting depression? Was capital fleeing from equi-
ties into the credit markets? Had listings and capital operations had their
day? Had we gone back to the Stone Age where international finance was
concerned? Would small investors ever regain their confidence in the stock
market?
   Later the great stock market crash of October 1987 would turn out to be
much smaller than we had imagined at the time. Shares recovered their pre-
vious levels by the following year. Nevertheless Black Monday in October
1987 took its place in history. When the reasons for the crash were investi-
gated, it turned out that programmed trading was responsible. Changes in
		
 Against All Odds                                                              93


equity prices had automatically triggered sales on such a massive scale that
the market couldn’t cope and so it crashed. This happened when both the
economy and the stock exchanges were at a very high level. What goes up
must come down, and now it was the stock market’s turn.
  October 1987 was also the first indication that the financial markets had
really gone global. The crash in New York affected the stock exchanges in
London, Paris, Frankfurt, Stockholm – and Helsinki. The secondary effects
would be much greater, but in 1987 we received a foretaste of what was to
come ten years later. By then small investors would be using systems that
had previously been available only to professional traders.
  We sat there late into the night – a hard day’s night. It had been a tense day
for us, especially since we were both young: I was thirty-seven and Olli-Pe-
kka thirty-four. It left us with a lasting sense of uncertainty, but with the sure
knowledge that no rise in a share price could last forever. The work of de-
cades, major investments, and the entire value of companies could be wiped
away by the markets in a matter of minutes. Later neither of us ever wanted
to invest Nokia’s cash reserves in the equity markets. We managed to resist
that temptation even when many people regarded us as too conservative.
  As the evening went on we wondered what the future held. What would
happen to Nokia? Its major acquisitions were just under way. Would the
world still provide a market for Nokia’s products, or would that melt away?
How would things go for us at Nokia? These were the questions going around
in my head as I drove home in my Volvo that Monday evening. Outside it
was dark, damp, and treacherous and a slushy rain was falling. That October
day in 1987 became known as Black Monday. That evening in Helsinki cer-
tainly lived up to the name.
94                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                         CHAPTER 21


       The Finance Director Gets
            Down to Work


A     t the end of the 1980s Nokia was a bundle of different activities –
      tissue paper doesn’t have much to do with electrical cables. Nokia had
traditionally made rubber boots, but that didn’t help much with the mobile
phone side of the business.
  It was to be my destiny to decide where Nokia should focus in the future.
My first job was to work out what we should do with Nokia’s paper division.
Paper was Nokia’s core, Nokia’s heart. That was where it had all started.
  Nokia had taken its name from a manor house at the confluence of two
rivers just west of Tampere, Finland’s second city. There had been a house
at that spot since as far back as 1270 or thereabouts. The golden age of the
Nokia Manor, though, had been the nineteenth century. A town called
Nokia later grew up around the house and the factories.
  The name “Nokia” has its roots in an old Finnish word for the sable, a
small, dark, furry animal that made its home on the banks of the river
Nokia, to which the animal gave its name. From there the name passed to
the manor house, to the company, and eventually to the whole community.
There’s something curiously fitting about the name Nokia: the little furry
beast was a nimble creature that had to adapt to changes in its environment,
just as the company did later. Now the animal has achieved immortality: it
appears on the coat of arms of the town of Nokia.
  The paper factory was founded by Fredrik Idestam (1838–1916), who was
a Finnish government official as well as an entrepreneur. He had heard while
travelling abroad that paper could be made from wood. Until then paper
had been made from linen rags, but it had been discovered in Germany that
		
 Against All Odds                                                            95


paper could be produced more cheaply by adding wood to the pulp. Finland
was a land of forests, lakes, and rivers. Wood was the raw material for paper,
and water was a source of the energy needed to turn wood into paper.
   Idestam set up his first paper mill in 1865. Times were hard: crop failures
had led to a devastating famine. Finland was an autonomous part of Rus-
sia, dependent on political decisions made in St Petersburg. All in all the
economy was weak. Even so, paper consumption appeared to be growing
rapidly; Fredrik Idestam had chosen the right area.
    Nokia Ltd. was incorporated in 1871, when the company’s first general
meeting was held in Helsinki. The company developed its paper production
at Nokia, while other companies set up mills elsewhere. They laid the foun-
dations for the entire economy of Finland, which became an independent
country in 1917.
   Nokia’s paper division grew and blossomed right up to the end of the
1980s. Domestic competitors had grown up alongside Nokia: companies
merged and pooled their resources in the face of ever-fiercer international
competition. The paper industry was so important for Finland that many
political decisions were made on its terms. When it got into difficulty it ex-
pected the government to bail it out. This led to regular devaluations of the
Finnish markka to ensure that the paper trade ran smoothly.
   And of course other exporting industries benefited from devaluation.
   Nokia didn’t focus solely on paper production. Indeed, in the 1980s Nokia
didn’t really focus on anything. It wasn’t big enough to succeed as a producer
of tissue paper – it had to find new areas or be swallowed up. This was a time
of consolidation in the paper industry: Nordic companies were forming alli-
ances in a new way, European firms were buying one another, and American
firms were buying European ones.
   I had made an early assessment of Nokia when I was a young analyst at
Citibank – the company was too diverse. For example, following a reorga-
nization in 1983 it had nine separate divisions, and it owned subsidiaries
producing everything from batteries to hunting weapons. The company had
to focus on something, fast. I thought it should give up on paper, consumer
electronics, and its cable business and concentrate on electronics. But then
again, cables produced a healthy cash flow. Of course at that time I wasn’t in
a position where I could decide Nokia’s future direction.
   It took a year to get out of paper, and it needed some sticky negotiations
and some sweaty journeys to the United States, London, and Italy. It was the
first project where I sold part of Nokia. Because the paper division was in a
sense sacred I couldn’t openly talk about selling it. Instead we talked of alli-
96                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


ances, cooperation, and the transfer of operations as part of an international
totality. Nokia’s top management was divided about giving up paper produc-
tion. Chairman Kari Kairamo gave an impression that he didn’t want to sell
anything that belonged to Nokia. He had begun his career in Nokia’s paper
division. His grandfather had been one of the original subscribers for Nokia
shares in 1877. Although Kairamo was forward-looking as Nokia’s chair-
man, he didn’t want to be remembered as the man who sold its paper divi-
sion. The chief executive, Simo Vuorilehto, also had a background in paper
production, but he understood that Nokia couldn’t compete against larger
firms, and he supported the move to cut paper production. On the other
hand, the head of the paper division, Janne Simelius, wanted to expand it.
And Jaakko Lassila, one of the two dominant figures in the world of Finnish
banking, who sat on Nokia’s board, was opposed to selling it.
   These differences of view on a key strategic question speak volumes about
the problems Nokia faced. In the midst of these differences I was given the
task of disengaging Nokia from paper, and I saw it as my duty to do so.
Nokia had to find an international partner, but where? How could we ar-
range matters so that the sale would seem a genuine example of coopera-
tion? Who would pay what, and to whom? Would we use shares or money
as our means of payment? What did we really want? And what would be
good for Finland? If Nokia made the wrong decision the Finnish media and
Finnish politicians wouldn’t miss the opportunity to attack us the moment
the deal was concluded.
   Nokia’s top management was very short of international expertise. The
truth was that the company had lost an entire generation. The company’s
president, Kari Kairamo, and chief executive, Simo Vuorilehto, were both
over fifty. The forty-something board members were either on their way out
or otherwise on the sidelines. Whether to end paper production was the first
of the big challenges my generation faced at Nokia. It was not of course my
personal project. I got to know people with whom I would work very closely
later on. One of these acquaintances was the Swedish consultant Per Karls-
son, who later became an important advisor and would sit on the Nokia
board.
   Per Karlsson was an investment banker at the Svenska Enskilda Bank and
formerly the head of IKEA in Germany. He was on the small side, bespecta-
cled, cheerful, and courteous. He was soft-spoken but far from soft-headed.
He was able to find innovative solutions to difficult strategic problems that
others had tried and failed to resolve. He had a thorough knowledge of many
industrial sectors. One of his areas of expertise was tissue paper produc-
		
 Against All Odds                                                             97


tion. I had first met him in London in 1986, at the time of Nokia’s listing on
the London Stock Exchange. His colleague Roger Gifford had invited us to
watch the tennis at Wimbledon. I remember I won a five-pound bet on who
would be champion.
   Per Karlsson had earlier had discussions with Nokia about our tissue pa-
per division. We had talked about an alliance with Holmen Hygiene, a Swed-
ish firm. We had also made an offer involving the formation of a European
company to sell, though the terms weren’t clear and wouldn’t become clear
until we were certain that there was no alternative to selling it. If this sounds
confusing, that’s because it was.
   Sometime in the spring of 1988 Per Karlsson and Roger Gifford came
to my office in Nokia’s headquarters in the heart of Helsinki. They told me
bluntly that Nokia couldn’t make a profit as a lone player in the European
tissue paper market, so it would be best for Nokia to sell out straight away.
Per Karlsson had good contacts in the paper industry, and he reckoned that
an American company called James River might be interested in buying
out our tissue paper division. At ten o’clock one Swedish spring evening he
picked up the phone in Stockholm and rang Brenton Halsey at James River.
The switchboard asked Per: “Which Brenton Halsey do you want to talk
with?” Per was dumbstruck for a moment – he had forgotten that a father-
and-son team ran the company. He chose Brenton Halsey senior, who hap-
pened to be the right one.
   During this call James River commissioned Per Karlsson to buy Nokia’s
tissue paper division. He travelled to Richmond, Virginia, where James Riv-
er Inc. was based. The company was proud of its history and reputation – a
cannon from the American Civil War was on display at its headquarters.
Brenton Halsey, for his part, assured us that his company was honest and
straight in all matters. This I would find out for myself later as the nego-
tiations advanced. These negotiations were not always easy, however. The
sale of our paper division became a process that tried my patience intensely.
When the negotiations began money wasn’t the question uppermost in our
minds. But as they continued Nokia’s cash reserves dwindled. Now we badly
needed the money the sale of the paper division would bring. Selling a com-
pany is always difficult. In any such sale there are always a million reasons
why one shouldn’t be doing it. There’s always someone who thinks it’s too
expensive, or too uncertain, or otherwise a stupid thing to do. And what’s
more, they’re very often right. Someone really has to push for the sale to take
place in order for it to happen. On top of that practical matters may turn
out to be deal-breakers. In major deals there’s always an army of investment
98                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


bankers, consultants, lawyers, public relations people, and other advisers. In
selling our paper division I had for the first time to command this little army
of people, all of whom had to do their bit if the deal was to be successful.
And even that wasn’t enough, because Nokia’s divided board would still have
to agree to the terms of the deal. For me this was all new and exceedingly
instructive.
   The negotiations with James River got underway with a meeting with Per
Karlsson and Roger Gifford. I took along Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo, who had
now moved to the finance department, to work out the practical aspects. The
practical aspects meant that every month we flew to London for a couple of
days to negotiate the details of the deal.
   From time to time Per Karlsson stumbled into my line of fire. I cannot
bear delay, foot-dragging, or artificial obstacles in anything that I do. The
sale of our tissue paper division was turning into the biggest project of my
time as finance director. In the summer of 1988 it seemed to me that the
sale wouldn’t go ahead. I wanted to make the negotiations go faster, but I
didn’t know how. I sat in the office late into the night, staring at my papers
and talking on the phone. Most often Per Karlsson was at the other end of
the line “Per, we need to get this done!” was my simple message. My fingers
tapping the desk were so loud they could be heard in London, Per told me
later. He was quiet at the other end, listening to my outpourings and saying
he would do his best.
   In September 1988 the negotiations seemed to be moving forward, though
that was just a mirage. Matters had matured to the point where I suggested
to Brenton S. Halsey, Sr., that he visit Nokia. He came from Richmond, Vir-
ginia, first to Helsinki, where we met him at Nokia’s head office. The chair-
man, Kari Kairamo, was there, with the other directors. After this meeting
Halsey flew in Nokia’s private aircraft to Nokia, to the birthplace of the entire
enterprise and the “sacred” paper factory. Fredrik Idestam’s manor house
had gone, and in its place stood Nokia’s company villa, built of white stone.
Many a captain of industry had visited this house before Brenton S. Halsey.
The American executives spent a long evening with their Finnish hosts.
   Halsey was pretty sharp the following morning. He had come up with
three options: sale of the company, time-limited cooperation, or open-end-
ed cooperation.
   The Americans wanted to conclude the deal. I wanted to conclude the
deal. Nokia’s CEO wanted to conclude the deal. Nevertheless the negotia-
tions ground to a halt: Nokia’s chairman, Kari Kairamo, didn’t want to con-
clude the deal.
		
 Against All Odds                                                           99


   The process was logjammed for several months. It resumed again only in
December 1988, when Kairamo’s views were no longer decisive and a pre-
liminary agreement was signed in London. It says a lot about Nokia’s com-
pany culture at the time that the board member who signed it, Harry Mildh,
had played no part at all in the negotiations. He just happened to occupy the
right seat on the board.
   Olli-Pekka and I knew very little about paper production or, to be honest,
about the paper industry in general. We were technocrats, and it was our job
to see this operation through to the end because we believed it was a matter
of necessity for Nokia. When we presented the deal to the board I explained
the background, which showed that the tissue paper division was profitable
but the outlook for growth was weak. Also, Nokia was less profitable than its
international competitors in this sector. The aim of these explanations was
of course to build up the case for the deal.
   Such deals never run according to the timetable. Unexpected problems
cropped up in this project, too. The ownership arrangements became ever
more complex. Olli-Pekka kept an eye on the legal aspects, and we also en-
gaged the services of Tomas Lindholm at one of the top Helsinki law firms.
He described the deal as the most complex of his career. He became my
trusted lawyer, whom I called on again later when I was in a tight corner.
   Nokia’s board agreed to the sale of the paper division in 1989. In the final
stages the Italian firm, Montedison, part of the Ferruzzi group, joined James
River as Nokia’s partner in the new joint company. At the decisive meeting of
the board one of the directors gave an ill-tempered speech in which he said
the sale was a mistake. It would have been better to sell off Nokia’s consumer
electronics division instead. He was both right and wrong. The consumer
electronics arm had to be sold in any case. Selling it would be the next long
and arduous process we had to go through. But we were also right to sell the
paper division. Our keenness to sell it was sharpened by the knowledge that
Nokia was hemorrhaging cash. According to its interim results that spring,
the company’s profit was 100 million markka ($36 million in 2016 money),
less than budgeted for. The previous year the profit had shrunk by 130 mil-
lion markka ($47 million). Nokia’s descent into the abyss had begun.
   The arrival of the Italians at the negotiating table brought new color to
the deal. I later became a board member of the joint company established
by Nokia, James River, and Montedison. I added Milan to my frequent-flyer
program, though the preliminary discussions on the role of the Italians were
held in London. The investment bankers and consultants relished that. The
Swedish investment banker Bengt Hammar announced pompously at one
100                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


stage that his client was “Raoul Gardinia himself, the Chairman of Ferruzzi,
whom I am representing personally.” “Then not the Pope himself,” I whis-
pered to Olli-Pekka, who was sitting beside me. He had great difficulty in
containing his fit of laughter – but if he hadn’t it would have done immense
damage to his reputation for stone-faced imperturbability.
   The new joint venture became Europe’s biggest tissue paper company.
Nokia announced in its press release that it was passing to the new com-
pany “all its activities in the field of paper, or that part of the firm from
which Nokia began 125 years ago.” Later, in January 1991, Nokia would sell
its share in the company. Thus Nokia had taken its first big step in moving
toward a new age and a new scene of operations. The deal was financially
sound for Nokia: by my calculations Nokia profited from the sale of its paper
division to the tune of about $148 million at 2016 rates.
   The deal included some terms very favorable to Nokia regarding exchange
rates: the price would rise to Nokia’s advantage right up to the very day the
deal became binding.
   I don’t know what Fredrik Idestam would have made of our deal. His
brainchild had survived and turned a profit for 125 years. In that time Nokia
had fortunately had new ideas and moved into new fields. Perhaps he would
have been pleased that we had at least achieved a good price for our paper
division. He was a true cosmopolitan who did much to bring European ideas
to Finland. So our international operations, which had produced a much
larger and more vigorous enterprise, would certainly have pleased him. Per-
haps Fredrik Enestam would have wished us bon voyage into the new mil-
lennium, when Nokia would once again be an entirely new company. What
else is there of Idestam’s legacy? The manor house is still owned by Nokia
and still stands in the town of that name. The mills on Tehdassaari – factory
island – are still working, though now under the name of SCA – Svenska
Cellulosa Aktiebolaget.
   I was now a more experienced business leader, and I understood better
how big organizations were run. The deal I had just concluded didn’t make
me a great enthusiast for mergers or acquisitions. At the same time I sensed
that we still had to divest ourselves of consumer electronics, rubber prod-
ucts, and cables. That would provide work for the coming years.
   When I later became chief executive of Nokia I wouldn’t do much in that
line. Nokia would concentrate on organic growth in a growing market. There
are always so many risks in M&A. It’s not worth buying a failing business,
and a successful one is never for sale at an affordable price. And acquisitions
are dangerous for corporate culture. By one estimate, 70 percent of them
		
 Against All Odds                                                            101


don’t meet the targets set when done. I don’t find that surprising. Deals al-
ways look easier on paper than they turn out to be in the real world, which
has real people, institutions, emotions, and history. So I’ve tried to resist the
temptation of acquisitions, and in this I’ve succeeded rather well.
102                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                           CHAPTER 22


              Spend, Spend, Spend



I   n the 1980s Wellington boots were still Nokia’s best-known product.
    They were in very wide use. In Finland’s challenging climate there’s a use
for a pair of decent wellies all year round: for working or walking in the
forests, fields, and bogs – and even on the lakes or sea when they’re frozen
in winter. Nokia had produced its first rubber footwear back in 1898, when
it started making galoshes. Then it moved into bicycle tires, car tires, and
industrial rubber. It started to produce its classic Wellingtons in 1934. The
Finnish army had them as part of its regular kit and wore them in key cam-
paigns. I had worn them myself during my military service.
   In 1988 Nokia was still Europe’s largest producer of rubber boots. But a
couple of years later the company exited the business when there was a man-
agement buyout of this traditional sector. In the early 1990s Nokia divested
all of its traditional basic industries, which was when it finally started to look
like an electronics company. It was looking for areas of growth – capturing
new markets lay at the heart of Nokia’s long-term strategy. The company
had developed its capability in telephone networks and switchboards. Now
it tried to grow through direct sales to consumers. Nokia had embarked on
an adventure that would put its entire future at stake.
   There was plenty for Nokia’s finance director to do in the 1980s when the
company set off on its European spending spree. The most important part of
my job was ensuring that we could pay the bills for the chairman’s shopping.
   Kari Kairamo believed that the secret of growth lay in some combina-
tion of consumer electronics, computers, and mobile phones. He thought
the company needed to be active in all three sectors to be certain of success.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          103


My views didn’t diverge from Kairamo’s, but I, and many others, understood
that Nokia was taking some hair-raising risks.
   In 1987 Nokia decided to take many serious risks simultaneously. The at-
mosphere was competitive: who could bring to the board the most inter-
esting international project? In the spring the company bought the French
television producer Oceanic from the Swedish firm Electrolux. That made
Nokia Europe’s third-biggest maker of televisions. That was the starter. For
the main course Nokia was eyeing a really big fish: the German company
Standard Elektrik Lorenz (SEL).
   Antti Lagerroos was in charge of this. He was an ambitious, self-assured,
and purposeful member of Nokia’s board, whose dream was one day to take
Kari Kairamo’s place as the company’s chairman. He was assisted by the ex-
ceptionally gifted and much-loved Timo Koski, who had joined Nokia from
Siemens in 1983 and had become head of Nokia electronics and a member
of the board. He was one of the few people in Nokia with real international
experience and a vision to match. At the time Koski had less than a year to
live, though none of us knew that then.
   These two men drove Nokia to make a series of acquisitions that turned
it into the king of European television production. According to them SEL
was the last company in Europe it would be possible to buy. They were not
disturbed by the fact that Sony had looked at the company and decided not
to buy it. During the planning of these deals there was a buzz on the fifth
floor of Nokia’s headquarters, where the top management had their offices.
I didn’t have anything to do either with the calculations or with making the
decisions. I kept to myself the thought that the market for televisions was
quite unknown to Nokia, and that it was full of pitfalls.
   The purchase of SEL was announced in the middle of December 1987. It
was a major deal, but there was more to come. All autumn Nokia had been
negotiating with its arch-rival, the Swedish company Ericsson, over the ac-
quisition of its computer division. The discussions reached their conclusion
at the same time as the SEL deal. Nokia was becoming a formidable player in
the European television market, and the largest computer firm in the Nordic
region.
   We held a press conference in the ballroom of the Marski Hotel in Hel-
sinki to announce our purchase of Ericsson Data. As we were getting ready
for that I chatted with my Nokia colleagues. I was quite sure that the journal-
ists would attack our ambitious strategy. I was certain that someone would
ask: “How can you be sure these deals will ever succeed?” But this question
didn’t come up.
104                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   That was just as well, because it was a question that Nokia’s board hadn’t
even asked each other before concluding the deals. Silence reigned: no crit-
ics of the deals came forward, even though Kari Kairamo was said to have
had doubts about the purchase of SEL right up to the evening before the
deal was signed. He had asked some executives to come to his office and had
asked them: “Will this sink Nokia?” No one had been able to offer an answer.
Silence filled the room.
   The head of the Dutch television company Philips, Jan Timmer, made a
striking observation when Nokia acquired its television factories in 1988.
Timmer had visited Helsinki to get to know his new competitor. During his
trip back to the airport he was deep in thought. He told the Nokia director
accompanying him exactly what he thought after their day of discussions:
“It’s dangerous to find ourselves in an area where a new player comes along
knowing nothing about making televisions.” This was Dutch directness at
its sharpest. Those wrong decisions and those managers’ silence cost Nokia
dearly, right up until 1996. Kari Kairamo asked just once whether Nokia
could afford this expansion program. He ought to have asked a dozen times
a day. SEL and Ericsson Data cost Nokia 3.75 billion markka in all (about
$1.6 billion at 2016 prices). At the end of the 1980s that figure represented
a serious threat.
   My answer to Kairamo was clear. “Nokia’s balance sheet is under strain
on account of these deals. Both of them – televisions and computers – have
to work if Nokia is to stay solvent,” was what I told him. Kairamo listened
to my explanation. He looked at me through the transparent screen of his
large spectacles and went on to the next thing. He was a small man, restless
and mercurial, who took people on trust. He had a brilliant intellect and a
compelling vision. He had good intuition and the ability to inspire people.
He was a charismatic leader in the fullest sense. But he wasn’t always able
to accept hard facts if they challenged his own vision. Or perhaps he just
thought Nokia had to go forward and any problems could be solved one at a
time. Or that the company’s future growth would take care of any financing
problems. I’m still not quite sure what he could have thought. Neither do I
know how much he really believed his plans could succeed.
   Although Kairamo had added me to the payroll, I wasn’t one of his inner
circle. Officially I reported to the president, Simo Vuorilehto, not to Kairamo.
Also, we were very different people. Kairamo wanted everything to be fun.
He was quite capable of gathering his secretaries and whoever else happened
to be around for a quick game of ice hockey on a nearby rink. He loved long
evenings that went on far into the night, long after the invited guests had
		
 Against All Odds                                                         105


departed. Once, on the way to an island Nokia owned, Kai-
ramo dangled from the door of his helicopter, to the delight
of his friends making the journey by boat below.
   Kairamo was a perpetual schoolboy, always surrounded
by fun, even when things weren’t very funny. He kept those
around him busy day and night. It wasn’t my job to write
the speeches he gave several times a week in Finland and
abroad. Matti Saarinen, then head of information at Nokia,
worked two floors above Kairamo. He might be summoned
by the chairman five or ten times a day. Eventually a new
phone was installed for Saarinen – a hot line for Kairamo’s
sole use. In this way Saarinen could hurtle downstairs, put-
ting life and limb at risk, to see the chairman, for whom
issues of presentation and PR took precedence over all else.
Saarinen could not take the lift to see Kairamo, because it
was too slow and nothing could be done about that.                Mobira Cityman
   Kari Kairamo always had his sleeves rolled up and was al-
ways in a hurry to be somewhere else. His helicopter waited just around the
corner. Or some project had to be kicked off today, in order to be ready by
yesterday. Kairamo really wasn’t a man for long-term planning. Everything
happened here and now, quickly and intuitively. Even Kairamo’s personal
possessions were not always in order. He was always leaving wallets, brief-
cases, and even clothes in various locations. His habit of piling up papers and
press cuttings in his office drove his secretaries and subordinates to despair.
   Now and again Kairamo managed to annoy people other than his own
staff. When Nokia succeeded in making its first workable mobile phone,
Kairamo became the best possible salesperson for them. This model, the
Mobira Cityman, weighed about as much as a brick, but Kairamo took it
everywhere. Meaningfully and with great ceremony he would place it front
of him at the dinner table. He would wait for it to ring, and when it did he
would reply with engaged enthusiasm. His hosts at Helsinki’s finest restau-
rants didn’t always appreciate this new sign of the times.
   Sometime in 1988 I travelled with Kairamo to an investment seminar in
the United States. He boarded the plane with a briefcase and three plas-
tic carrier bags full of foreign newspapers a couple of weeks old. When the
plane had taken off he dug out scissors and a pen, with which he annotated
the items that interested him, to dispatch to his underlings when we reached
the other end. He wanted his organization to take care of things and follow
new developments. He wanted Nokia to move forward and to remain intel-
106                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


lectually alert. Kairamo was a generator who never seemed to run short of
energy – a perpetual motion machine. But as anyone who has ever studied
physics knows, such a device cannot exist.
   Kari Kairamo could be the world’s most irritating manager. He would
change his plans without telling anyone. His work rate was manic; he drove
himself to the edge and seemed to enjoy it. And he assumed that his younger
staff members were ready to work at the same rate. As for me, I tried to live
as regular a life as I could. I didn’t really like going out in the evenings, and
Liisa liked it even less. Generally I got home sometime after eight, but always
by half past, when the television evening news began. On Sundays I would
play tennis in the afternoon, after which I often drove to work and got ready
for the following week.
		
 Against All Odds                                                         107




                         CHAPTER 23


                    Annus horribilis



E   verything still looked good in the spring of 1988. Nokia had
    become a major Nordic and European company. But danger signs had
already begun to appear. Senior executives were jostling for position, and in
the corridors of the head office no one worried anymore about what would
be good for the company, but only what would be good for themselves in the
next chapter of the Nokia story.
  As summer approached the worst year in Nokia’s history began. Its open-
ing act was a human tragedy. One of our senior executives, Timo Koski, was
returning to Finland from a holiday in London. As the plane taxied along
the runway at Heathrow airport he suffered a stroke. Before he lost con-
sciousness he managed to speak to the air crew. He was rushed to a hospital
in Wimbledon specializing in such emergencies. Finnish and British doctors
consulted each other, but there was nothing they could do. Timo H. A. Koski
died as the result of a stroke at the age of forty.
  Koski’s death was of course a great shock to us all. But the death of one
key manager doesn’t derail an entire company. It was nevertheless a grim
reminder that overwork may lead to exhaustion and worse. But Nokia was
already beginning to slow down by then.
  A sickness, a cancer, had taken hold of Nokia, and it was eating up the
time of those who should have been running the company. The head office
spent its days in plots and power struggles, even as the cash flow was drying
up. Nokia had made major acquisitions in television and computer manu-
facturing, and now it was time to combine them as efficiently as possible into
an integral whole.
108                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   There would be some difficult decisions ahead concerning redundancies
and relocations to countries where manufacturing costs were lower. Nokia’s
computers were doing markedly better than televisions – computer produc-
tion had been effectively restructured earlier that year and the results were
beginning to show.
   It was in the television division that the dismal truth began to reveal itself.
European television makers were in ever-worse difficulties – color televisions
hadn’t sold as well as expected. The major European companies, Thomson
and Philips, were scaling back their production or moving it to the Far East,
where costs were lower. Europe was simply making too many televisions for
a saturated market that was weakening along with the wider economy.
   Nokia’s total revenue was over 22 billion markka in 1988 ($8.2 billion at
2016 prices). Consumer electronics accounted for about 6 billion markka
($2.3 million) – and employed over 13,000 people. That was far too many:
restructuring had started too late. At the beginning of August Nokia’s senior
management all knew we had bitten off more than we could chew. Antti La-
gerroos had lost Kari Kairamo’s confidence and had been removed as head
of consumer electronics. In his place Kairamo had installed a Frenchman,
Jacques Noels. The necessary restructuring had stalled. Noels based his of-
fice in Geneva, where he seemed remote from the company’s Finland-based
leadership.
   Noels was too slow in delivering the necessary efficiencies when his divi-
sion needed decisive leadership to simplify its technology base. We made far
too many different models of television and needed to do some pruning if
we were to be competitive. We also had too many people working on prod-
uct development, scattered across too many locations. We should have shed
workers from our German factories, but this wasn’t done because Kairamo
had promised there would be no redundancies. Inevitable but painful deci-
sions were not made, which meant we had to make them later when they
were more difficult and expensive.
   Nokia’s top man, Chairman Kari Kairamo, seemed to devote his time to
almost everything except running his own company. He had been invited to
join the European Round Table, which gathered the continent’s most impor-
tant business leaders together in various locations to discuss the issues of the
day. This was of course highly prestigious from Nokia’s point of view, except
that the company was in danger of collapse.
   In August Kari Kairamo held a crayfish party in honor of the president
of the European Commission, Jacques Delors. Nokia’s crayfish parties were
legendary. They took place in the historic Båtvik manor at Kirkkonummi,
		
 Against All Odds                                                        109


about twenty miles west of Helsinki. It was in the area known as the Pork-
kala peninsula, which the Finnish government had been forced to lease to
the Soviet Union after World War II, and which had been returned to Fin-
land in 1956 in poor condition. The area was a living reminder of the war
between Finland and the Soviet Union, when Finland fought heroically for
its independence, which it retained but at great cost in men and money. So it
was perhaps a fitting irony that in the 1970s and 1980s Båtvik saw many long
and liquid evenings where Soviet politicians were encouraged to increase
their purchases of Nokia products.
    Now Nokia’s guests were no longer from the Soviet Union, but from Brus-
sels. Times had changed – Nokia was a major player in the Nordic region
and in Western Europe. That was why the top man at the European Com-
mission was learning how to eat crayfish Finnish-style. Nokia’s chairman
helped Delors tie the ribbons of his bib before the sacred ritual of opening
his crayfish. Kairamo later received a beautiful thank-you letter from his
distinguished guest. Nokia didn’t skimp on its crayfish parties or its other
amusements, though the company’s business results were declining rapidly
in the autumn of 1988. A fleeting and deceptive sense of hopefulness had
taken root in the company the previous year, which had been the best in the
company’s history to date – its profits had exceeded a billion markka for the
first time – just over $411 million in 2016 money. Nokia would not achieve
as good a result again until 1994.
110                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                          CHAPTER 24


               The Leader Departs



I  remember trying to get Chairman Kari Kairamo to take an interest
   in the company’s finances. I was frustrated and fearful for the future of
the firm, which was looking ever more dismal. One day in the autumn I met
Kairamo outside his office, where I tried to tell him about either our latest
results or some financial details, I don’t recall which, but neither would have
made for happy listening. Kairamo stopped for a minute, then continued
on his way, because somewhere a gaggle of journalists or others who might
promote his public image was waiting.
  In the course of 1988 Nokia’s relations with the Finnish banks had become
strained as its financial results had deteriorated. It didn’t help that Nokia
had stealthily begun to use its cash reserves to buy back the Nokia shares
that the banks owned. This suited Kairamo’s aim of gaining independence
for Nokia, but the company’s weakening position was pushing matters in the
other direction. The two main Finnish banks were compelled to intervene
in Nokia’s affairs more frequently. Kairamo may even have feared that his
own position was in danger. Later I heard rumors that the banks had been
planning to force him out, but nothing I knew at the time suggested that his
days might be numbered.
  For investors Nokia’s deteriorating results were a cold shower. The com-
pany’s stock price had fallen by about 40 percent in the course of a year.
Chairman Kairamo received hate mail from individual investors in vari-
ous parts of the world. Next in line was the press, which began to criticize
Nokia’s plans to conquer the world. Until then Kairamo had been regarded
as Finland’s best business leader, and his reputation had begun to spread
		
 Against All Odds                                                           111


well beyond Finland. In 1988 there wasn’t a European newspaper whose re-
quest for an interview he would turn down. And there were requests aplenty.
   Chairman Kairamo began to live more and more through the media, and
the media always creates its own reality. The more one appears in the me-
dia, the more its artificial reality diverges from real life and the real world.
The media is like a treacherous goblin, which promises a million beautiful
things when all is well. But when the luck runs out it finds vengeance all the
sweeter.
   I organized a Christmas drinks party at my home for staff in the finance
department on 8 December 1988. About twenty-five guests came to our ter-
raced house, and we had fun. We sang Christmas carols, ate Christmas food,
and drank glögi – something between punch and mulled wine. I had invited
Kari Kairamo to drop by, though this was something one could never be
sure of: his plans could change at the last moment. So it was all the more
delightful when he turned up at our front door as happy and lively as ever.
He didn’t stay long, because he was having dinner with the board of a ma-
jor bank. And the following day, a Friday, would be the meeting of Nokia’s
board’s executive committee. Kairamo seemed to be running at full speed,
or perhaps even faster.
   The following Sunday – 11 December 1988 – I went as usual to the ten-
nis court and after the match to my office, as I often did. I liked to have a
peaceful period to focus on my work for the coming week. I sat in my office,
studied my papers, and thought about the week ahead, when Nokia’s board
would address the company’s situation. I rang my secretary, who wasn’t al-
ways delighted to hear from me on Sundays, but who promised to do ev-
erything I asked. When I had done all I could I gathered my papers and my
tennis bag, went down in the lift to the garage, and left for home. I had seen a
light in the boardroom, and I wondered what might be up. I rang Olli-Pekka
Kallasvuo, my closest colleague and the second-in-command in the finance
department, but he hadn’t heard anything out of the ordinary.
   I started my Volvo and set off to drive home to Espoo through the dark
December night. When I had driven about a hundred yards my car phone
rang. The head of communications, Matti Saarinen, was on the line. I could
tell from his voice that something was wrong.
   “Listen, Kari Kairamo is dead. He has committed suicide,” said Saarinen. I
was silent for a long time. “Well, well,” I eventually managed to say.
   I continued on my way home, but I just couldn’t concentrate on driving.
On either side of the road it was dark. The ice on the sea round the coast of
Helsinki seemed extraordinarily black. I felt powerless and a little betrayed.
112                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


Had Kairamo left us to take care of this mess? Was that just and fair to us?
   I knew at once that suicide was Kairamo’s personal solution. There weren’t
any other skeletons in Nokia’s cupboard: as the finance director I was certain
of that. Everything would change the following day, but life had to go on,
and we had to save what we could of Nokia. After Kairamo’s suicide that
would be no easier than before.
    The last time I met Kairamo was at that Christmas drinks party at my
house, on the Thursday evening. On the Saturday he had set out alone for his
place in the country, and on the Sunday he had hanged himself there. In the
past he had suffered from depression and bipolar disorder. Now he left a sui-
cide note, signed “Sick.” But the situation at Nokia had certainly influenced
his decision – the pressures on him were stacking up from every direction.
And his troubled mind probably added to his problems by inventing other
pressures out of thin air.
   I was a different generation from Kairamo and also too serious and ear-
nest for his inner circle. I lacked that sense of fun and spontaneity that Kai-
ramo valued above all else, apart from intelligence in those close to him. So
I had no feelings other than a great sense of emptiness when Matti Saarinen
gave me the news of Kairamo’s death. Besides, I tried to push all my feelings
to one side because we would all have such an overwhelming amount to do
in the following days.
   A photo-shoot at Nokia’s head office had been arranged for the following
morning with the French magazine Dynasteurs. The interviews for the story
had been done a while back. Now the photographer wanted to immortalize
Kari Kairamo, some other senior figure, and me. While the photographer
was setting up his lights and cameras in our head office, our press office
was trying to write a press release, in all the major languages of the world,
announcing that our chairman was dead. But no one could let the photog-
rapher know because it was still inside information. Only around midday
did Nokia’s press officer tell the photographer that one of his subjects had
passed away.
   “Our Chairman Kari Kairamo died suddenly at home as the consequence
of a stroke in the early hours of Sunday morning. Despite this grievous loss
we are continuing to work normally.” This sanitized message, signed by the
chief executive, Simo Vuorilehto, was sent to all Nokia’s employees. But Fin-
land’s leading newspaper, Helsingin Sanomat, decided to release the news that
Kari Kairamo’s death was suicide. The private tragedy was now very public.
   I sat for the photographer at 9 a.m., wearing a dark suit and a subdued tie.
I looked more serious than I had ever looked before. My skin was gray. But
		
 Against All Odds                                                         113


I sat for my portrait because it had been arranged – once again I performed
the task I had been given. Inside my dark suit and my gray skin, however, I
was trying to keep myself together. The picture appeared later in the French
magazine; in it I appear to be smiling. I still don’t understand how I could
have contorted my features into a smile that day.
   Altogether I worked with Kairamo for just under four years. His energy
and his vigor made Nokia a special company, a place that attracted many tal-
ented people. The people Kairamo had brought into the organization made
Nokia the company it became later.
   Kairamo was not in any sense a business leader or a captain of industry. He
was a leader, who could easily have led a political party, or become president
of Finland or the head of some international organization. He knew how to
bring people with him, and how to inspire and motivate them. Kari Kairamo
was a great leader. He immersed himself deeply in key issues. He followed
things through. He had a vision of Nokia’s role in Europe. And although it
didn’t work out in practice, his vision was clear and correct. Kairamo be-
lieved in globalization and in specialization in high technology, which was
rare in Finland in the 1980s.
   Kairamo’s legacy was a great help when Nokia became a global corpo-
ration in the 1990s. When he died my generation had to take enormous
responsibility for the company. Our outlook was more international than
our predecessors’, but we didn’t have much experience. These days I would
scarcely allow such inexperienced individuals to make decisions on such big
issues, as we had to.
   A good leader has to have at least three qualities: competence, willpower,
and a desire to work hard. Kari Kairamo had all these. I wasn’t present at his
funeral, which was a private affair, but I was told that a storm covered the
mourners’ cars with a thick white layer of snow, blew people’s hats off, and
made it almost impossible to walk. The whole church went dark with the
force of the storm. That’s the sort of man Kari Kairamo was – a snowstorm
from Finland.
114                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                          CHAPTER 25


                 Preparing to Lead



S    imo Vuorilehto took over as chairman following Kairamo’s death.
     It fell to him to lead Nokia through one of the most difficult periods in
its history. The recession that was just beginning, and Nokia’s overambitious
program of acquisitions, threatened to engulf the company. Vuorilehto had
to restructure Nokia ruthlessly in order to ensure that the company would
survive.
   The dramatic departure of Nokia’s most senior figure left its mark on the
company’s workforce. It was a constant presence during Vuorilehto’s three
years at the helm. Kairamo’s decision to commit suicide was the elephant in
the meeting room, the cruel fact that everyone knew but no one would talk
about. Vuorilehto’s role was itself a daily reminder of it.
   Suicide is ultimately a private human tragedy. The job of a chair or a chief
executive is one of the loneliest the world can offer. I understood that only
when I experienced it. Of course, Kairamo was pretty remote from most of
us in his everyday routine at Nokia. But that didn’t stop us silently asking
ourselves questions: Could we have spotted something? Could we have done
something?
   I have often discussed the issue with my colleagues. Many of them felt
that the atmosphere in the company took a turn for the better somewhere
around 1992 or 1993. By then Nokia had an entirely new management team
that wasn’t so connected to the Kairamo era. Perhaps the regeneration of
Nokia also demonstrated the company’s strong internal culture. A weaker
company could have lost its way completely after the suicide of a charis-
matic chairman.
		
 Against All Odds                                                         115


   The end of the 1980s saw me carrying out my daily agenda in Nokia’s
finance department. Companies were bought and sold, and there was also
plenty to do in managing and organizing processes. Ambitious people in the
1980s ensured that they ticked the right boxes by managing profit centers
and factories. The finance department was necessary, but not very interest-
ing. Those who didn’t make, sell, or invest anything might thrive there, but
it wasn’t regarded as a particularly exciting place.
   When I became the finance director I decided to change things. I wanted
the people in my department to value their work, and I wanted the best pos-
sible people to come and work there. And later I tried to help them take their
careers forward, at Nokia and in the world beyond. At Citibank I had man-
aged a few groups of finance specialists. Before that I had had no leadership
experience to speak of. The finance department was my first real manage-
rial position: twenty-five people answered to me. After my time in Nokia’s
finance department I was in charge of 2,000 people. And six years after that
I was responsible for 50,000.
   Leadership is largely a matter of communication, and the methods and
channels one uses depend very much on the number of people you’re man-
aging. If you have lots of subordinates you have to consider how you can
be certain of getting your message across to the whole organization. In the
finance department I could tell everyone directly what was on my mind, and
they could give me feedback directly. You can’t do that with 50,000 people. So
communication must be clear and carefully planned. This is the CEO’s most
important task: communication, communication, communication. The sec-
ond important task is personnel policy: the CEO is always a company’s most
senior personnel manager. These two matters cannot be delegated to anyone.
   It was with these two matters that I wanted to begin as Nokia’s finance
director. I explained to people that much would be expected from them, but
also that good results would be rewarded. I put new people in new positions.
Many of my appointments came as a surprise and caused a great deal of
discussion within the company. I began to spring these surprises in Nokia’s
finance department, then in Nokia Mobile Phones, and I have followed the
same policy as head of Nokia.
   I enjoyed both the surprises and the discussion they caused. I seriously
believe that an organization needs a regular shake-up in order to stay fresh
and lively. One should give lots of responsibility and power to good people,
perhaps three times more than they could imagine in their wildest dreams.
   People who are trying their best shouldn’t be punished for the odd mis-
take, but they must learn from every mistake they make. Every failure or
116                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


error is a formidable packet of information that the company should be able
to profit from. Not everyone is fond of my habit of regularly turning the or-
ganization upside down. For me, though, it’s an instrument of leadership. It
offers a means for as many people as possible to use as many of their skills as
possible, and to learn many new ones. New tasks should be genuinely new.
Individuals’ learning processes enrich the whole company, but they enrich
the individuals themselves even more.
   I didn’t know all this when I became finance director. Much of it I learned
only much later. I have also sometimes made mistakes when recruiting peo-
ple and appointing them to new positions, but I’ve tried to learn from that.
In the finance department I wanted to extract from people as much energy
for Nokia as I could. Because we needed to save money I couldn’t take on
many new people, but I concocted other ways of making us more effective.
I decided to offer everyone in the department a home computer, paid for
by the firm. In this way we were no longer tied to normal working hours.
Parents who wanted to leave early to look after their children could work
later at home. In those days the concept of remote working had hardly been
invented, so our department was truly ahead of its time.
   I started to transform Nokia’s financial management in other respects. To-
gether with my fellow director Kari Haavisto, I persuaded Nokia to adopt
international accounting standards – the IAS. At that time this was an object
of wonder, and we frequently found ourselves justifying it to our colleagues.
We had agreed that, from that moment, Nokia would really be an interna-
tional company. We had to comply with international accounting standards
if international investors were to read our accounts and compare them with
those of other firms. The old guard had a fit of the horrors, but Kari Kairamo
was enthusiastic about it. By some inexplicable instinct he always chose the
international alternative, if one was open to Nokia.
   I have never had any time for conservative people. They dwell in the bu-
reaucracies and on the boards of many a major enterprise. They believe that
every little change threatens the entire heritage of the firm or, perhaps more
to the point, their own desire for a comfortable life. Indeed, they often or-
ganize things so that the company serves them rather better than they serve
it. Meeting such people can easily throw me into a rage. They simply can’t
comprehend that if the company does something new, it learns something
new as well. After that every new thing becomes a little easier. Every com-
pany has its share of these intransigent people who do all they can to pre-
vent every change or reform. But by adopting the international accounting
standards Nokia moved up a league and also learned to think in a new way.
		
 Against All Odds                                                         117


   I set other reforms in motion, which rapidly brought financial results.
Nokia’s old system had channeled money to all the banks Nokia dealt with.
As a former banker I decided to make the banks compete for our custom
and so save money for Nokia. We created a system of strict financial controls
whereby the different parts of the company had to take instructions from
the head office. In this way we prevented Nokia from repeating the foreign
exchange losses it had suffered in the early 1980s, when the dollar collapsed.
   We established a finance company in Geneva whose function was to con-
trol all Nokia cash streams. This was a new idea that reduced the power of
Nokia’s business units but also made things simpler. It was just the sort of
idea worth pushing forward when reorganizing a company. So of course it
too met with vigorous opposition. The business units thought that Nokia’s
head office was grabbing power – they would no longer be able to lend or
invest their own money freely. But it was exactly this freedom that had cost
Nokia so dearly in payments to its bankers. I wanted to restrict that free-
dom and keep the money for Nokia. We thought our plans through very
thoroughly, again with Kari Kairamo’s support, before we moved the entire
company’s financial management to Geneva.
   At the same time we focused our banking relationships on our main bank-
ers, and we adopted the net principle: the net effect of each foreign exchange
transaction was taken into account. In this way we no longer had to pay the
banks interest on accounts that were in the red if on the same day another
account was in the black. All Nokia’s cash transactions were simplified and
focused. In the finance department we were building a new Nokia: interna-
tional, well-run, clear in its reports to international investors.
   New ways of doing things call for new people to do them. I churned
through staff in the finance department rather fast because I wanted the
most talented people. Little by little I succeeded in my goal. When Olli-
Pekka Kallasvuo came to us, other stars were not far behind. I wanted “my”
stars to continue their trajectory way beyond my department. When I was
transferred to a new job at Nokia, Olli-Pekka was promoted to be finance
director. The role fitted him like a glove.
   I constantly preached to people in the finance department about lifelong
learning, new challenges, and new opportunities in Nokia. Pii Kotilainen
was an excellent example. She had joined us a couple of years earlier, when
she was about twenty-five years old, to work as a corporate dealer. Rather
grandiosely I called her cubicle our dealing room. There might have been
a couple of people working with her. But it was our nerve center, where we
learned the business of the money markets. For me it was an important place
118                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


because of my background in banking. I had learned to follow the markets,
and I got energy from their rapid movement. I would disturb the work of the
corporate dealers by phoning them and asking questions, which they would
painfully attempt to answer. Pii was one of them; she told me later that I
always rang when she was least ready to respond to anything.
  When Pii had worked eight years in the finance department I summoned
her to the CEO’s office. She must have thought that Nokia’s foreign exchange
positions had collapsed, that her trades had failed, or that the final reckon-
ing was due for some other reason. She couldn’t have been more wrong.
When she sat down on the dark brown sofa I asked her how much longer
she intended to spend in the finance department. I proposed that she might
become the head of training for the whole of Nokia. Her look of amaze-
ment was truly worth seeing. She didn’t have a single day’s experience of
personnel matters, but she was a brilliant example of the ability to learn new
things. She was one of many who moved from the finance department to
other work and new challenges. That was my goal, and I was happy when I
could achieve my goals.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          119




                          CHAPTER 26


   The Finance Director Hits the
           Shop Floor


U     ntil 1990 I was Nokia’s money man. I ran the firm’s capital opera-
      tions, I looked after the investors, the finance, and the company’s head
office, and I was also in charge of strategic planning. I watched over Nokia
from the bridge, but I didn’t know much about what life was like below deck.
I knew very little about how the company developed, made, or marketed its
products.
   The new CEO, Simo Vuorilehto, tried to stop Nokia drifting and put it
back on the right track. He was a very different leader from Kairamo: cau-
tious, realistic, and stiff. He tried to simplify our corporate governance, for
example, by doing away with internal committees, which he regarded as
pointless.
   One night in January 1990 Vuorilehto rang me at home and asked wheth-
er I would like to manage Nokia’s mobile phone division. He must not have
expected me to sign up there and then, because when I did he repeated his
question in case I had misunderstood: was I sure I wanted to bring some
order into that chaos? I told him I was up for it.
   The mobile phone division had previously been run by Antti Lagerroos,
who had long been another of Nokia’s rising stars and a strong candidate
to be the company’s next CEO. But Lagerroos found himself on a collision
course with Vuorilehto. In February 1990 Lagerroos left the company, and
Kalle Isokallio was promoted to Nokia’s second-in-command at Vuorilehto’s
suggestion. In April 1990 Nokia’s supervisory board, which would soon be-
come the board, chose Isokallio as the new president of Nokia. The deputy
chairman, Jaakko Lassila, made the proposal because the chairman, Mika
120                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


Tiivola, was Isokallio’s father-in-law and could be seen as having a conflict
of interest.
   Although I had spent my time at Nokia in the head office I knew a lit-
tle about our mobile phone operation. I had had to chair a working group
whose task was to rationalize Nokia’s television and mobile phone manu-
facturing. We worked on this for about five months and suggested some
restructuring and ways of improving productivity.
   Nokia’s mobile phones were manufactured in Salo in southwest Finland
and Korea. There were historical reasons for this. Salo had long been a cen-
ter for electronics, with Salora, which made televisions, the dominant com-
pany there. Nokia had set up a joint venture with Salora, called Mobira, back
in 1979. The ethos at our plant in Salo was very different from that at the
head office in Helsinki, where we wondered if we would ever get a grip on
television production. We planned savings and new targets, but these never
seemed to be met. When visitors to Salo from the head office left the factory
to return to Helsinki, everything lapsed back to business, or lack of it, as
usual. I suppose the new CEO wanted someone to straighten Salo out.
   Nokia had made mobile phones since the 1970s. At its peak in the 1980s
the Nokia-Mobira share of the world market had been 13 percent. Nokia
had been particularly successful in the United States with the goods it sold
using the Tandy brand name. But by the end of the 1980s Motorola domi-
nated the market. In 1990 Motorola had 22 percent of the market, Nokia
just 10 percent. It was clear who we had to beat in the mobile phone market.
   Motorola had started a complex and time-consuming patent infringement
case against Nokia in 1988. Motorola’s aim seemed to be to prevent Nokia
from entering the U.S. market (a commonly used competitive tactic). We
settled the dispute and had to pay hefty damages in December 1989, just
before I started in the mobile phone division. The damages, over ten mil-
lion dollars, now seems pocket money compared to the amounts involved
in such disputes today. But at the time it was a substantial sum, especially
compared with the size and profitability of the mobile phone division. The
incident didn’t imbue us with friendly feelings toward Motorola.
   Motorola was arrogant with good reason. They had good product de-
velopment, a good brand, and the necessary capital. Nokia’s mobile phone
brand didn’t exist then. The Nokia trademark had a long history, stretching
back to the beginning of the 1900s, but it had nothing to do with mobile
phones. At the end of the 1980s Nokia owned seven makes of television and
two of mobile phones, all sporting national trademarks, but not one of them
was “Nokia.” Something had to be done about that.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          121


   In taking responsibility for the mobile phone division I was taking on a
small unit that had three years of financial losses behind it, from 1987 to
1989. The mobile phone division’s share of the company’s total revenue was
just one tenth in 1990. Nokia Mobile Phones was then like the start-ups of
the 2010s – it had passion, intelligence, expertise, and gifted, hard-working
people. But it wasn’t systematic or efficient. Within the unit there were con-
stant problems with both product development and production. My job was
to establish whether mobile phones could become a profitable, productive
area of activity.
   Deep within Finnish society lurks a belief in heavy industry. The belief in
the value of mobile phones was nowhere near universal, even within Nokia.
Many believed that mobile phones were like televisions, in that only the Jap-
anese were capable of manufacturing them profitably.
   I drove the seventy miles from Helsinki to Salo, out toward the western
coast. The road wandered through the Finnish countryside: woods, fields,
water, and prosperous farmsteads. There was time to think on the hour’s
journey, but I also had to concentrate on the driving because traffic was
heavy on that constricted road. I felt uneasy. There were some tough deci-
sions to be made, which the workers at the factory wouldn’t like at all. Even
then Nokia’s plant was among the largest in the small town of Salo. The boxy
buildings housed labyrinthine production lines, which were not designed in
the most efficient way, in so far as they were designed at all.
   My appointment as manager of the mobile phone group gave the people at
Salo every reason to fear the worst. I was the fourth manager in three years.
If I had been a worker at Salo, I would have started to look for a new job as
soon as I heard that finance director Jorma Ollila had been put in charge.
   For me the factory was almost unearthly, although my father had worked
in industry. As a boy I had told the world that factories would play no part in
my future. As a student I had spent one summer in a factory, but since then
about twenty years had passed, during which I had had nothing to do with
industrial production. But now I was as involved as it was possible to be. I
was a thirty-nine-year-old chartered engineer, an economist, a banker, and a
former finance director who now had to learn how to run product develop-
ment, manufacturing, and marketing. And if I didn’t learn, there wouldn’t be
much of a future for me at Nokia.
    I encountered considerable suspicion about the motives of Nokia’s top
management. It didn’t reveal itself directly – no one said anything, there
were no signs of rebellion. It was more dangerous than that – it took the
form of a deep and icy silence. Finnish silence is famous, perhaps notorious
122                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


– but this went far beyond our famed reticence. When I went for the first
time to address the employees at the plant, you could have heard a feather
drop. They stared at the floor. They didn’t ask any questions or offer any
comment. But their fear was so palpable and real and so dense and over-
whelming that I felt the factory could collapse into nothing, like a star falling
in upon itself to form a black hole.
   I had called a meeting in the largest room I could find. I talked, talked,
talked, and talked some more. I used every positive word I honestly could. I
told them this outfit would be knocked into shape and made to grow. I was
open about Nokia’s failings and admitted that the company had handled this
area of its operations badly. “No one deserves to have four bosses in three
years,” I said. All this did little to reassure the employees – my employees. I
kept on talking in the midst of a dismal silence.
   “From this day on there is the prospect of growth and an attractive future.
Now we must roll up our sleeves and get down to work,” I concluded my
speech. I believed what I had told my employees.
   But I couldn’t promise anything. It could all turn sourer still. Motorola
might take over what was left of the market. A shortage of parts might cause
our production to collapse. Or marketing mistakes could kill us. Nokia could
decide to stop throwing good money after bad. And if anyone knew the state
of Nokia’s finances it was the company’s former finance director – me.
   I ascended from the factory floor to my office at the top floor of the build-
ing. I looked out on the western Finnish landscape and on the blocks built
on the fields in the 1970s. The spring sun shone with unyielding clarity. My
fingers drummed on my desk as I focused all my powers on getting to grips
with this new job. I pondered briefly whether leaving the head office had
been a mistake. I sighed from the bottom of my heart, but I’m glad to say
there was no one to hear.
   Within Nokia’s mobile phone division there were of course various func-
tions. The most important were product development, production, market-
ing, and human resources. Now Nokia’s new products had to be better than
its competitors’. And we had to make them more efficiently than our com-
petitors made theirs. The whole division had to internationalize.
   And we had to create a brand, Nokia’s own brand. To succeed in this I
needed the best people I could get for my own unit. Matti Alahuhta, a bril-
liant and highly analytical young manager, was going to look after product
development. I had gotten to know Matti before the other key leaders in
Nokia. We had gone to Vaasa High School at the same time, though Matti
was a couple of years below me and I had only known him slightly.
		
 Against All Odds                                                         123


   The next time I met Matti was in 1985, when I started at Nokia. It was
a joyful reunion. He worked in Nokia’s telecommunications group and in
the middle of the 1980s was promoted to leader of the Dedicated Networks
business, which had been spun off from Mobira. Matti had begun his career
in Nokia as a research engineer even before he graduated from the Universi-
ty of Technology in 1975. He had made a sideways move and become a sales
director at Rank Xerox from 1982 to 1984, but had then come back to Nokia.
   Matti had become an extremely reliable and results-oriented executive.
You could put him into any situation and his analytical mind would not be
flustered in the least. He combined the best aspects of a researcher and a
business leader. And his sangfroid would never let you down. Matti joined
the Nokia executive board in 1993 and continued there until 2004. In 2005
he moved to the elevator company Kone as CEO.
   When I started in the mobile phone unit Matti was writing a dissertation
at one of the world’s best business schools, IMD in Switzerland. We had al-
ready agreed in principle that he would be my deputy in the mobile phone
group. But the president of Nokia Telecommunications, Sakari Salminen,
who had been coaching his designated successor in the telecommunications
group, wasn’t willing to let Matti go.
   When I moved to the mobile phone unit I noticed that support from the
head office was even more modest than had been agreed upon and promised
beforehand. One day Nokia’s resident eccentric, the usually good-humored
Kalle Isokallio, called me to his office. There he moved about agitatedly and
beat about the bush before he reached his point. He didn’t make any of his
characteristic wisecracks. “The way things are now, you’ll have to cope there
on your own,” he finally managed to say. No apology, nothing about the
breaking of a promise, no indication of support. I felt betrayed, but I kept
my feelings to myself. I decided to roll up my sleeves and do the best I could
with the hand I had been dealt.
   I grabbed the young and gifted people I found at Salo. They would have key
roles in the success story of Nokia mobile phones in the 1990s. Kaj Linden
would be in charge of product development. The Global System for Mobile
Communications (GSM) project was fragmented, and I gave Reijo Paajanen
responsibility for sorting it out. Markku Alasaari had quietly moved from
the telecommunications group to take charge of manufacturing. In addition
I brought on board a quiet, balding man who wore round glasses. He was a
thirty-three-year-old business graduate from Helsinki School of Economics,
where he had been a researcher before coming to Nokia in 1984. Now he was
in charge of Nokia’s U.S. production. His name was Pekka Ala-Pietilä.
124                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   Pekka Ala-Pietilä comes from a small town north of Helsinki. He was
born into a family of entrepreneurs and saw the joys and sorrows of busi-
ness life from an early age. His grandfather was a timber carrier on one of
Finland’s largest lakes, and his father imported medical supplies to Finland.
The roller-coaster that was the life of the small business owner convinced
Pekka that a large firm might be a better place to work than a small one. He
came to Nokia and stayed there. He started by selling Nokia’s computer sys-
tems, but mobile phones were something quite new, and they attracted him
as they attracted other forward-looking people at Nokia.
   In the mobile phone division, then called Mobira, Pekka rapidly encoun-
tered new challenges. He went on study visits to possible new markets, trav-
elling to post-Pinochet Chile and to Argentina, which was still a police state.
Pekka brought calm analysis to the table. When I thumped my fist on the
desk, demanded everything immediately and showed how impatient I could
be, Pekka behaved like the tranquil surface of a Finnish lake. A stone might
break the surface, but once the ripples had radiated away it would soon be
calm and peaceful again.
   Pekka is an analytical manager. We worked extremely well together – we
were sufficiently different from one another, but we respected each other.
Pekka is more philosophical in his approach. I, on the other hand, am always
focused on practical achievement: I want quick results. We were united by
our desire to achieve results and also a certain conceptual way of thinking:
Pekka’s analyses weren’t the most rapid, but they usually hit the right spot.
In meetings other people put their opinions forward before Pekka did, but
things were usually done the way he thought they should be.
		
 Against All Odds                                                           125




                          CHAPTER 27


     Taking Production Seriously



A      t Nokia no one seemed very interested in production, at least
       it certainly didn’t seem to interest Nokia’s senior personages. These in-
dividuals would stay in a factory only for the moment it took to open a new
production line in the glare of the cameras. Production had something dirty
about it – it was physical work that didn’t demand much attention, there
was nothing dramatic about it, and you were hardly likely to get the press
interested in a rearrangement of the production lines or the acquisition of
new machinery. Business editors glazed over if you tried to talk to them
about the details of production; they didn’t want to understand. Nor were
consumers interested in how their phones were manufactured as long as
they worked. And if the phones didn’t work, it was the chair or the market-
ing chief who got it in the neck, not the production manager.
   I started by reading, as I always did. I read books, reports, descriptions
of processes. I read at home in the evening, in the office in the mornings,
and on Sunday nights in Nokia’s Helsinki headquarters. In Salo, at the fac-
tory, I called Markku Alasaari, the production manager, to my room. I asked
him to explain how the factory worked, how mobile phones were made.
After that I asked all the key production people to talk me through the same
things, one by one. I tried to ask simple questions. I learned about the role
of material resource planning in production, about operations management.
I learned what impact a certain machine made by Panasonic would have
on our production line. (And I still understand it today.) I wanted to learn
the language that production people spoke. It helped that I had an excellent
memory, which would be extremely useful later on as well. I find it easy to
126                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


remember numbers, names, abbreviations . . . everything, in fact, whether I
need to or not.
   Perhaps the most difficult issue, which I had to address pretty much as
soon as I started the job, was to introduce a three-shift system. At Salo in
1990 all the work was still carried out in a single shift, and moving to a
shift system aroused fierce opposition. I ran the project personally. Markku
Alasaari held meetings where we were clear about what we were doing and
why. Our competitors, such as Motorola, already operated a shift system at
their most productive factories. We had to work more efficiently, too. I held
frequent and informal meetings with the supervisor and trade union repre-
sentatives. Through patient discussions we brought about a complete change
in less than half a year.
   Production was important in Salo because we had to bring our goods to
market quickly, preferably according to a clear timetable, and faster than our
competitors. We also had to design phones that we could be confident we
could actually make. Our product development had risen to the challenge
posed by Motorola: we developed a model with features that would ensure
that we would beat our American competitors. It was an excellent piece of
work, but we couldn’t make it efficiently or profitably. My most important
job now was to ensure that the demands of production were factored in at
the planning stage.
   Product development has always been one of Nokia’s strengths. Nokia en-
gineers were always proud of their ability to develop new ideas and apply
them without preconceptions. There has always been a dash of madness in
Nokia’s genes – we believed that we could do things if other people could do
them. This has never been too big a challenge for Nokia, but for some reason
it was just this characteristic that got us completely bogged down at the fac-
tory. When Motorola announced its new model, Nokia’s engineers were all
over the place. We tried to respond in half a year, but our production lines
weren’t up to it and we sank even deeper into a quagmire. Not all Motorola’s
products were successful, but they were successful enough to drive us to
the brink of panic. The production people were always the lowest caste in a
thriving company, and at Nokia they were often regarded as failed product
developers. So when senior management started to take production seri-
ously the impact was immediate.
   I went on to the shop floor once a month and the production line was
stopped. I gathered the employees together to listen and tried to explain as
openly as I could how things were going both in the company as a whole
and at Salo. I listened to their complaints and considered their suggestions. I
		
 Against All Odds                                                           127


kept up my factory visits even when I became CEO and then chairman. The
key thing was to develop relationships of trust with the local shop stewards.
Lilja Laakso, the chief shop steward at the Salo plant, was especially sup-
portive. Her rigorous but reasonable approach solved many problems as the
factory grew and changes were set in motion.
   I reached the age of forty in August 1990. I organized a small party at
our home in Espoo, near Helsinki. I felt good. Liisa, my wife, regretted that
Nokia was taking up ever more of my time. But we raised a glass of cham-
pagne to each other to mark the big day.
   It seemed to me that I was a success in my new job. People had regained
their self-confidence. The company’s management was in good shape. Prod-
uct development and production were marching in step. I had been driving
to Salo several days a week, and during the journey I had time to think of
everything I could possibly do to make things run better there. I must have
seemed enviably, almost absurdly fit, and I made my staff feel guilty by adver-
tising that I played tennis at seven in the morning before setting off for Salo.
   We needed to move faster at Salo. Motorola was ahead of us all the time.
Our acquisition of the British firm Technophone in March 1991 gave us a
boost. Technophone was an important player in the U.S. car phone market.
So with this acquisition we stealthily installed a tank on Motorola’s front
lawn. For some years customers bought phones under the brand name Tech-
nophone. It wasn’t until 1995 that we started selling phones under the brand
name Nokia in the United States.
   The acquisition of Technophone was among Nokia’s more important deals.
Discussions had begun in 1990. The company was registered in the United
Kingdom, but its founder was Nils Mårtenson, a Swede. Again I called on
my Swedish friend Per Karlsson, who had helped me sell our tissue paper
business. Per had visited our Salo plant in October 1990. After that visit
Per organized a meeting in Stockholm for Kari-Pekka Wilska and me with
Technophone’s owners. The discussions were painfully slow. At some point
in the evening Per said in his polite way that he would have been delighted to
continue these gentlemanly discussions, but that very same evening he had
to attend a meeting in Italy of the new board of the tissue paper company,
Jamont. The discussions were suspended for thirty-six hours, but when they
resumed we promptly reached an agreement.
   We also had to get Nokia’s senior management and board to give their
blessing to the acquisition of Technophone. Per Karlsson and I went to dis-
cuss it with Kalle Isokallio. The asking price was 238 million markka ($76
million at 2016 prices). Isokallio stared for a moment at the calculations.
128                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


“OK,” said Isokallio, “Jorma has made roughly this much for Nokia. So he
has every right to spend the money.” The deal had been accepted.
   By buying Technophone Nokia gained a stronger position in the U.S. mar-
ket: a larger market share, increased revenue, and a strong mobile phone
brand. We would find out later what else we had taken on. Technophone’s
production capabilities were first rate. Behind them lay one man – Frank
McGovern, who had made millions upon millions of dollars for Techno-
phone’s owners. This stocky, lively, Scottish engineer knew how to organize
production lines and work processes to manufacture mobile phones with
world-class efficiency. He wasn’t a marketing man, he wasn’t a product de-
veloper, but he knew how to run a plant to best effect.
   Another major leap was our move to the English language. When we
bought the British company Technophone, our middle managers had had
to learn a new language and a new culture. In a small town factory this was
a major change, even if the market had always been international. We pre-
pared our presentations in English, we practiced thinking in English, and
we tried to work out what our English-speaking customers were thinking.
   In Salo the meetings held by my predecessors had been very long. Manag-
ers had spent days agonizing over strategy. I wanted an orderly and efficient
management group whose members were keen to take personal responsibil-
ity for the areas they ran. I wanted to put the right people in the right places.
In addition to production I wanted to focus on personnel.
   For the important jobs I looked for people who radiated a quiet charisma.
By that I don’t mean brashness, bumptiousness, or self-centeredness, but
some intangible quality that will win people over without their noticing it.
And this quality includes a strong work ethic, a vision, and an ability to think.
   There were very few European companies where young and inexperi-
enced managers could rise so quickly to positions of responsibility; Nokia in
the 1990s was one of these. Our employees in Finland developed a healthy
self-respect. I used an overhead projector to show a slide to our manage-
ment group comparing us to Motorola and announced that in the future we
would be Dynamic Champion. We would beat Motorola. We started to speak
openly about our strategy and objectives.
   I wanted every single one of our workers to understand what these were.
We didn’t delude ourselves that each and every worker would become a true
believer in our objectives. Sometimes I wasn’t even sure myself where we
might end up. But fortunately things started to happen. We were bringing
products to market that would at last make us a serious challenger. The first
of these was the mobile phone Nokia 101.
		
 Against All Odds                                                           129




                          CHAPTER 28


        The Miracle of the Mobile



I  n 1991 our biggest problem was to create a phone that would enable
   us to increase our market share globally. We wanted a mobile phone that
would be light, functional, and that you could take anywhere. And if it looked
good and was easy to use, then so much the better. At the beginning of the
year we didn’t have such a phone, but we would need to have a new phone on
the market by the following January if we intended to survive. Everyone knew
the company would stand or fall by the success or failure of its new phone.
   A new and wonderful product doesn’t spring into being overnight, or even
over the course of twelve months. Behind its development, design, and test-
ing lie many years and many people. Those people must have dedicated their
lives to product development, technology, and innovation. For this they need
the right sort of education to transform raw talent into ability. Fortunately
Finland had the right sort of people with a good basic technical education.
   Genius is the property of individuals, of course, but it shows itself best in
a group that must meet a formidable challenge in a given time. The story of
our new phone is an example of this. But to understand its development it’s
necessary to go back in time to its beginning, over forty years, and to the vil-
lage of Meltaus, north of the Arctic Circle in Finnish Lapland, six hundred
miles or more from Helsinki. The village has a school, a library, shops, and
a bank. Two rivers converge there, which is presumably why people settled
there in the distant past. The inhabitants make a living from agriculture,
fishing, and tourism. In the summer the sun shines round the clock. In win-
ter the days are very short – the sun just glimmers briefly on the horizon.
Meltaus is cold, dark, and to many minds dreary.
130                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


  Back in the 1970s the library in Meltaus was its cultural center. Day af-
ter day a ten-year-old boy went there, avid for every book on technology
he could lay his hands on. He read the Inventor’s Handbook a dozen times.
He read every issue of the magazine Technical World until it was in shreds.
Eventually he had read all the books in Meltaus library, at least all the refer-
ence books.
  The boy’s father had died when he was three. His mother was a teacher.
He went to primary school in Meltaus and then to the sixth-form college
in Rovaniemi, the capital of Lapland nearly fifty miles away. He dismantled
and rebuilt every possible thing that ran on electricity. He constructed his
own steam engine and electric guitar. In his hands every tool was made to
work, and he understood mathematically how each device and mechanism
worked. So it was the simplest thing in the world for him to go and study at
Oulu University. Oulu is south of Rovaniemi, but even from there it’s nearly
four hundred miles to Helsinki. From the boy’s viewpoint Helsinki, London,
and New York were way over the horizon.
  The young man rapidly mastered technology at Oulu University. He be-
came interested in mobile phones because they contained new and exciting
technologies. The students at Oulu University were enthusiastic about this
small, new, and perhaps growing field. The young man got a place as a re-
search assistant at Nokia, but before that he still had to complete his military
service. Life is full of random events, he thought: a couple of years earlier he
had tried to get a summer job at Nokia, but he hadn’t been taken on then.
  The young man, Pertti Korhonen, was Nokia’s tenth employee in Oulu.
First he completed his diploma work and then he became an expert on
product development. He lived for his work. Sometimes his research team
continued its work until two in the morning because in northern Finland
the spring and summer evenings are so light. They couldn’t bear to leave
their work halfway through. And so they continued into the small hours
because everything was new, interesting, and had something about it that
they thought might change the world. When they did stop working they
went to the sauna, did some more thinking, and then started again early in
the morning.
  The twenty-five-year-old Pertti Korhonen exuded expertise, even though
he had only just graduated as an engineer. He was given the task of design-
ing the integrated circuit systems for the base stations, even though he had
never even seen an integrated circuit for a base station for a mobile phone
network. He worked with the same enthusiasm as that little boy who had
made himself an electric guitar and a steam engine.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          131


   Korhonen didn’t know he was solving impossible problems. He only
learned that later when one of the component manufacturers told him that
he had thought the problem in question was insoluble.
   Korhonen’s solution was taken into production and stayed there for over
ten years. Hundreds of millions of calls on mobile phones in different cor-
ners of the world went smoothly and reliably through the integrated circuits
Korhonen had designed.
   Success in this first project was an important lesson for Pertti Korhonen
and his team. And it was a very simple lesson: nothing is impossible. People
are the only animals that build themselves cages. Once something has been
pronounced impossible, that’s how it’s likely to stay. Pertti Korhonen person-
ified Nokia’s core values in the 1990s – we did impossible things. We decided
to change the path of history and to challenge those adversaries who seemed
to us impossibly big and powerful.
   In 1989 Pertti Korhonen encountered an adversary whom most people
would have thought invincible. He held in his hand Motorola’s new model
of mobile phone. It was the first flip phone, which opened neatly to reveal its
keypad. It was small, functional, and beautiful. Korhonen took the Motorola
phone in his hand and swore. “Voi perkeleen perkele, voi helevetin helevet-
ti!” he shouted once he was alone in his own office in the Oulu research unit
– and Finnish swear words are at least as strong as English ones, and you can
imagine a translation for yourself. His northern accent added something to
his words, which already contained a lot of determination and much else be-
sides. “And then when Motorola has its Iridium [a plan for a satellite phone
offering global coverage] they will have everything sewn up . . . It’s a tough
job for a northern lad, if we want to get something done about it.
   “What on earth can we do about it?”
   Korhonen talked it through with himself. After that he took Motorola’s
wonder phone to bits and examined every component and circuit. He had
to admit that Nokia’s big American competitor had indeed made a marvel-
ous phone.
   Pertti Korhonen and his team decided to make an even finer phone. Its
catalog number was the Nokia 101. All Nokia’s best talents – in product
development, in production, in design, and in marketing – were focused on
this new product. It would establish Nokia as a brand. We bet Nokia’s entire
future on this new model of phone.
   In January 1989 the project outline for the new 101 was agreed upon.
Pertti Korhonen was in charge of the systems design. The European football
championship was on in Italy. The star players were the Argentinian Diego
132                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


Maradona, England’s Gary Lineker, and Italy’s Salvatore Schillaci. I watch all
sports avidly. At half-time I rang Korhonen, who was on holiday in Spain.
I left a message on his answering machine and after a short while he called
me back.
   “Could you take over as product development manager?” I asked him.
   “Bloody hell! Do you really think I’m up to it? Can you give me some time
to think?” he asked.
   “Of course I can. You can have until the end of this match,” I said and hung
up. Up till then I had met Korhonen just once, but I was sure he was the best
possible person for the job. He decided to take it on. Later I got into the habit
of asking him to take on difficult tasks.
   Things didn’t all run smoothly, however. The years 1990–91 were extreme-
ly difficult in financial terms. Nokia’s cash reserves drained away. We had to
save money everywhere. Product development was reorganized again. We
cut back on foreign trips. Development of the new model was put on ice for
the moment, but Pertti Korhonen seemed to take that in his stride. Later he
told me he designed a phone in secret and on his own time after the order
had come to suspend work.
   Nothing would hold Korhonen back. His goal was to make the lightest
mobile phone possible. He also wanted to double the length of time it could
be used. Once again his engineers said it was an impossible challenge. He
put the circuit diagram for Nokia’s current model, the Cityman 100, under
the microscope and reached the only possible conclusion: the number of
components had to be halved. The engineers tore their hair out and declared
that Korhonen was mad. But one summer night Korhonen and his team
had an inspiration – they suddenly realized how the phone needed to be
designed in order to meet all the requirements. It was like a religious experi-
ence: a thunderbolt from heaven. The problem had been solved.
   Korhonen ordered components from subcontractors. ST Microelectron-
ics made microcircuits; Korhonen recklessly asked for quotes for 100,000 or
200,000 at a time. The subcontractor thought he must be over-estimating. A
few years later Korhonen received a souvenir from the subcontractor – be-
cause Nokia had ordered 10 million microcircuits for its phones.
   Nokia’s new phone was developed in the middle of a crisis in the market. In
the past we had managed to sell moderately expensive phones to customers
in the Nordic region. Car phones and the Cityman 100 were among our suc-
cesses, but we hadn’t gotten very far with cheaper models. Our phones were
aimed at just a few market segments. We were still not a global operator, but
now we had to become one. Motorola was bringing down its prices in the
		
 Against All Odds                                                        133


United States. The Japanese had already arrived in Europe. Panasonic, NEC,
and a gaggle of other companies were conquering markets where Nokia
should have been dominant. The markets, and business activity in general,
were in such a state of crisis that Nokia’s future was in danger. Nokia might
well have been a footnote in history: a company that made mobile phones for
a brief moment before shrinking and dying. We all understood this, if only
subconsciously, and it gave us the strength to go on living on the edge.
   Microcircuits or technical properties were not enough to ensure the suc-
cess of our phone. It also needed to look good, to be marketed brilliantly,
and to be what the customers wanted. For the first time we were creating a
product that would be bought by individuals all over the world, so we had
to find out quickly what they really wanted. This job fell to Juha Pinomaa, a
young product manager. He tried feverishly to learn what people hoped to
get from their mobile phones.
    Was the market really for such a miniature item? Was the timing right?
How would customers react to a family of products with different models for
consumer and for business use? Was our product development fast enough
to respond to the hopes and expectations that our customer research re-
vealed?
   Pinomaa tried his best. He noticed that while we were designing our phone
our competitors had changed the antennas of their phones. Now they were
retractable, rather than built into the body of the device. We made a rapid
shift, which must have given our engineers grey hairs. But our new phone
got its retractable antenna because that was what the consumers seemed to
want. For the first time our product development process had responded to
signals coming directly from the market.
   We developed a six-stage process for the introduction of a new product.
At each stage we assessed how things looked: if they were satisfactory, we
moved on to the next stage. For the first time this brought together product
development, sourcing of components, and marketing. For the first time ev-
eryone involved was at the same table looking at the same product.
   This was a revolutionary process for Nokia at the beginning of the 1990s.
The same process, the same way of thinking, in stages from zero to five,
became part of our way of doing things for many years. When I met the en-
gineers designing our new phones in Salo they were using the same process.
It was one of the most important factors in Nokia’s success.
   Once the Technophone deal was in the bag we needed to consolidate all
our production and other European activities in the United Kingdom and
Finland. One Sunday in September I rang Pertti Korhonen in Oulu.
134                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   “Do you want to move to England? To manage the next phase of product
development?” I asked him.
   “Can I have some time to think about it?” Korhonen replied. I said he had
until the next day. He took up my offer, and from that November on Pertti
Korhonen was responsible for everything to do with linking up our U.K.
operations with those in Finland. Before that Pertti Korhonen had never
worked abroad and had never managed a factory. He was twenty-nine when
he started and he spent a year and a half in England. After that he was in
charge of European production, and with his team made the Nokia 2110
phone a mass-production item. His work was excellent and he began to win
a reputation as Nokia’s finest problem solver.
		
 Against All Odds                                                               135




                           CHAPTER 29


          The Nokia Brand Is Born



I  ’m not a natural product development engineer. On my own I’m
   not particularly creative, but I try to bring creativity into organizations
and to provide opportunities for people who are creative. Nor am I espe-
cially skilled at marketing, so I decided I would also leave that to the experts.
Kari-Pekka Wilska, head of sales and marketing, looked after all the market-
ing activities around the world better than anyone. But we needed some
fresh energy as well if we were to turn Nokia into a global brand.
   In autumn 1990 I invited three of the most important members of my staff
to a meeting. Our organization needed more oomph. We needed to renew
ourselves, to internationalize, and to generate some fresh ideas. I told the
three men that I hoped they would take on staff more intelligent than them-
selves. These new managers might come from within Nokia, but it would be
better if they were recruited externally. “Make sure that they’re better than
you at one thing, at the very least. Better still, at two,” I said and looked at the
startled managers. Two of them did start an enthusiastic hunt for “people
smarter than themselves.” That was how we found Anssi Vanjoki, who came
to Nokia from his position as second-in-command at 3M’s Finnish opera-
tion.
   Six and a half feet tall, fair-haired, and with a booming voice, Anssi im-
pressed me in a matter of minutes. He had a brilliant knack for bringing
together the rational and the emotional sides of marketing. He had an ana-
lytical mind, but he also understood what might entice a customer to buy
our products.
136                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


  For some reason most of Nokia’s successful managers came from Finland’s
smaller towns, and many from western Finland. More than a few came from
an entrepreneurial background, or at least from a middle-class home. Many
were active in the scouts or cadets during their school years.
  Anssi Vanjoki met only some of these criteria. He had grown up in the
suburbs of Finland’s only major city, Helsinki. His father had spent his whole
working life in Volkswagen’s Finnish operation, where he had risen from
humble general duties to become managing director. Anssi had not been top
of the class at school, but he had spent all his time in the scouts and play-
ing basketball. After graduating from Helsinki School of Economics in 1981
Anssi received four job offers; he accepted 3M’s. In ten years he had risen to
the number two position in Finland and had Europe-wide responsibilities.
  In 1990 Anssi Vanjoki took a phone call from a headhunter, who wanted
him to meet Kari-Pekka Wilska from Nokia to discuss a possible change of
job. The two men met. Wilska asked Vanjoki how he could set about making
him angry. Anssi Vanjoki must have succeeded in answering the question
brilliantly, because Wilska offered him a job on the spot.
  I met Anssi Vanjoki at Nokia’s head office, on Helsinki’s central Esplanade.
I explained our alternatives to him: either we made something big out of
mobile phones, or we sold them off. My own suggestion was that we should
try to make something big from them. Vanjoki seemed convinced and de-
cided to take up the new job at the beginning of January 1991.
  Vanjoki made a circuit of Nokia’s production facilities. Every day of his
tour delivered new shocks to his system. He walked around inside our Salo
plant. He compared Nokia’s electronics manufacturing methods with 3M’s
and was clearly horrified. Something was badly wrong.
  Production was dreadfully organized, the workers lolling around amid
complete chaos, cigarettes drooping from their mouths. When the agitated
Vanjoki left this factory, he rang his wife.
  “I have made a terrible mistake. I should never have left 3M for this mess,”
he sighed into his Cityman 100, which resembled nothing more than a brick.
  Anssi decided to stay with Nokia, however. He knocked sales and mar-
keting into shape. But his greatest contribution lay in building Nokia as a
brand. I asked him to arrange a “branding afternoon” – a brainstorming
session to discuss how Nokia might be built up as a brand. This fired him
up at once: this was one of the areas where he was expert, and one where he
had self-confidence, which in later years we really came to appreciate. Anssi
had become interested in brands as a student. He had studied Mercedes-
Benz, Marlboro, and Nike and their history as brands. Each was the leader in
		
 Against All Odds                                                          137


its field. Finland didn’t have a single internationally recognized brand to its
name, with the possible exception of Marimekko. But even Marimekko was
known only to a few select groups of discerning consumers.
   Finnish industry was focused on the production of capital goods, in-
tended not for individual consumers but for businesses. Indeed, one leading
Finnish industrialist said that in Finland it wasn’t worth producing anything
smaller than a horse or that couldn’t be bolted to the floor. Paper-making
machinery certainly met these criteria; mobile phones, on the other hand,
did not. Even so we were convinced it was worth giving phones a go. And
if we didn’t succeed in creating a strong brand there was no future for us in
the world market.
   At our branding afternoon Anssi Vanjoki explained that it would be better
for Nokia to focus on a single brand name rather than the plethora of trade-
marks then in use. Some people thought the only hope for Nokia would
be to design and manufacture mobile phones as a sub-contractor to other
manufacturers: Nokia didn’t have what it took to create its own brand. That
would have been the easy way out. Surprisingly many people at Nokia want-
ed to take it. If we had Nokia would have ultimately become the same sort of
manufacturer as many Chinese and Taiwanese firms are today – they make
products anonymously for Nokia and other brands.
   The people at that meeting sat on the edge of their seats as Anssi ran
through his presentation. Many were gripped by dread. They thought Ollila
and Vanjoki must be mad. Nokia, which had only recently emerged from the
Finnish forests, could surely never become something that one might men-
tion in the same breath as Mercedes-Benz. But in true Finnish style those
dissidents were silent and waited to see how we would stumble in imple-
menting our megalomaniac ideas.
   After our seminar I asked Anssi Vanjoki to develop Nokia’s first brand
strategy. He also opened tendering discussions with international advertis-
ing agencies.
   We decided that from now on our brand would be simply “Nokia.” The
only exception would be the British mobile phone company Technophone,
which we had bought. But apart from that we would use no name other than
Nokia. Anssi argued forcefully for this decision. When it had been made An-
ssi became the key strategist of the Nokia brand, which had five dimensions:
high technology, Nordic touch, individuality, freedom, and lasting quality.
   But what should the new phone look like? What shape should it be? What
sort of phone would customers be eager to buy? Could a mobile phone be
some color other than black? We found ourselves in a world where every-
138                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


thing was possible, but where we didn’t know what would work. Fortunately
we found Frank Nuovo.
  The designer Frank Nuovo had worked for Nokia since 1987 through
the company Designworks. It was Pekka Ala-Pietilä who “found” him. Our
new mobile phone was the first that Frank Nuovo designed. After that there
would be many more. We took design seriously. We believed that a phone’s
external appearance and the user’s experience of using it would be critical in
the consumer market. The Finns also had a good sense of design. We were
known for our architecture, our glassware, Marimekko textiles, and other
classics of industrial design. We tended to take design seriously, both as a
matter of natural professionalism and because it had brought us our earlier
success and helped put us on the map.
  Frank Nuovo’s family was originally Italian, but he himself was thoroughly
American, a child of the West Coast. He was born in Monterey, California.
His approach brought sun, a sea breeze, and warmth to our projects, which
were born almost literally in our time of kaamos – the long winter night
when the sun doesn’t rise for weeks in northern Finland. Nuovo gained his
inspiration from the play of the waves of the warm Pacific Ocean on the
rocky shores of the West Coast. Finnish snow, ice, darkness, and coldness
must have been a culture shock for him, though one that he politely kept to
himself.
  We didn’t of course want design for design’s sake. We were going head-
to-head with Motorola over which of us would produce the iconic mobile
phone. Fortunately, Anssi Vanjoki, of our marketing group, and Jyrki Sal-
minen, our head of marketing, understood the nature of this battle. They
had seen how Motorola had already succeeded in making its flip phone an
iconic product. We couldn’t take that away from Motorola, so we had to
come up with something new. We wanted to plant in consumers’ minds
the idea that Nokia made the iconic mobile, that a Nokia is what a mobile
should be.
  In winter 1991 Frank Nuovo travelled from balmy California to Salo,
which was up to its knees in snow, slush, and ice. In his summer clothes
he waded across the snowy yard to the meeting room. He had with him
a large and interesting travelling bag, and he spread its contents out over
the meeting room table. Juha Pinomaa, the product manager, gazed at them
dumbstruck. He invited the others to take a look at what Frank had brought.
The table was a sea of color, every possible color: violets, reds, bright greens,
whites. They were colored casings, the first colored casings ever made for
mobile phones.
		
 Against All Odds                                                        139


   The realization that mobile phones need not all be black had struck our
team in a meeting a short time earlier. They had been standing around a ta-
ble on which they had all put their phones down. Suddenly someone’s phone
started to ring, and no one knew whose phone was. After all, there had prob-
ably never been so many mobile phones in one place before.
   “If only there was a way of telling them apart. If only there was a way of
seeing which one was yours,” someone said. “Aha,” Pekka Ala-Pietilä replied.
Everybody knew that when Pekka said “aha” he was on to something. Usu-
ally, too, his ideas were pretty good. He realized now that mobile phones
might be different colors.
   Our marketing people had quite an argument about the colors, to the
point where discussion broke down. No one had a clue which colors might
work. Nuovo gathered up the colorful models and put them back in his bag.
Anssi Vanjoki asked Juha Pinomaa to choose just a few examples for the
next meeting, which would take place in Helsinki in the summer. There the
discussion continued. Many customers had said they would like a white
phone, but fortunately we were on our guard: white phones had already ap-
peared in the shops, but customers hadn’t bought them. We wanted more
women customers, but a white phone combined with lipstick stains wasn’t
really part of our design.
   Finally Anssi Vanjoki, our master of branding, decided that our new phone
would be made available in two colors, green and grey. The back of the phone
would always be charcoal gray, so all our phones could be switched between
two colors by removing one colored casing and replacing it with the other.
   A new era had begun – the mobile phone was black no more. The customer
could choose. The mobile phone was no longer merely a dull utensil but a way
to show your individuality and to send out messages about yourself. After
this nothing would ever be the same in the development of mobile phones.
   Anssi Vanjoki began work on a revolutionary marketing operation. We
didn’t have much money to spend, however, at least not compared to our
competitors. One of Anssi’s most brilliant ideas was to buy little advertise-
ments on the most boring pages of the financial press. Readers of the Wall
Street Journal who turned to the stock exchange reports suddenly found
themselves staring at a strange new phenomenon: the Nokia name and
brand. American readers had a ready explanation for this: yet another Japa-
nese company was trying to infiltrate the consciousness of American con-
sumers. That didn’t bother us at all.
   An international PR agency had recommended that Nokia carry out a
huge advertising campaign to take its products direct to the consumer. Anssi
140                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


Vanjoki, stubborn as ever, had kept his head and concentrated on the qual-
ity press and CNN, which was a favorite of business leaders. There Nokia’s
adverts hit decision-makers in the morning, just after they had woken up.
Anssi Vanjoki loved to gamble, and he had placed Nokia’s modest marketing
money on the winning number.
   Nokia’s market share began to rise, especially among consumers with high
incomes. From them the news about our phone began to spread to people
who aspired to high incomes. The result was brilliant: our share grew in all
market segments. Then the news began to spread by word of mouth. After
that we needed much less money for marketing. We did all this against the
advice of every advertising and media agency.
   Earlier our products had been packed into off-putting brown boxes, whose
only embellishment was a bar code on the bright yellow base. Every other
manufacturer’s phones were packed “bloody colorfully” as Anssi put it. All
the others had understood years before us what would work with customers.
   Anssi Vanjoki made a study of the cosmetics shelves of shops. He found
a shampoo that was called simply “Extremely Fine Finnish Shampoo” (in
Finnish, of course). It came in a plain and simple blue bottle, but nonetheless
it practically jumped off the shelf. Anssi decided that Nokia would have two
colors, blue and green. They were the colors Nokia used for its packaging for
over a decade.
   As well as Finnish cosmetics shelves Anssi studied Japanese cameras. For
many years these had had a “quality mark” – a little sticker that said “passed.”
Our marketing people wondered what we might be able to come up with.
We briefly considered the word Suomi (Finland), but at that time the signal
it sent out seemed more negative than positive. So we decided to stick a little
label with “Nordic” on it on to our phones, because Nordic values seemed
good. They embodied clarity, naturalness, good design. But we quickly real-
ized that the “Nordic sticker” didn’t do much to improve our sales or our
brand, let alone help us create an identity. We were ready to stand on our
own two feet as simply Nokia.
   We had a very simple goal for our television advertising: we wanted the
viewers to think “Nokia” whenever there was any mention of a mobile
phone. We ran a campaign showing life before and after Nokia. Life before
was really grim – a despondent figure reminiscent of James Dean wandered
gloomy streets in search of adventure. In the next sequence the same young
man talked into a Nokia phone, smiled, and the whole world turned bright.
We wanted to touch everyone on earth, we wanted everyone to talk to one
another, and to smile.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          141


  I tried my best to spur people along. I gave good people plenty of space.
Because our budgets were so small compared to our competitors’, I had to
encourage people to take risks and use their imaginations. I regularly took
part in the meetings of the project group. There I emphasized that phones
had to be easy to make. I wanted to get rid of the silo mentality of marketing,
product development, production, and the procurement of components.
Every member of the project group should be ready to talk about the issues
that worried them. I learned a great deal from this. Our group was commit-
ted to a common goal and a common timetable.
142                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                          CHAPTER 30


      A Telephone in an Envelope



T    he outlook for the mobile phone group seemed much brighter
     than when I’d taken it over at the beginning of 1990. But Nokia Mobile
Phones was not in a position of great strength within the larger company.
   The highly respected Boston Consulting Group had carried out a study in
the early autumn of 1991 in which it tried to analyze which business areas
Nokia should focus on and which it should withdraw from. The study had
been commissioned by Tapio Hintikka, the head of planning, and Kalle Iso-
kallio, the chief executive. The consultants visited us and interviewed many
of my key executives, though they didn’t interview me.
   The result was a very broadly based report, a great pile of useless paper-
work, to be frank. The consultants affirmed that mobile phones were a prom-
ising area of business. But Nokia didn’t have the capacity to compete effec-
tively with Motorola or Japanese manufacturers. Nor were the mobile phone
division’s leadership resources adequate. This wasn’t a particularly comfort-
ing assessment, since those resources consisted of me and my management
team. The consultants’ view of Nokia’s future was generally dire: the company
could not hope to succeed globally in any of the areas where it was active.
   This report didn’t generate any follow-up activity at Nokia. The situation at
the head office was inflamed, with the double-headed leadership scarcely on
speaking terms. I don’t know much more than that about the background.
I understand the report was buried because the cautious chairman Simo
Vuorilehto didn’t accept the consultants’ views.
   About ten years later I received a visitor from the United States, the chief
executive of the Boston Consulting Group. I have rarely had a conversation
with an individual so ready to admit that his firm had got things wrong. The
		
 Against All Odds                                                         143


apology just came flooding out; the man who made it
must have spent the whole long flight over the Atlantic
working out what to say.
   This example shows that one cannot run a company
by blindly trusting what consultants have to say. Though
it can be useful to have external opinions, either for or
against, senior managers must have their own clear
policies.
   Meanwhile at Salo the product development experts
were preoccupied with more concrete matters. Could
a telephone fit into an envelope? Could a telephone fit
into a pocket, really? Could the battery of a telephone
last several hours without recharging? We had to bring
a winning product to market.
   By the end of 1991 we knew we were on to a winner.
The new phone, the 101, had wonderful features. It was
                                                             The Nokia 101
small, much smaller than our earlier models. The world’s
first GSM call was made on 1 July 1991, when former Prime Minister Harri
Holkeri rang the deputy mayor of Tampere, Kaarina Suonio. The 101 was
an analog phone, operating according to three different mobile phone stan-
dards: NMT, AMPS, and TACS. That gave us immediate access to the US,
European, and Asian markets. And the TACS standard also opened the door
to the U.K. market. (The phone’s digital sister was launched in autumn 1992.)
   The 101 was ready at the end of 1991, and we decided to announce it on
9 January at Nokia’s Helsinki headquarters. We invited about ten economic
journalists from Finnish newspapers. Our publicity department had worked
far into the night and had come up with an inspired idea. They had made
little cardboard mock-ups of the new phone and popped them into enve-
lopes. The bemused journalists each had in front of them a cup of coffee, a
bun, and an envelope. When I told them they could, the journalists opened
the packet and saw for themselves that a phone could fit inside an envelope
– for the first time in the history of the world. We made the impression we
wanted: the journalists were amazed, even if they’d have found it difficult to
make a call on a cardboard phone.
   The original 101 came in just two colors: graphite gray and green. Its but-
tons didn’t twinkle in the dark like the lights of Las Vegas. It didn’t have a
radio, thermometer, or camera. But it was an effective and reliable mobile
phone that sold well everywhere. It weighed just 9.7 ounces, which made it
the lightest you could buy. Its batteries were the best available and the lon-
gest-lasting. And it looked good. Without it we would never have achieved
144                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


our great successes later in the 1990s. The 101 was the Model T Ford of our
time: it took mobile phone production out of the workshop and into the fac-
tory. It was a mobile phone that we could churn out in vast quantities and
so gain the advantages of mass production. And it gave a foretaste of Nokia’s
design language.
   I did well at the press conference. I had all the facts and details at my fin-
gertips, as I usually do. Fortunately none of the journalists asked aggressive
questions about Nokia’s future leadership. At that press conference I knew
that six days later my appointment as chief executive would be announced,
so my head was already spinning with all sorts of issues above and beyond
the launch of the latest mobile. A couple of days before the press conference
I had jotted down on a couple of sheets of paper my ideas on how we could
save Nokia. The plan was audacious, very short, and, should the worst hap-
pen, wrong. But I believed in it completely.
   Nokia had drifted into ever more troubled waters for the whole of the
year just gone by: the banks had turned off the taps as far as further credit
was concerned and revoked their existing credit limits. The finance director,
Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo, had travelled the world to get more capital wherever
it was to be had, but every time he came back to Finland he was grayer and
more depressed.
   After the Helsinki press conference I flew to Stockholm to talk about our
new model there. The Swedish journalists were aggressive in their usual way.
They asked why Nokia wanted to launch an old-fashioned NMT phone when
Ericsson’s forthcoming model would use the new GSM technology. This grill-
ing didn’t feel good, for I sensed an undercurrent of Finnish-Swedish rivalry.
   Somehow I got through the press conference, but it was an uncomfort-
able experience. The fact was that Ericsson was far too early in trying to ex-
ploit the new technology. Nokia sold its “old-fashioned” phones at least until
1994. Model 101 kept our factories going through our darkest years. And I
learned that you should never offer people new technology before they’re
ready for it. It’s not worth it: you can’t teach your customers; what you have
to do is listen to them very carefully. I understood, though, that we had to be
in a position to launch a good GSM phone as soon as we could.
   We had now brought Nokia’s mobile phone business back into the black
after three years of losses. But there was still a long journey ahead before we
achieved real growth. The 101 was a great help in this, and it was a success
story for many years. This one phone carried our entire business a long way.
In 1992 its share of our total mobile phone sales was 28 percent and the fol-
lowing year 22 percent. This one product in its various versions was Nokia’s
bread and butter just then.
		
 Against All Odds                                                            145


  One of my last duties while I was in charge of the mobile phone division,
just four days or so before my new appointment was announced, was to host
a visit by the local press to the Salo factory. We had arranged to give the chief
editors and other journalists a presentation on the mobile phone market.
This would be followed by drinks, a sauna, and supper. In those days Finns
often looked after our communications and marketing in the sauna, and
Nokia was no exception. Indeed, in earlier times executives would often go
to the sauna during the day, but happily those times were already behind us.
  On this occasion I didn’t have time to linger in the sauna. Instead I would
set out my thoughts on the mobile phone industry in a series of slides us-
ing an overhead projector. But the projector wasn’t working because our
communications chief, Lauri Kivinen, had forgotten to check it beforehand.
“Doesn’t anything work around here?” I shouted at the terrified Kivinen. Af-
ter that he learned to check the equipment in advance. The local newspaper
editor who happened to be in the room was a little startled at my volcanic
reaction. My new duties were already pressing down on me.
  Nokia’s board asked me who should succeed me as the manager of the mo-
bile phone division. I told them that wasn’t an easy question and that I would
need at least two months to mull it over. I thought hard and long, until the
answer was clear to me. March 1992 Pekka Ala-Pietilä would take charge
of Nokia’s mobile phone operations. Pekka, who was then thirty-five, didn’t
really have any experience of running a major operation. He wasn’t overly
bubbly or full of himself. His appointment was one of my bigger risks. But
I was used to trusting my intuition, and that now told me that Pekka could
grow into the job. The first six months were difficult, but after that everyone
saw I had been right. The choice was of course a surprise; some people in the
mobile phone group imagined they had a right to that job. But it was perhaps
Pekka who was the most surprised. I heard it in his voice when I called him.
  “Can you give me till the morning to think it over?” Pekka replied. Later
he told me he had spent a sleepless night and had talked it through with
Tiina, his wife. In the morning he took on the biggest challenge of his life.
  My time in charge of mobile phones had been difficult but rewarding. We
had played as a team and made a crucial breakthrough. We had shown that
mobile phones could be designed and manufactured profitably in Finland.
We had created new ways of working, which Nokia would exploit in the fu-
ture. Now the role of chief executive awaited me. It would be full of solitude,
responsibility, and unrelenting publicity that would often be exaggerated
and unfair.
146                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                          CHAPTER 31


              An Offer and a Reply



I  was forty-one, happily married, and a father of three. I had
   learned my own strengths and weaknesses. I knew I could run a company.
Now I had been offered the role of Nokia’s chief executive, and I wouldn’t get
a second chance like this at Nokia. The company was a catastrophe. There
were only two ways it could go: either it would be knocked into shape, or it
would be sold off bit by bit. And that would be the end of over a hundred
years of Finnish industrial history and expertise.
   For a year or more before I took over there had been speculation that
Nokia might be sold. Informal discussions had begun in March 1991 with a
view to preparing Nokia for sale to Ericsson. The banks that owned most of
Nokia led the way. But they too were in a bad way because Finland faced the
worst recession of any western European country in more than forty years.
   In practice, preparations for Nokia’s sale to Ericsson were in the hands of a
small group of corporate investors. The man who was behind it was Casimir
Ehrnrooth, one of Finland’s most influential industrialists and also a mem-
ber of the Nokia board of directors. He was well known to Ericsson’s Swed-
ish owners and would play an important role at Nokia in the next few years.
   In spring 1991 it seemed practically certain that Nokia would be sold to
Ericsson. Discussions took place in a positive spirit. The aim was to con-
clude the matter by the autumn; the Finnish banks had a great deal to worry
about at that time and would welcome having one of their burdens lifted.
   The tenth of October was the deadline for Ericsson to reply to the group
that had prepared the sale of Nokia. I was told that they gathered in the of-
fices of an insurance company in the center of Helsinki. There they waited
		
 Against All Odds                                                             147


around the table for the conference call bringing final confirmation from
Stockholm. But when the call came it brought bad news: while Ericsson had
been interested in Nokia, it had decided that the consumer electronics divi-
sion, which was losing money, posed too great a risk. The price was too high
to cover the risk, so Ericsson would not buy Nokia after all. The investment
bankers were first stunned and then deeply disappointed.
   Ericsson made its decision for sound reasons. But the company’s top man-
agement clearly didn’t understand the impact their decision would have on
the telecommunications industry, or indeed on their own position. There’s
nothing unusual about that: such decisions are often made pretty much by
chance, and only later are reasons found to justify them.
   I personally took no part in these discussions since I was still running the
mobile phone division in Salo. My enthusiasm had proved infectious: people
now tried to beat their previous achievements and our growth targets. Nokia
was still a small player in the mobile phone market compared to, say, Mo-
torola, but our fighting spirit was on the march, fortified by our results so far.
   It must have been around late October that discussions started on whether
I would be a suitable candidate for the job of Nokia’s chief executive. These
mostly took place in the private dining room of Yhdyspankki, one of Fin-
land’s two big banks. I don’t know exactly who came up with my name, but
certainly Casimir Ehrnrooth, the bank’s chairman Ahti Hirvonen, and its
senior banker Björn Wahlroos were involved. Later I was told that no other
internal candidates were discussed.
   My boss, Nokia’s CEO Simo Vuorilehto, summoned me to his office one
day in November to tell me I was in the frame to be Nokia’s new chief ex-
ecutive. He was ready to retire before his contract came to an end; his rela-
tionship with the company president, Kalle Isokallio, was poor. Vuorilehto
wanted Isokallio to step down as Nokia’s second-in-command.
   I reported this conversation to Liisa. Her reaction was horror rather than
delight, but she was ready to support me. Taking on this new role was a per-
sonal risk. When I asked Liisa if I should accept the challenge, her answer
was clear: “Of course you should.” But we both knew that if things went
badly my fall would be precipitous. Failure as Nokia’s chief executive would
have been a very black mark at a time when Finland’s job market had all but
closed down.
   Things went forward. I had a meeting with a bank chairman, who asked
me what I thought should be done with Nokia. I told him, and he made a
note of my thoughts on a large notepad. I also discussed my future with Per
Karlsson. I had gotten to know Per well, and I trusted his analytical abilities.
148                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


We met in London in mid-December and had an English breakfast at the
Capitol Hotel, which was my favorite, when I told him that I’d been invited
to take over at Nokia. He was stunned.
   “Well, that’s something that only happens once in a lifetime. You have to
take it, of course. But you must also discuss things very carefully with Liisa,”
Per said seriously.
   After breakfast I walked from the hotel to my car. I had to drive to Camber-
ley, where we had a mobile phone factory. As I drove I thought that nobody
would say to me: “Don’t take that job!” I had to take it. That’s certainly what
I thought myself, but I also wanted to think through all the less appealing
options. There weren’t many people I could discuss these with, but the con-
versations I did have made me all the more determined to take the new job.
   There were some skeptical views. I discussed the offer with my old friend
Pentti Kouri. He understood the state Nokia was in since he had joined the
board a year before. Kouri kicked the idea around and analyzed Nokia’s situ-
ation and the risks associated with becoming its chief executive in a very
personal way. “Is there anything in this for you?” was the question that
summed up his view.
   At the end of November I took a call from Casimir Ehrnrooth. We had
met very briefly on a few occasions, but I couldn’t really say I knew him. He
suggested a meeting, which started a collaboration at Nokia that lasted near-
ly a decade. Ehrnrooth wanted to know whether I was interested in becom-
ing the chief executive of Nokia and what I thought should be done with the
company. We met on 30 December in an office overlooking Helsinki’s Old
Church. There was still no snow in the churchyard. The tombstones of the
plague victims buried there appeared as dark shadows against the ground,
while the trees seemed even darker and more threatening. The impression
was radiant in a way only a deep Finnish winter can be.
   Casimir Ehrnrooth was accompanied by another board member, the chief
executive of the Pohjola insurance company Yrjö Niskanen. My two bosses-
to-be presented me officially with the question: “Are you ready to accept the
position of chief executive of Nokia?” When I had officially answered that
I was, our conversation began. In breaks between drinking coffee we dis-
cussed how Nokia had gotten into its current state and what might be done
about it. We agreed that I would do some serious thinking about Nokia’s
future. I promised to prepare a presentation for them in the New Year.
   I did have some thoughts, or rather one thought. While my discussions
over the new job were going on I was also working on my vision with Olli-
Pekka Kallasvuo. We sat around in the New Year and drafted a short paper,
		
 Against All Odds                                                         149


which was extremely simple. The message was clear: Nokia had to focus on
mobile phones, telecommunications, and cables, and it had to add value for
its shareholders.
   Everything else should follow from that. In practice this meant that Nokia
had to move out of many areas. It was a radical but simple idea. Such ideas
are often the best.
   When I look again at that two-page report, I am still unashamedly proud
of it. Of course I didn’t predict the entire future correctly –some of the de-
tails came closer to reality than others. But I could put something very simi-
lar forward again with a clear conscience.
   My view was that the company should examine at once whether it could
sell off the whole consumer electronics operation. If that wasn’t possible, I
put forward a model for a joint venture that would guarantee it could be
sold later.
   Cable manufacture was one of Nokia’s oldest areas of business and very
much part of its history. Nokia had made cables since the 1920s, and un-
til 1991 that had been its most profitable division. It didn’t make a profit
in 1992, but at least it brought in more money than the budget forecast. I
thought the cable business was worth pursuing, though this turned out to be
a misjudgment. The cable industry was languishing across Europe, and we
sold the division later in the decade.
   Finland was sinking into an economic depression. The Soviet Union was
crumbling; indeed it had formally ceased to exist four days before I accepted
the new job. It had been an important trading partner for Nokia, a stable
and lucrative source of income. The break-up had a serious effect on the
telecommunications and cable divisions in particular.
   Between January and May 1992 Nokia’s losses amounted to around 200
million markka (about $62 million at 2016 prices). Only its mobile phones
and basic industry divisions were clearly making a profit. The losses had
worsened from the previous year, and revenue was down compared to both
the previous year and the budget. The figures confirmed the impression that
the whole company was in a tailspin.
   In my report I suggested that mobile phone networks would be the invest-
ment of the future. I didn’t, however, believe that Nokia could go it alone; I
thought that it needed to consider alliances with other companies. On mo-
bile phones I wrote the following sentences, which I’m still proud of: “Mo-
bile phones are a central focus, which there is no reason even to consider
relinquishing. At the very least our aim should be to maintain the group’s
current position globally.”
150                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   I had myself been in charge of the mobile phone division from 1990 to
1992, and I knew that we could achieve results. I knew the employees at
our Salo development center and plant were motivated and keen to make
a world champion of Nokia. I didn’t of course know that ten years after I
wrote that paper Nokia would command 40 percent of the global mobile
market – or indeed how big that market would be. That could scarcely have
been predicted. Nor would I have dared put a bet on it myself back in 1992.
   If the Nokia of 1992 had a core business it was tire production. We had
given up paper manufacture some time earlier, and I had been actively in-
volved in that decision. In my own report I proposed divesting ourselves of
our core business as well. And we did, though not until 1994, when Nokia
Tyres was sold off and listed on the Helsinki Stock Exchange. It’s become an
extremely successful company.
   The report was ready for 3 January, when I met Casimir Ehrnrooth and
Yrjö Niskanen again. At that meeting I learned how much I would be offered
to take on the role of CEO. We also dealt with some other practical matters.
I had one request for my new bosses: I wanted complete freedom in choos-
ing my staff. Ehrnrooth and Niskanen agreed without demur. My report was
put into final form a few days later and Nokia’s board discussed it when they
met on 16 January.
   Even now I don’t really know how I found the self-confidence to write that
two-page report. I only knew that something had to be done. Money should
flow from companies to their owners, not the other way round. Lines of re-
sponsibility should be simple. The company’s values and a new leadership
team should be established on that basis. And there wasn’t a moment to waste.
   The day before the crucial meeting I met the investment banker Björn
Wahlroos. He told me all about the previous year’s discussions on the own-
ership of the company. When the proposed sale to Ericsson had collapsed,
one bank’s shareholder group had come up with an alternative. The idea was
that some of the shareholders would have Nokia delisted from the stock ex-
change by buying out its shares. The debt arising from this purchase would
have been passed to Nokia for payment. In this way Nokia would have be-
come a private company. I had no experience with private companies. I had
only worked in Citibank, which was a big firm listed on the stock exchange.
After that I had moved to Nokia, also a listed company, though not one that
brought much joy to its shareholders in the difficult years at the end of the
1980s and beginning of the 1990s.
   Ultimately Nokia’s auditors refused to allow this arrangement. It’s hard to
say if Nokia would have survived as a private company owned by one bank-
		
 Against All Odds                                                          151


ing group. It was much easier to measure Nokia against its targets if it were a
listed company. The markets are merciless and put a price on our capabilities
every single day. I’m not sure if a private owner would have been ready for
that enormous changes we were compelled to make in order for our value on
the stock exchange to rise. These are difficult questions to which there really
is no final answer. At the beginning of 1992 we knew only that Nokia was a
public company and would stay that way.
   The board made the formal decision to appoint me at its meeting on 16
January. The company would now have just one leader. Kalle Isokallio left
Nokia at once, and Simo Vuorilehto would stand down from his roles as
chief executive and chairman of the executive board as of 1 June, when I
would take on the latter role as well. Chairman of the Board Mika Tiivola
also submitted his resignation, and Casimir Ehrnrooth was elected in his
place at a general meeting on 2 April.
   Rumors that Nokia would be broken up continued after my appointment.
Indeed in some parts of the media the rumors intensified. My banking back-
ground was used against me in their stories. Because I crunched numbers
and determined what the company was worth, it followed that my job was to
slice Nokia up and sell the bits off to the highest bidders. And there would be
those who understood Nokia’s value and would want to buy.
   And there were those who sold. Around that time one of Finland’s two
big banks made the worst trades in its history by selling its shares in Nokia.
Ten years later those shares were worth many times what the bank had sold
them for.
152   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa
		
 Against All Odds     153




       PA R T I I I


       MASTERS
   OF THE UNIVERSE
154   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa
		
 Against All Odds                                                          155




                          CHAPTER 32


          Life as a Chief Executive



M       y job as Nokia’s chief executive demanded absolute commit-
        ment. I always had Nokia’s latest model of mobile phone, and it was
always switched on, even at night. You may, if you wished, detect a dark iro-
ny in the fact that I dedicated my career to promoting products that ensure
that senior business executives, myself included, are never off duty.
   Wireless communications have also made senior executives lives much
easier, made work more efficient, and enabled the freedom of movement
that executives have always aimed for. The evolution of working habits that
began in the early 1990s and is still going on today is truly remarkable. These
days you don’t need to go the office to get your work done.
   When I accepted the job, I knew what was coming. For summer holidays
I would snatch a few days or maybe a week; around Christmas and the New
Year I might even take ten days. I tried to keep Saturdays for my family, and
we’d often spend time together at our summer cottage in Orivesi. By Sunday
morning it was back to my desk to start preparing my agenda for the follow-
ing week.
   My diary filled up several months ahead. If I wanted time for free discus-
sion or an unscheduled meeting with my senior managers the options were
seven o’clock in the morning, late in the evening, or on Sunday. I usually
went into the office between three and five on Sunday afternoons and stayed
there long into the evening. Often on Sunday evenings I’d set off on a busi-
ness trip. Conference calls and other forms of remote working that would
later make life easier were still in their infancy.
156                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   In my first few months I carried out my duties as my secretaries pro-
grammed me to do. My diary was full of meetings with investors and banks
and with the company’s obligatory internal meetings. Days quickly fill up
with such meetings unless you take care to avoid them. Time is the most
valuable resource of all, and you can waste it on all the wrong things. I still
didn’t have any experience of what it really meant to work as a company’s
chief executive. Every incoming CEO has to start with the processes and
projects inherited from his predecessor.
   Only in June 1992 did I start to run according to my own timetable and
bring my own teams together. I started to actively influence Nokia’s strat-
egy. My feet were now back firmly on the ground after months when I had
struggled just to keep things going one day at a time. I gave myself body and
soul so that Nokia would stay alive. While I managed to sleep at night, when
summer 1992 finally arrived I was utterly exhausted. The company’s board
were worried about me, and the following year they compelled me to take a
proper holiday.
   Back in 1992 Nokia suffered a lack of self-confidence, though by Finnish
standards the company was pretty lively internationally. Its success however
had remained modest. Its major European acquisitions were losing money:
Nokia was withdrawing from international markets like a defeated army
leaving the battlefield to tend its wounds. Battle-weariness was all around,
and we had to rebuild our self-confidence from scratch.
   Because we didn’t have much confidence in ourselves, other people didn’t
have much confidence in us. Nokia was not in complete crisis, but the com-
pany’s cash reserves were dwindling. Our business activity was shrinking,
and losses were mounting, especially in consumer electronics. We had to
build trust with everyone we dealt with: the banks, who were reluctant to
finance us; the shareholders, who didn’t trust Nokia as a sound investment;
and the customers, who were losing faith in our products. More to the point,
perhaps, our competitors’ products, especially Motorola’s, dominated the
market overwhelmingly. On top of all that, the media doubted our ability:
they thought that Nokia should be sliced up and the bits sold off to the high-
est bidders among its competitors. When I began as chief executive in 1992,
rebuilding trust was the most important task facing me. I would also need
to assemble a new team, just as I had when I took charge of mobile phones.
   Apart from appointing people I spent that spring firefighting, trying to
prevent the company from going under and morale from crumbling com-
pletely. My diary from that time shows that I met many bankers around
Europe and the United States. Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo, our finance director,
and I used to travel to try to persuade people that Nokia did indeed have
		
 Against All Odds                                                         157


a future and to patiently try to rebuild trust. Every banker wanted to know
what we intended to do with the unprofitable consumer electronics opera-
tion. In March 1992 bankers from Kommerzbank came to our head office in
Helsinki. We all sat in our conference room and I told the bemused bank-
ers that the entire European consumer electronics industry was badly run.
“Now is the time for some real businessmen to come in,” I said as I tried to
convince my listeners with some carefully chosen words.
   The German bankers seemed to believe me, because they continued to
finance Nokia after that meeting. I have never been sure where my own
self-confidence came from. Consumer electronics was our big problem, and
back in 1992 I had no idea how long it would take and how difficult it would
be to solve it. But my own self-confidence was infectious and persuaded
others to trust us.
   A few months later Olli-Pekka and I were on the banking circuit in Zu-
rich, where we stayed at the Baur au Lac Hotel. The doormen there were
amazed when a car from Credit Suisse took us to the airport. “Those men
must be really rich if the bank ferries them around in a limo,” they whis-
pered to one another. The truth was completely the opposite: Nokia owed
so much to Credit Suisse that the bank wanted to do everything within its
power to ensure that its debtors wouldn’t disappear before they could catch
their flight back to Finland.
   Much later I took a closer look at my travels between 1992 and 2006. On
average I was travelling 115 days each year. This is roughly half the work-
ing days in a year, and nearly one in three of all days. Most of my trips were
abroad; I used to go five or six times a year to Asia and seven or eight times
to the United States. Between 1988 and 2006 I went to China fifty-two times.
The chief executive of a major company can’t travel more than this, other-
wise the company will start to suffer from a lack of leadership. A leader has
to be present. Modern communications do indeed help, but all the blogging
or tweeting in the world can’t substitute for a physical presence.
   I don’t remember many of the details of that spring. My diary says that
as well as bankers I met many shareholders and staff, that I held numerous
internal meetings, and that I always travelled to see customers when they
wanted me to. I worked from morning to night and into the small hours so
that Nokia could be saved – it was truly a battle for survival. The company
had to regain trust by every possible means, both internally and externally.
   In April I received another visitor from Germany. The second-in-com-
mand at Siemens, Dr. Herman Franz, came to our head office in Helsinki.
He informed me that Siemens wished to buy our cellular systems unit, which
was just then becoming a key element of our strategy for developing mobile
158                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


phone networks. Siemens knew that Nokia had difficulties in the area of
consumer electronics. The Germans thought we would be ready to sell the
very unit on which our future would be based. (Siemens would eventually
withdraw from the mobile phone business.) I listened politely, promised to
reply in due course, and bade farewell to the distinguished German.
   I discussed Siemens’ offer a couple of times with Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo and
Sari Baldauf, then in charge of networks. Dr. Franz came back to Finland on
the afternoon of 16 June. We had prepared a little cup of coffee for him in the
dark-paneled meeting room next to my office. I told him we were not inter-
ested in selling our network business. The German stiffened. “Mr. Ollila, I do
hope you understand that you are making a great mistake,” he managed to
say when he had recovered from his surprise. He rose from the table halfway
through his coffee. “You will be hearing more from us,” said the representa-
tive of Siemens just before the door slammed shut.
   I sat down again. We had avoided a major trap, but I have to say I felt rath-
er more isolated as a result. Nevertheless we felt that we had made the right
decision, Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo, Sari Baldauf, and I. We were on our own
now. We would have to be even faster and more agile if we were to topple the
Goliaths. I took full responsibility for my decision, which in truth was based
on nothing more than my self-confidence and my trust in Nokia’s capabili-
ties. So I didn’t tell the board about the visit of the man from Siemens. The
chairman of the board, Casimir Ehrnrooth, heard about it only a year later,
but he didn’t complain. The outcome was the right one.
   I got on extremely well with the new chairman from day one. It says some-
thing about Casimir Ehrnrooth’s career in Finnish business that he had first
sat on the board of a listed company as far back as 1954, when he was just
twenty-three. He was a highly cultivated and skilled manager and business-
man. He had not spent his career in technology companies, but in forestry.
He was a highly conscientious member of Nokia’s board and briefed himself
thoroughly on our fields of activity and our figures. Whenever I talked to
him and asked his opinion I received a clear reply. He did not defer matters
to unnecessary meetings or working groups, and this was crucial when the
changes in Nokia were so rapid. He was especially interested in corporate
governance. He was absolutely clear about the division between the roles
of the CEO, the board of directors, and the board chairman. Within this
framework he allowed those of us with day-to-day responsibility a great deal
of freedom and room for movement.
   At that time the boards of companies listed on the Finnish stock exchange
often had working committees. At Nokia this committee comprised the chief
executive, the board chair, and the deputy chair, at that time Yrjö Niskanen.
		
 Against All Odds                                                             159


The working committee met once a month, and we spoke for about an hour
and a half about the current situation in the company and in the markets.
When necessary an outside expert might be invited to give a presentation on
a selected subject. I made these meetings very brief. At Casimir Ehrnrooth’s
suggestion we abolished the working committee in 1997 since there was no
real point to it.
   Ehrnrooth was extremely consistent in carrying out his duties. When
things were difficult, as they often were, he showed understanding and gave
us support. In 2006 I became chairman of the board; in pondering this role
I took the way Casimir Ehrnrooth had carried it out as my reference point.
   Although I had confidence both in Nokia’s management and in myself, I
wasn’t entirely hopeful. I didn’t know whether we could be sure of surviving,
even if we did as well as we possibly could. The consumer electronics divi-
sion was still hemorrhaging cash. Spring 1992 didn’t bring Nokia back into
the black. We published our results for the first four months of the year in
June, just before the whole of Finland went on holiday at midsummer. The
bottom line was a heavy loss, heavier than ever before. At the same point
in the previous year we had made 119 million markka ($39 million at 2016
prices). Now our losses were 178 million markka ($58 million). For tactical
reasons we released the results at a time when most Finns had other things
than economic news to think about. But after midsummer the headlines
were bigger than before. The press wondered if Nokia could ever rise to the
surface and whether the company’s CEO had any credibility. The media’s
silence during the spring had turned into a furious onslaught.
   I drove Liisa and the children to our summer place at Orivesi, but my holi-
day wasn’t long. By 3 July I was already at a meeting in the United Kingdom.
There, after a meeting of the board of Jamont, the paper company, I met my
trusted adviser, Per Karlsson. We sat together in the great hall of a country
house, while outside the sun shone on the English countryside. “Per, could
you do me a favor? Could you help me get us out of consumer electronics?
The figures are just dreadful. I need help fast,” I said. “I can try,” he replied.
Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo and I had agreed we should ask Per to discuss with
Philips, the electronics company, whether there was the possibility for a
joint venture or even the sale of the money-losing division. These talks with
Per helped a little at least. July 1992 was one of the most difficult times in my
entire career. While many matters were progressing reasonably well, we still
didn’t know whether Nokia was safe.
   The collapse of consumer electronics – a grand title for various television
assembly plants scattered around Europe – was dragging down Nokia’s prof-
itable and growing sectors even though the figures for mobile phones and
160                 Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


telecommunications networks had improved. So our share price also sank
lower. Nokia was becoming an interesting purchasing prospect for those
most familiar with the firm’s affairs. Companies other than Siemens were
starting to understand Nokia’s potential for growth.
   Would we sink before we really started to grow, or would we soon reach
the surface and break through into profitable growth? That was the only
question on my mind in July 1992. The following months would surely an-
swer it, I thought.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          161




                          CHAPTER 33


                          New Plans



I  n the autumn of 1992 Nokia’s executive committee made a decision
   that had a more lasting impact than most in the company’s history – we
chose a slogan for Nokia. I had asked the head of communications, Matti
Saarinen, to come up with a phrase that captured what we were trying to do.
   Saarinen presented us with a long list of ideas. We had a discussion, based
on the list, that took less than half an hour. We crossed out all but five of
Matti’s suggestions, all of which were linked in some way with the themes
of “Human Technology” or “Connecting People.” Then we took a time-out
and agreed that we would come back to the question at our next meeting a
month later. There we affirmed with one voice that “Connecting People” was
our guiding principle. At that time the field of wireless communication was
still young, so we were in the happy position that we could make our choice
freely because not all the best slogans had yet been snapped up. Boards and
committees are not always the strongest links in the creative process, but
“Connecting People” has shown its staying power.
   In 1992 we had at last decided that Nokia would concentrate on telecom-
munications. The decision was clear, brave, and final. I believed in it myself,
knowing that my whole career depended on getting this decision right.
   I communicated the decision at workplace meetings, typically to about a
hundred people at a time. Of these perhaps twenty would find a place at the
Nokia of the future that I believed in; the other eighty belonged to the parts
of the company we had decided to sacrifice. The sacrifices were needed for
two reasons: we needed to concentrate on an area where we would be one of
the world’s best, and it had to be in a growing market. Only this combination
162                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


could save us. It was clear that both making our decision and explaining it
caused people pain, distress, and anxiety about their own future. In many
cases the anxiety proved well-founded. But things were going so badly at
Nokia in 1992 that almost everyone knew that the company was fighting for
its very existence.
   Nokia had never been a homogeneous company. For its entire history it
had been made up of individual units or subsidiaries that often competed
with each other. In 1992 Nokia still had separate units responsible for mo-
bile phones, telecommunications networks, cables, consumer electronics,
and basic industry. These units, or rather the people working in them, often
didn’t have the faintest idea of what people in the other units did. People
didn’t feel they were working for Nokia, but only for their own unit.
   My vision of Nokia’s future crystallized around four key concepts, which
I expressed in English because that was the language in which we needed to
do business. They were: focused, global, telecommunications-oriented, and
high value-added. These words encapsulate a decade of activity at Nokia.
Back in 1992 they were aspirations, but by the end of the decade they were
also achievements. Each of the four concepts had its own story to tell. The
number of concepts wasn’t a matter of chance – I believe that people can
absorb no more than four concepts at a time. Three is often too few, and five
is already too many to remember. Over the years people working under me
have learned my way of doing things. I expect them to simplify even com-
plex matters to enable us to communicate our goals clearly.
   Focused meant that Nokia really would concentrate on those areas we be-
lieved in. It’s also, however, an instruction on how to work. We had neither
time nor money to waste on the wrong things. In 1992 we were a challenger
in almost every market. We had to devote all our resources to narrow, clear
aims. We had to find exactly those areas where our competitors were weak-
est, or those areas where we had budding know-how that we could quickly
nurture and spread. And we expected all our managers at Nokia to focus on
their own working methods and time management and to concentrate on
what was essential.
   Global was, back in 1992, an as yet-unrealized ambition for Nokia. Of
course we had our international activities. Nokia had factories, sales subsid-
iaries, and representatives around the world, but we didn’t really function on
a global scale. We lacked global logistics, marketing, and a global brand. We
were used to comparing ourselves to the Swedes and to Ericsson, but that
was no longer enough. I announced that we had to fly beyond Stockholm
airport and engage with more distant parts of the world. Our entire mode
		
 Against All Odds                                                          163


of operation had to go global. We had a great deal to do: our organizational
structure, our attitudes, and our communication and marketing methods
had to change.
  When did Nokia become a global company? I think we started to work in
a global way in 1994–95. That was when the GSM mobile phone standard
spread as far as Asia. We were listed on the New York Stock Exchange in
1994, which compelled us to work according to the conditions set by the
international capital markets. Also in 1994 English became our working lan-
guage.
  Telecommunications-oriented was a relatively clear and simple aim. It
did however contain a strategic risk. If we didn’t succeed in telecoms, we
wouldn’t succeed in anything. But our expertise was rooted in this area – we
didn’t pluck our goals from the air. Many other areas of our business had
come up against barriers to growth or encountered other difficulties. Our
cable division had lost its Soviet market, while in western Europe the profit-
able cartel had been dismantled. There was clearly a future in telecommu-
nications – you could see the market growing in front of your eyes – but no
one could have predicted that global growth would be as impressive as it was
by the end of the decade. In fact it was only in 1994 that Nokia’s board, meet-
ing in Hong Kong, decided that we would sell everything except telecom-
munications. The struggle to sell consumer electronics went on for another
two years. Our “simple” goal was by no means easy to realize.
  High value-added meant we should concentrate on the most profitable
products, where the margins were highest, so that the profitability of the
entire company would reach a new level. We needed to develop products
that could command high prices. That demanded strong design, a strong
brand, and a strong technological capability. We had to get money flowing
back to the shareholders at last – an increase in shareholder value became
one of our fundamental goals. At the beginning of the 1990s many of Fin-
land’s institutional investors didn’t believe Nokia had a future. They voted
with their money and withdrew from the ranks of our shareholders. Inves-
tors, the government, and my fellow chief executives were all fixated on “my
harsh fate” back in 1992.
  Once the company’s basic objectives had been set out, the organization
seemed to get down to work. Stating the objectives worked like an electric
shock of just the right intensity. People woke up and stirred themselves, and
the company began to pull itself together. These basic aims needed to be
repeated and repeated all the time and everywhere. Everyone had to learn
what Nokia was about. If one of Nokia’s employees were to be awoken in his
164                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


own bed in the middle of the night, he should be able to describe the Nokia
he wanted to create. This provided an altogether new sense of self-assurance
and clarity for everything we did.
   Where did my own self-confidence come from? I don’t exactly know. I
had put together my own short vision of Nokia’s future when I was asked to
take over as CEO. I believed in that vision, which would turn Nokia into a
telecommunications company. Everything else was, in principle, for sale. It’s
part of my nature that if I internalize a vision I’ll be ready to do everything
I can to make it a reality.
   Although my colleagues and I understood the opportunities open to
Nokia, the vultures were already circling what they took for Nokia’s dying
body. At least three investment banks were circulating calculations of how
Nokia might best be split up and sold. My first year as CEO had been diffi-
cult, even bleak. After the spring of 1992 I didn’t know if Nokia would make
it. I have never been deeply depressed, but my darkest moments were during
that summer.
		
 Against All Odds                                                         165




                         CHAPTER 34


      Values Underlie Everything



I  demanded a great deal from the people at Nokia, but every chief
   executive expects a lot from his or her employees. It’s like saying that a
swimming teacher makes her pupils go in the water. It’s essential for getting
the job done.
   As chief executive I expected everyone in a position of responsibility to
have their facts and figures straight. Senior executives don’t generally lay
their pens down on their desks at quarter past four in the afternoon, as hap-
pens in most of Finland’s offices. I worked evenings and weekends and so
did many others at Nokia. It must often have seemed to them and their fami-
lies tedious and unreasonable.
   No one can know what a chief executive’s job is like until they do it them-
selves. I had observed closely how Kari Kairamo and Simo Vuorilehto set
about their duties, but it was only when I took over that I really grasped how
wretchedly difficult and onerous it could sometimes be.
   The chief executive’s position at Nokia in the early 1990s sometimes felt
especially hard. The company’s statistics were dismal, the banks were breath-
ing down our necks, and in the backs of our minds was the fear that one of
our competitors would buy us out. I knew too that among my closest col-
leagues were people who were waiting for me to fail and wanted to step into
my shoes. I had no guarantee that the company I was leading would take
wing. Conditions in the early 1990s were difficult and sometimes my feel-
ings boiled over. I raised my voice, too often, but I also tried to support my
management team. Eventually we got the struggling company back on its
166                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


feet, and this lifted the spirits of the people running it. Our success made us
feel we were all in it together and gave us the energy to go on.
   As a management tool I sometimes deliberately gave meetings an adren-
alin boost. We can all imagine the torpid atmosphere in regular, two-hour
meetings where the work of a business unit is minutely examined. Tedium
and a lack of meaningful activity are dangerous for a company. They’re sopo-
rific and they turn the company’s management into a bloated Politburo. I
wanted to fight this, and so I raised my own levels of energy and intensity.
Some people regarded this as ranting.
   Leadership is a skill that can be learned, and experience is the founda-
tion on which one can start to build a management style. I grew as a leader
in perhaps the most visible position in Finnish business life, and my man-
agement style has evolved over the years – the rough edges have become
smoother. “There’s no need to make a fuss about those explosions from Jor-
ma anymore, since they don’t often happen now,” said Matti Alahuhta, one
of my closest colleagues, sometime at the beginning of the 2000s.
   Many people completely misunderstand how an enterprise the size of
Nokia is run. They imagine that the chief executive personally intervenes in
every little issue where there might be a problem. That would be neither pos-
sible nor reasonable. When I took over as chief executive, Nokia employed
roughly 25,000 people. The successful leadership of such a large group de-
mands shared values. In the early 1990s value leadership was still a relatively
new concept. In the 2010s the discussion has moved on and values have
shifted in significance. Now we talk, for example, of the significance of work.
In any case it’s generally understood that employees are not solely motivated
by external incentives such as pay.
   In 1992–93 we didn’t have a clue how a global company should be run. We
didn’t even need to know, because at that stage Nokia hadn’t really become
a global company. Nokia’s top management was a group of young managers
who were extremely ambitious but inexperienced. We had to learn to trust
each other completely in all circumstances, in good times as well as bad.
   I had encapsulated Nokia’s objectives in four key concepts. But objectives
and values are not the same thing. Our values needed to be something that
people genuinely wanted to be committed to but also something that Nokia
wanted them to commit themselves to. We needed a value system that would
hold up well should the company succeed. A company’s values will often see
it through the hard times, because then people have to pull together and
trust one another. But the significance of values will be called into ques-
tion if the company does well. Sudden and unexpected success is one of the
		
 Against All Odds                                                         167


greatest risks to a business. Then the company acquires the wrong sort of
arrogance, the customer is forgotten, self-satisfaction increases, and sensi-
tiveness to change diminishes.
   The roots of the work on values lay years back in Telenokia, our telecom-
munications network unit. I kicked off our wider discussion of Nokia’s val-
ues in spring 1992. I set up a working group to consider Nokia’s core values
and mission. The group identified and affirmed three Nokia values.
   These values were implicit in the way the company operated, but they
needed to be clarified. They were Customer Orientation, Achievement, and
Continuous Learning. The group discovered one new value they felt it im-
portant to add to the list –Respecting the Individual.
   In September 1992 we gathered at Båtvik, Nokia’s traditional represen-
tational villa. Our top leaders were all there – 25 key individuals. Nokia’s
success was by no means assured, and I delivered a rather long and gloomy
monologue, straight from my heart. We also had a long discussion about our
values, our mission, and our working methods. Our gaze was very much fo-
cused on the present, which still presented many threats, but we also glanced
toward the future.
   It helped that there was no one there who hankered after a golden past.
Our meeting managed to convince Nokia’s senior management that we
needed a statement of shared values. Some of them regarded the whole pro-
cess as an utter waste of time that should have been spent on sales or product
development. But just a few months later everyone agreed that without our
discussion of values we wouldn’t have gotten through.
   At that meeting we gained an insight that swept Nokia forward by ten
years. After our lengthy discussions we understood that two factors would
determine whether Nokia succeeded. On the one hand our products, tech-
nology, and design had to be first class. But all our competitors had exactly
the same aim. How could Nokia offer more? What did our customers really
want? By pondering these questions we came up with The Nokia Way. This
was a package that contained our firm’s values, working methods, processes,
and mission. We explained our core values everywhere we could. For ex-
ample, in the course of a year our head of strategy, Mikko Kosonen, spoke
about Nokia’s values and working methods over a hundred times in different
places in different parts of the world. This was mainly in internal engage-
ments but also included outside events.
   Customer Orientation meant that we would correctly identify the custom-
ers’ needs, we would add value for our customers through our products, and
we would take trouble and care over our customers. We wanted our custom-
168                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


ers to guide everything we did. We declared the customer, not Nokia, to be
our employer.
   Respecting the Individual strengthened our mutual trust, but also made
Nokia a good and attractive employer. We wanted people to be treated hon-
estly, openly, and fairly. But we also wanted to stress that we all depended on
each other. We needed one another. We had to learn to trust one another. I
also wanted Nokia to be a multicultural workplace, where we valued diver-
sity, whether that arose from gender, nationality, skin color, or religion. This
is conventional wisdom now, but in the Finland of 1992 it was revolutionary.
   Achievement is rather an obvious value in a company. Every company
wants to meet its objectives. A company should also want its employees to
achieve their own goals along with the company’s goals. Nokia no longer
had resources to spare for vested interests or internal battles over our goals.
Everything had to be shared, perhaps even to the point where our customers
could sign on to our goals. We emphasized the urge to win, which was al-
ready high on the list of Nokia’s corporate values. We also wanted to make it
clear to our employees that those who achieved their goals would be valued.
We wanted to demonstrate that we would reward people for their achieve-
ments, not their presence. This goal was indeed realized later, when our rev-
enue and profits grew so spectacularly. Many people at Nokia became mil-
lionaires because of the way our incentives were structured.
   Continuous Learning was perhaps the value closest to my heart. I believe
that a company whose leaders and employees have stopped learning is con-
demned to an early grave. In Nokia, learning – continuous learning – is
one of the highest values. That means learning on the job, in negotiations,
in relations with customers, and in developing processes. Sometimes it also
means that the company’s managers continue their studies and complete
dissertations. It’s not a matter of one-off achievements, but an attitude to-
ward the whole of work and life. It’s the attitude of an organization as well as
the people within the organization. It cannot be measured by qualifications
gained or some financial metric, but if a company loses its ability to learn,
one will soon see the results in red on the balance sheet. At Nokia learning
means innovation and bold decisions. The company wanted to enable its
employees to grow as people through their own jobs.
   We accepted that mistakes and failures happen. Indeed, we wanted the
right number of them to occur, for every mistake and failure brings a huge
amount of information that can be put to good use.
   Success often provides less in the way of new information. At its best fail-
ure leads to a thorough rethink and overhaul of the company’s processes.
		
 Against All Odds                                                         169


Over the years people working for me have learned to recognize my catch-
phrase, which is that everyone in the company has the right to make mis-
takes, but never the same mistake twice.
  The concept of a humble and open mind is also linked to these values. I’m
always afraid I’ll be misunderstood when I talk of humility. Humility doesn’t
mean humiliation, timidity, or excessive caution, nor does it mean a lack of
self-esteem. It means such strong self-esteem that an individual or a com-
pany has the strength to show humility in the face of difficult or unfamiliar
facts and fresh challenges. I also mean humility toward competitors, when
they have succeeded in doing something special. In my view Pertti Korho-
nen showed exemplary humility when he picked up Motorola’s new phone
in 1991. He recognized that Motorola had come up with a brilliant product,
though even then he was sure that Nokia could do even better. That belief
took us a long way, for it led to the creation of our success story, the Nokia
101.
  As well as establishing our core values, we agreed how Nokia would be
run. We decided that our structures should be as flat and decentralized as
possible. They should also be as efficient as possible, and everything should
be based on teamwork. Managers should set clear goals for the operations
they supervised. Managers and foremen should work primarily as coaches,
who would enable those working for them to realize their potential. And the
organization should do all that it could to promote the mobility of the labor
force. Nokia was constructing a company that believed in free and active
global mobility for people. It would have been mind-boggling if we hadn’t
believed in mobility within our own company.
  We identified three processes that we saw as the most important in the
new Nokia. They were strategic planning, financial control, and human re-
source management. But even more important than the processes were the
values, which preceded everything. The processes were there only to enable
the company to realize the goals based on its values. The example of Nokia in
the 1990s shows how a company can be run on the basis of values. We called
this “value-based management,” which may not have been very imaginative
but made it clear what we were about. Senior managers often imagine that
once the values have been identified and communicated to the staff, things
will be fine. But from my own experience I would say that if value-based
management is taken seriously, communicating the values is only the first
stage.
  At Nokia we started by explaining our values to our hundred most im-
portant managers in January 1993. That spring we organized further events.
170                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


We disseminated Nokia’s new values and guiding principles throughout
our global organization. Later in the spring we considered what the values
would mean for our human resource management. Our values and guiding
principles would have no meaning unless they were incorporated into the
everyday activities in the company. Personnel management was the most
important area of all, because the company was beginning to grow, which
meant hiring new people, selecting new managers, and increasing mobility
inside Nokia. The global energy firm Enron, which collapsed into wrong-
doing and criminality, had a fine set of values, better than those of many
companies, but they weren’t incorporated into the everyday activities of the
company.
   I remember well the time we first outlined our new values to senior man-
agers. Some of my colleagues were enthusiastic, some were indifferent, and
some showed openly that they thought the new chief executive’s speech was
just for show and had nothing at all to do with everyday life. On the one
hand, the values raised many expectations, while on the other, people were
skeptical about whether they would actually lead to anything.
   I had thrown myself behind the new values and the idea of value-based
leadership. I spoke about values in hundreds of meetings. Other senior man-
agers were required to discuss them with their own subordinates. No one
was allowed to let the discussion of values slip off the agenda. The Nokia Way
was just as important as the manufacture and marketing of mobile phones,
the purchasing of components, or putting together the company’s business
plan. It was even more important, really. I don’t think we could actually have
gotten the business going until we had worked out what we all fundamen-
tally believed in and how we wanted to run Nokia together.
   In every meeting and board discussion I made it clear how much I myself
believed in our work on values. I made sure that the company would meet its
financial targets. Of course every day I made decisions, small and large. But
I knew that only a common culture and common values could bring Nokia
back to growth and a new resurgence where the company would endure the
pains and dangers of success. Only then would its real ethos be tested.
   Nokia’s personnel people often said that “even big boys can cry.” They were
referring to our staff appraisal process, which looked each year at what in-
dividuals had achieved, how they had developed, and their character. Many
companies hold development discussions with their staff, but by the early
1990s Nokia already had a system where superiors, subordinates, and peers
all evaluated each other. I believe in the power of example. So at Nokia we ex-
tended these discussions to include executive board members, right up to the
		
 Against All Odds                                                        171


chief executive. Thus I too received an annual appraisal of my development in
accordance with Nokia’s values. It was sometimes hard, but necessary.
   Nokia’s core values were knitted into these development discussions: ev-
erything was measured in relation to those values. There were years when
we focused on just one out of the four core values. We might want, for ex-
ample, to do better in Respecting the Individual. Then all our discussions
would stress just that value. Our personnel department also laid stress on
understanding people’s own values, if for example a manager or expert was
posted into an unfamiliar culture. Our company’s values were not intended
to contain even the slightest hint of cultural superiority. So we created a
method to help us check out the values held by key employees, before they
were posted.
   When our personnel department was given value-related objectives, we
gained several additional tools for changing the organization. The personnel
department’s job was to ensure that The Nokia Way was the crucial principle
in recruitment, managerial appointments, and team-building. From now on
those values would form the sole basis for the development of our work-
force. It would ensure continuity, real security, dynamism, and consistency.
It would also differentiate Nokia from other employers. We would be able to
say very simply what we believed in and how we saw ourselves.
   We believed it would make Nokia an attractive company on the interna-
tional job market.
   Trust was the password that would open everything up. The executive
committee needed to learn to trust me as chief executive: that was anoth-
er reason we needed values to which everyone was publicly signed on. My
leadership style should have come as no surprise to my colleagues: it was all
there between the covers of The Nokia Way.
   Several of my senior colleagues helped lead the discussion on values. They
expended a great deal of valuable management time on it. People below
them continued the discussion, which fortunately began to focus on practi-
cal issues, which was not always easy. “What if my supervisor asks to me
to do something for a customer at six o’clock on a Friday when my family
is expecting me for a special dinner?” might be a typical question. It was
certainly a concrete and realistic question, and even now I’m not quite sure
what the right answer might be. But that makes it just the sort of matter you
need to discuss.
172                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                         CHAPTER 35


                       A Black Hole



M       y greatest headache in the early 1990s was consumer electron-
        ics. At the beginning of the decade, when I was in charge of mobile
phones, there had been a brief moment of optimism when there suddenly
seemed to be golden opportunities for television production in Europe.
   To understand why, we have to go back a little in time. In November 1989,
Günter Schabowksi, a member of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of the German Democratic Republic, held a press conference in what
was then East Berlin. At the close of this event Schabowski read out a state-
ment he had received only hours before. It said, in the complex language
of communist bureaucracy, that restrictions on travel by the East Germans
were to be relaxed. A journalist asked when the change would come into
effect. The confused party official replied with the words that would change
the course of history: “sofrot, unverzüglich” – “immediately, without delay.”
In fact it was intended that travel was to be made easier only on the follow-
ing day.
   People interpreted the decision in their own way: before an hour had
passed thousands of people thronged in front of the Berlin Wall, clamor-
ing to exchange communist dictatorship for the freedoms of the West. The
border was opened, and the Wall, which had kept the two Germanys apart
for nearly 30 years, was torn down. World history had changed as the result
of a mistake, and certainly not for the first time.
   A little later Germany was unified. East German marks were exchanged
for the Deutschmark. The impoverished East Germans suddenly had money
to buy the goods they had dreamed about for decades. They travelled to the
		
 Against All Odds                                                          173


West in their little Trabant cars to buy bigger western vehicles, fridges, and,
of course, televisions. They wanted well-known German makes, which they
had seen advertised for decades in the press or on the West German televi-
sion channels they secretly watched. Nokia happened to own some of these.
  This caused a spike in demand, which obscured the real future of the tele-
vision market. More experienced television makers, such as Philips, point-
ed out that this sudden growth in demand was a one-off. It might last six
months, but after that production would fall back to its old depressed and
depressing level. But at Nokia we were desperately short of good news just
then, so such warnings from our Dutch competitors were not taken seriously.
  On the contrary: Nokia’s then-president, Kalle Isokallio, used television
production as an example of how Nokia could do well in the wider market.
And things looked good for those first four months. After that there was an
appalling slide, which at times looked as if it might bring down the whole
of Nokia.
  In 1991 Philips had wanted to buy our television manufacturing division
and was ready to pay real money – 500 million markkas, as I remember
($159 million at 2016 prices). But German demand was at its peak, televi-
sions were selling well, and Nokia’s directors were seized with a joyful opti-
mism and didn’t want to sell. Electronics would make the company a global
player. The company’s double-headed leadership was in open disagreement,
which made all decision-making difficult. There was also the fear that Nokia
would shrink too much in the course of a single year if the company sold off
both its computer and its television production.
  We had succeeded in selling our computer division at an excellent price
and at just the right time to the British company ICL. Just six months later
we would have gotten virtually nothing for Nokia Data. The deal on the
computer division was a combination of good luck and of Isokallio’s skill.
While Nokia’s other directors wondered whether we would get as much as
£150 million for our computer division, Isokallio sent off a fax to London
suggesting a price tag of £320 million ($715 million in 2016 money), a figure
plucked from the air based on nothing more than his intuition and eye for
the game.
  We should undoubtedly have accepted the Philips offer. Nokia would have
been relieved of its millstone, and money would have been freed up for the
expanding new fields of mobile phones and networks. It would also have
cleared the way for Ericsson to buy Nokia in October 1991 since it wouldn’t
have had to worry about the risks associated with our money-losing televi-
sion production. The major consumer electronics deals of the 1980s had
174                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


been a colossal mistake. Paradoxically, it was probably those mistakes that
ensured that Nokia remained an independent company.
   This mess became my responsibility in 1992. Consumer electronics was
run from Geneva by the Frenchman Jacques Noels, who was known as a
good strategic planner but not, to be frank, for his successful management
of operations. In February 1992 I wanted to know for myself exactly what
was going on. I asked our strategic planning director Tapio Hintikka to tell
me, so he came to my office one February evening. I must have looked ex-
hausted: I was working fifteen-hour days at least six days a week. Hintikka
was very critical of the way the consumer electronics operation was run.
   The following morning I flew to Geneva and heard what Jacques Noels
and his team had to say. Their plans sounded good to me. So the following
day I called Hintikka back into my office. “What you told me was complete
rubbish. They have all the plans they need to put things right,” I said. He gen-
tly contradicted me. (Hintikka is eight years senior to me, a calm and strong-
willed manager who was not afraid to disagree with me.) He told me that the
same plans had been presented in a beautiful leather-bound file four years
earlier, but nothing had come of them. I looked at the matter again, and two
weeks later Jacques Noel was replaced as head of consumer electronics by
Nokia’s Finnish finance director, Hannu Bergholm.
   Our consumer electronics arm caused me great anxiety in my first years
as chief executive. We hadn’t sold the division, though we had identified op-
portunities to do so. It lost almost as much money in 1993 as in the previous
year. In 1992–93 the losses from consumer electronics were greater than the
whole of Nokia’s net profit for 1993.
   We were sinking ever deeper, because the market for televisions showed
no signs of growing. Nokia produced cathode ray tubes and also complete
televisions, and both areas were in serious difficulty. Our tube factory at
Esslingen in Germany was a major financial loser. We hadn’t been able to
bring production up to a profitable level because we effectively faced a cartel
formed by Philips and Thomson. We were feverishly looking for an escape
route from the whole consumer electronics field. We were perhaps fortunate
not to know that this millstone would remain around our neck for another
four years.
   The spectrum of opinion in Nokia ranged from strong optimism, on the
part of those who made the televisions, to grave doubts about the future of
the operation – a view that Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo and I held strongly. When
we discussed consumer electronics together we wondered whether it could
ever be a profitable part of Nokia. “You must be joking,” was our conclusion.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          175


On the other hand I trusted Hannu Bergholm. If he couldn’t knock things
into shape, no one could. His second-in-command was Heikki Koskinen,
who knew the television business better than anyone.
  Bergholm told Nokia’s board in a memorandum that without investment
the Esslingen television tube factory would have to be shut down. If our
plans for a joint venture were to get anywhere, we had to show the world that
we believed we had a future in this area. I agreed to the investments Berg-
holm proposed at the outset, because they seemed unavoidable. Without
them we wouldn’t have any credibility.
  Nokia made television tubes and used them in making its own televisions.
Nokia made about 2 million of the 22 million television tubes sold in Europe
each year. Now Nokia was looking for an ally to help it boost production to
3 million annually. We could have closed the whole factory, but that would
have had disastrous implications for Nokia’s balance sheet, which in 1992
was as robust as the first thin film of ice on a Finnish lake after a September
frost. We couldn’t afford to do anything apart from pump more money into
making televisions. We had no guarantees that that would work; we could
only hope for the best.
  Consumer electronics became the company’s black hole – it sucked so
much time and energy out of us. I must have spent half my waking hours
thinking about, talking about, and planning what to do with our consumer
electronics division. Sometimes the black hole shrank a little, when demand
for televisions seemed to be rising. But then the black hole would grow big-
ger still, no matter how hard we tried – and the consumer electronics man-
agers certainly did their best. Both publicly and inside the company I had
to defend my belief that our consumer electronics division could be made
to prosper. I adopted my most confident manner, straightened my back and
my tie, and issued statements to the effect that we would knock this side of
our business into shape.
  Sometimes I didn’t succeed in disguising the reality. In 1993 Olli-Pekka
Kallasvuo and I flew to Boston for a meeting at Fidelity, the major inter-
national finance house. Twenty-four sharp and attentive analysts listened
to our presentations, trying to find any cracks they might exploit for in-
vestment purposes. Nokia was still relatively unknown then. Most people in
the United States still thought we were a Japanese company because of our
strange name. Compared to Motorola we really hadn’t achieved any profile,
and we weren’t yet listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
  I started my presentation by saying that mobile phones were our real suc-
cess story, but of course we did have a few little problems with consumer
176                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


electronics. I thought that “little problems” was just within the bounds of
honesty, though our problems were hardly the smallest possible. Before I
had finished my sentence a hand shot up in the front row. It belonged to the
sharpest analyst of all, and I think it held a gold-plated Cross pen. The ana-
lyst asked just one question throughout the whole presentation. When I said
“consumer electronics” the analyst asked: “Can it be saved?” “Indeed it can,
though I doubt if it will ever be really profitable,” I answered, though I didn’t
believe it myself. And I also had to ask myself why we should keep going in
an area that would never be profitable enough. How could I explain that to
the board, to the shareholders, to the analysts – and to myself?
   We had recently installed a new management team at consumer electron-
ics, which I had chosen myself. I had to support those executives, as CEOs
must always support the executives they’ve appointed, until they cease to be
managers. Also thousands of people depended on consumer electronics for
their jobs. Most of them were working in Germany, where a strong trade
union movement watched out for factory closures, and politicians vigilantly
followed what international companies did. What was more, those thou-
sands of people were certainly working hard, because they too knew that
times weren’t easy. Fairness demanded that I should support the managers,
the workers, and everyone else who was trying to make a go of television
production.
   Honesty and fairness were in conflict. I let fairness win, so honesty lost out
on this occasion. I don’t mean that I knew for sure that we would fail, but all
the facts were against us. On top of that my instinct told me that we had to
concentrate all our energies on mobile phones and mobile phone networks.
If half my time and that of my colleagues was spent on contemplating the
black hole of television production, there was a risk it would swallow us up
altogether.
   There were many reasons why television production couldn’t succeed.
Some of these were common to all the European companies that made tele-
visions. Some were particular to Nokia. Television production in Europe
was growing at 10 to 15 percent annually. It wasn’t that new companies were
coming into the field, but that all the producers were increasing their ef-
ficiency, while the market wasn’t growing. The European market for televi-
sions was mature – about the same number were sold every year. The only
exception was the spike in demand following German unification.
   Also, manufacturers in the Far East made televisions much more cheaply
than the Europeans did. In Japan televisions could be found in the super-
markets somewhere between the beer and the noodles. Occasionally a tele-
		
 Against All Odds                                                        177


vision would be thrown in free if a customer bought enough groceries. The
Europeans couldn’t compete with such aggressive pricing and marketing.
Small and cheap Japanese brands had broken into the European market, and
customers had responded enthusiastically.
   Nokia’s problem was that it had acquired a varied collection of television
factories and brands, and it simply produced too many models in a com-
plicated and expensive production process. Our models would have filled
a sizeable room. In 1992 we made 102 different models, with a total of 407
variants. Later we cut back to 37 models, with “only” 235 variants. We had
to reduce the number of models further, but we couldn’t do it in time. We
should have weeded out the redundant models back in 1988–92, but the
managers then couldn’t do it. When we did start to slim down our catalog
we were too late and could do nothing about it.
   As a purchaser of components Nokia was altogether too small a player in
the market. We learned later, when manufacturing mobile phones, that one
of the most important factors in our competitiveness was to get the right
quantity of the right components at the right time. We couldn’t do anything
to affect the price or the availability of television components.
   In Germany we had decided to sell our televisions through 6,000 outlets.
Our thinking was that we should team up with small market traders, which
would set us apart from Philips and our other competitors. The concept was
good, but facts got in the way again and did in our wishful thinking. Small
traders weren’t interested in our brand or our marketing. They just wanted
to sell televisions at whatever price they could.
   We made many other mistakes, many of which I didn’t even hear about.
I tried to believe, to hope, to support and sustain, and to say good things
in public about our brilliant future on the European television market. Nor
was I alone in my public optimism. The European Union was investing huge
amounts of money in its high-definition TV system, a revolutionary tele-
vision that would stimulate the torpid television market. The money, the
enthusiasm, and the fine speeches were all wasted. European taxpayers paid
the bill for this attempt to launch a technology the customers had no need
for. But if we hadn’t invested in television production, or showed our belief
in its future, we would have spoiled what chances we had either of selling it
or of collaborating with others in this area.
178                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                          CHAPTER 36


           The Future and the Past



A      t the beginning of the 1990s Nokia was divided in two: mobile tele-
       phones and mobile telephone networks. We knew what the company
should focus on. We had decided that Nokia would be a telecommunica-
tions company, but there was still a long way to go.
   According to the company accounts for 1992, telecoms and mobile phones
brought the company 864 million markka ($270 million at 2016 prices),
while consumer electronics lost us 783 million markka ($245 million). In
other words, consumer electronics lost us almost as much money as our core
business of telecoms made. Fortunately cables, cable machinery, and rubber
products were all profitable, so Nokia as a whole showed profits for 1992 of
288 million marks ($90 million). Compared with the previous year this was
a major achievement, since in 1991 our losses had amounted to 96 million
markka ($31 million).
   We knew that growth would come from mobile phones and telecommu-
nications networks, and also that these were what we did best. We did many
things in different ways from our competitors. We were without precon-
ceptions, because we had no alternative. We had no history as a significant
player in international telecommunications, so all our decisions had to be
new and fresh and sometimes improvised.
   Improvisation had long been part of life at Nokia. My predecessors as CEO
had always encouraged flowers to bloom wherever they could. Engineers
were encouraged to develop their ideas freely and “privately.” If an idea looked
like it might fly, Nokia was always keen to invest in it. The engineers had de-
veloped a spirit of enterprise, which included a willingness to accept failure.
		
 Against All Odds                                                      179


   The birth of the Nokia mobile phone was an example of
that spirit. The company had begun to design and manu-
facture mobile phones as far back as the 1970s. This was
very much a cottage industry at the time; the methods in
operation could never have been scaled up to allow global
production or distribution. Even so that first phase was im-
portant: without such bold experimentation Nokia could
never have become a global enterprise. Nokia phones were
marketed in Finland in the 1990s using the slogan “Nokia’s
engineers do it all.”
   The first generation of mobile phones often only worked
in a car. Analogue “portables” were so big that you had to
have a special pocket sewn into the jacket of your suit to car-
ry one around. Our competitors, especially Motorola, did
however offer much smaller models. Nokia felt compelled
to meet the challenge, which was how we came to create the The Nokia 1011
101 and its digital sister the 1011, launched in 1992.
   In the early 1990s mobiles were aimed at corporate executives and se-
nior government officials. Motorola’s background was in army and police
equipment. People thought then that mobiles would remain the preserve of
people who “really” needed them. Nokia overturned such thinking. When
Anssi Vanjoki began to develop Nokia as a brand, our goal was to sell mo-
biles to everyone.
   The change was rapid. To give an example, when the digital model 1011
was launched in 1992 it cost 8,250 marks ($2,577 at 2016 prices). At the
time that was well over half a substantial month’s salary. When the 6110
came on to the market in 1998 it cost 3250 marks ($943 at 2016 prices).
Nowadays the cheapest models cost a few tens of dollars, if that. Competi-
tion brought new products and special offers to the customers, so prices
fell. The mobile phone was less and less the tool of senior managers, police
officers, and salesmen and more and more a universal means of personal
communication. This didn’t happen overnight: we couldn’t have guessed
what a phenomenon the mobile phone would become. We didn’t know that
it would surpass every previous consumer or electronic product in the speed
at which it was adopted.
   We had started a revolution, and we still didn’t understand the conse-
quences. Indeed, at that time even we didn’t realize that we had started a
revolution. We knew that the market would grow. And we had lots of luck
on our side: we had chosen the right technology. We were geared up for the
180                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


digital age. When GSM phones took off we were ready to make them for
every market.
   We had changed the rules of the game in three ways: we wanted to bring
mobile phones within reach of everyone; we wanted through marketing to
make Nokia the leading brand; and we had focused on the right technol-
ogy. All this kept us busy between 1992 and 1994. We saw the results of our
labors, for the first years of explosive growth had begun. Our mobile phone
revenue grew by over 50 percent per year, and profits grew at about the same
rate. The Nokia ringtone was heard more and more often all over the world.
   At the beginning of the 1990s the world changed in ways that were very
helpful to Nokia. The European Single Market was declared complete in
1992. That meant that capital, people, and production could move freely
inside Europe. Earlier every market had needed its own factory run by a
subsidiary registered there, doing things in different ways from the factory
in the country next door. A global concern can’t operate in different ways in
different countries. In order to gain the benefits of global production and
distribution, a company must work on the same basis everywhere. Materials
and components need to move freely across borders. The finished products
need to reach their markets without customs barriers. Europe was moving
in just this direction, and Nokia benefited greatly from these changes.
   In the United States Bill Clinton took over from George H. W. Bush. The
challenger had defeated the incumbent. The country’s economy was show-
ing signs of growth based on a belief in information technology. People were
starting to talk of the Internet, the linking of computers into a network that
could quickly share information and send messages almost instantaneously.
Economists argued over whether it would have any effect on the world econ-
omy. That debate was eventually resolved.
   People’s desire to communicate with each other has surely been constant.
Smoke signals, carrier pigeons, papyri, even wood chips in a fast-flowing
river have all been used to relay messages. Later on, newspapers, radio, and
television communicated with a mass audience. But all these were tied to a
particular place or a particular time. People had to fit their lives and their
businesses around the message and the medium; by and large, messages
didn’t follow people around. You had to light the bonfire at the appointed
time and place if the people of the next village were to see the smoke. You
had to collect post from the postbox. You ordered your newspaper and it
was delivered at a certain time each morning, or you bought it from a news-
paper vendor on the way to work. Only small, commercial radio stations
were really adapted to people on the move, but radio didn’t become a me-
		
 Against All Odds                                                          181


dium of personal communication. You couldn’t use it
to chat with your partner or ask your children where
they were.
   Mobile phones changed all that. If you had one you
were no longer tied to the office, or to home, or to
your car, or to telephone kiosks, or to the country
you lived in. Mobile phones facilitated mobility, but
they also happened to come on the market just when
a new, more mobile generation was growing up. The
younger generation moved around more than ever
before. Whole nations were on the move. A mobile
workforce needed mobile communications that were
personal and easy and pleasant to use. Mobile me-
dia not only changed the way people spoke and ex-
changed information, it changed their entire way of
life, fashion, and culture.                                The Nokia 6110
   I am neither a sociologist nor a philosopher. I can’t
say how this change will look fifty or a hundred years from now. I wasn’t one
of the first to use text messages or all the many other services our phones
offer. But the mobile phone is now an integral part of everyday life and I sus-
pect it has changed forever how we do our work, how we conduct our family
life, and how we pursue our interests.
   Finns eagerly adopted Nokia’s new products in the early 1990s, though by
1992 about 56 percent of Nokia’s revenue already came from other parts of
Europe. Finland’s share of revenue was around 20 percent, though this figure
rapidly started to decline as markets grew beyond Finland and Europe. By
the mid-1990s Finland was already much more dependent on Nokia than
Nokia was on Finland, but Nokia had certainly gained from the rapid devel-
opment of the Finnish market at the beginning of the decade.
   In 1993 we could start to breathe a little easier. By 1994 we knew that in
mobile phones we had found an area that would propel Nokia to the very
top of the world league.
182                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                         CHAPTER 37


               Markets in the West



N     okia had made telephone exchanges back in the 1970s. This was
      an example of the boldness of Finnish engineers. Nokia engineers had
risen to a challenge knowing nothing of its difficulty. Nokia’s competitors in
the great wide world assumed that a little outfit like the Telenokia of those
days wouldn’t get anywhere in designing a telephone exchange.
   Nokia’s engineers saw things differently. They grasped one key fact: old-
style engineering logic, where you did everything yourself, wasn’t suited to
industrial production, let alone global dominance. The thing to do was to
use ready-made components to create something new and valuable. This
concept might have gone against the grain of the way things had been done,
but it was the reason Nokia could make telephone exchanges quicker and
more cheaply than its competitors.
   The first strategic decision was made in 1987, when Nokia realized that
the mobile phone business was bound to grow. Nokia had succeeded in de-
veloping a digital telephone exchange to which it gave the model number
DX 800. It was a profitable line, with the Soviet Union its main market. And
it was a good platform for a digital mobile phone exchange.
   Trade with the Soviet Union ended when the whole Soviet Union dis-
appeared into the fog of history, so Telenokia had to look west. With the
sudden loss of the Soviet market Telenokia had to fight for its existence. In
August 1991 we saw that our Soviet sales were 400 million marks ($128 mil-
lion at 2016 prices), less than budgeted for, but sales to western Europe and
beyond Europe were growing briskly. Telenokia was successful in opening
up new markets, though the collapse of the Soviet Union cost it over a billion
marks ($319 million).
		
 Against All Odds                                                          183


   At the beginning of my time as chief executive we reorganized our mo-
bile telephone network group: Matti Alahuhta was put in charge while Sari
Baldauf took over Cellular Systems, which focused particularly on mobile
phone networks. It helped Nokia that in Finland the mobile phone opera-
tor Radiolinja inaugurated its own GSM network in 1991. A new era had
dawned. So we were ready when markets based on the GSM standard began
to grow in other countries.
   Sari Baldauf (née Niiranen) was born in Kotka, a maritime town in south-
east Finland, but her family soon moved to central Finland. Sari went to
high school in the industrial town of Lahti and graduated from the Helsinki
School of Economics. In the early 1980s Sari went with her then-husband
to work in Abu Dhabi; she joined Nokia in 1983, the year before I did. I
got to know her as soon as I started at the head office. Three years later she
wanted to take on some practical responsibilities for a business unit, and she
was given a real challenge. She started as the first head of the mobile phone
network division in 1988, at the age of thirty-two, when the division’s sales
were 1.5 billion marks ($566 million at 2016 values). In 2004, her final year
as head of the division, its worldwide sales were worth $8.5 billion. Nokia
Cellular Networks is a global growth story almost without compare.
   All of us in Nokia’s core team had different approaches as leaders, and Sari
had the strongest spirit of entrepreneurship of any of us. She was notably in-
dependent, inspiring, and empowering in her role as head of mobile phone
networks. She listened to her customers and understood their concerns. As
chief executive I could trust her to look after her patch. And more. “Life
is a series of projects” was her unofficial motto. One of her more unusual
projects was the sabbatical she took in 1995. “I made fish soup and studied
Roman history,” she commented later. Since she left Nokia Sari has followed
a successful international career in corporate governance.
   In 1992 I knew that our network business would grow and improve its
profitability. All the indications were good, and I trusted Matti Alahuhta
and Sari Baldauf, who were both part of my core team. Later on it was easy
to transfer our success to the theory of business leadership. In his famous
book The Innovator’s Dilemma (1997), the American Clayton M Christensen
described innovations that led to what he termed disruptive competition. The
victims of this were usually large companies that dominated their markets
and had become complacent about themselves and their aging products.
   Major companies that produced telecommunications networks had a
great deal to lose. Siemens, for example, held sway over markets that Nokia
could only dream about. But Nokia decided to concentrate on one narrow
area: telephone networks, which would provide a digital platform for mo-
184                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


bile phones. We chose a narrow area because we wanted to break into the
western market. The choice wasn’t particularly bold or strategic. We made it
because it was the only way we could see of breaking into the markets that
major companies had divided up between them. We played a single card,
which happened to scoop the pool.
   Not everything at Nokia was based just on luck or intuition. Matti Ala-
huhta had written a dissertation on the globalization of technology compa-
nies. A key factor in their success was early entry into important markets,
where changes in consumers’ expectations and in technology were apparent.
Our director of strategy, Mikko Kosonen, had written his dissertation on the
same theme. They both observed that when markets opened and globalized,
companies structured themselves in a new way. Earlier every country had its
own subsidiary that carried out a full range of functions. We understood, in
theory and practice, that the world was changing. We were still not a global
firm, so we could structure our activities differently from the established
companies we were competing against. We didn’t set up a product develop-
ment department or even a manufacturing capacity in every country. We
developed our products where the quality was best. We made them where it
was most efficient to do so.
   Our old Swedish rival Ericsson had done everything differently. The
company had established a top-heavy organization in many countries. This
drove up costs and slowed things down. If every country had its own CEO,
the company would quickly be paralyzed by a combination of self-adminis-
tration and turf battles. Nokia managed to avoid this danger. Ericsson found
itself with 2,000 people in Thailand, but that didn’t stop Nokia winning a key
network contract there, though we had just 20 people there.
   The network business is completely different from selling mobile phones
to consumers. In the whole world there were only a few thousand cus-
tomers for networks, whereas our mobile phone customers soon num-
bered in the millions. In networks the essential thing was to target the key
decision-makers. In different countries these were different sorts of people:
in one country decisions were made for political reasons, while in another
they were based entirely on commercial factors. Nokia had to adapt to both
situations while bearing in mind that our values prohibited us from com-
peting by dishonest or unethical means. If our products, prices, or services
weren’t good enough, we had to accept the customer’s decision. Nokia didn’t
bribe its customers or use political influence.
   In the mid-1990s the mobile phone division ran into problems caused by
rapid growth, and the group’s results were rather weak for a time. Networks,
		
 Against All Odds                                                       185


however, produced consistently good results and were Nokia’s second pillar.
When crisis struck it was networks that kept Nokia alive.
   Nokia’s network and mobile phone divisions functioned completely sepa-
rately. They had separate subsidiaries and even separate locations around
the world. For example, in Brazil they had separate offices in Sao Paulo and
Rio de Janeiro. They also had different cultures, though both did things The
Nokia Way. And they did work together in certain areas, such as customer
orientation and technology.
   The importance of networks is sometimes overlooked in the Nokia story
because the growth of mobile phones was so spectacular. As the new millen-
nium approached networks provided roughly a quarter of Nokia’s income,
while mobile phones accounted for three-quarters.
   I want to emphasize, however, that the story of networks is exceptional
from two standpoints. Throughout Nokia’s history the company has devel-
oped a unique and deep expertise in telecommunications networks. The
company was internationalized in the 1990s on the basis of that world-class
expertise. The story of networks is one of both innovation and internation-
alization. Thanks are due to Sari Baldauf, Matti Alahuhta, and their teams.
186                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                          CHAPTER 38


              Sums on Scrap Paper



B    y the beginning of 1993 I knew that Nokia would survive. All of us
     at Nokia had already come a long way together, and at last we started
to feel solid ground beneath our feet. Although the profits for 1992 had not
been very large, we were at least in the black – Nokia was a profitable com-
pany once more. In the spring I saw that our profits were clearly on an up-
ward curve. I took the risk of saying so in the foreword to our annual report.
Our profits for 1993 eventually turned out to be more than four times those
of the previous year. Mobile phones and telecommunications networks
showed a doubling of profits. Cables too showed the most profitable year
in the company’s history. In percentage terms, the leap in our profits – from
$89 million in 1992 (in 2016 money) to $446 million in 1993 – was the great-
est ever: growth of over 500 percent. Five years later our profits would be
ten times greater than in 1993, but the annual growth figures were smaller.
  Nevertheless I still had a lot to worry about – I feared that Nokia might be-
come a target for a hostile takeover. We had quietly built up the profitability
of our mobile phones and telecommunications networks. The press wasn’t
particularly interested in us because, to put it bluntly, we weren’t expected
to succeed. But we understood our position and we believed in our future.
In any case, any company whose profits grow five times over in a single year
may become a target for a takeover, as long as its shares are undervalued.
  In 1993 Nokia began to transform itself into an international company,
both economically and psychologically. Finland had protected its own in-
dustries by placing restrictions on foreign share ownership, but at the begin-
ning of 1993 these restrictions were swept away. Ownership of Nokia began
		
 Against All Odds                                                            187


to shift from Finnish banks, insurance companies, and other institutions
into American hands.
   We made two issues of shares to international investors in 1993 and 1994,
because we wanted an international ownership base. It gave us the opportu-
nity to raise new capital for our investments. We didn’t want to take on debt,
but rather to finance our investments with our own cash flow or capital. The
share issues brought us fresh capital of 3.5 billion marks ($1 billion at 2016
values).
   Successful conglomerates do exist. The world’s biggest company, General
Electric, does well from one year to the next. In Europe the only feature
many of Siemens’ activities had in common was the name they bore. Con-
glomerates often have a gentle time during turbulent periods because their
different areas of activity don’t all rise or fall in unison.
   But neither the Siemens model nor the General Electric model were the
Nokia model. Nokia had become a conglomerate by chance, and many of
its sectors were too small to be viable on a global scale. In many of its tradi-
tional areas the markets had already been divided up among larger players,
or they were threatened by new and even bigger competitors from the Far
East who offered lower prices. Nokia couldn’t afford to compete in every
area where we were active. We had to focus product development where the
prospects for growth looked best. We needed to choose those areas of tech-
nology where we could set the global standard.
   I respect conglomerates. They work especially well when they have good
cash reserves behind them. But if a technology company focuses very clearly
on one or two areas, it’s much better placed to challenge the established play-
ers than a conglomerate could ever be. A highly focused company doesn’t
carry passengers: it doesn’t have an indulgent parent in another part of the
company who will cover up and pay the bills for its mistakes. Everyone must
try their very best in a company that has decided to focus on its greatest
strength and to succeed in its chosen market. In general, life is more exciting
in a company that’s concentrating on one area.
   Conglomerates and closely focused companies call for very different lead-
ership styles. The chief executive of a conglomerate can concentrate on run-
ning his or her company as if it were a portfolio of investments. The compa-
ny’s head office has investments in various industries, and it tries to nurture,
cultivate, and develop these investments, and to sell them when the time
comes. The chair must be neutral; if he favors one sector it will look as if he’s
neglecting others. The company’s managers will feel that its resources aren’t
being shared evenly, and the best of them will leave for companies that look
188                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


after their own areas of expertise better than the conglomerate does. The
best people thrive in those companies that know exactly what they’re doing,
companies where they’re allowed to concentrate on what they do best. It’s
the responsibility of a good company to give them the opportunities to do
that.
    In a company that’s focused on particular sectors and products, the chief
executive needs to know what the company is doing and why. He doesn’t
have the time to lead a finance company or develop a leadership culture. He
must know the basic facts about the company’s products, the technologies
they use, and how and why they’re marketed as they are. Professor Clayton
M. Christensen believes that many major companies are led by their cus-
tomers, not their executives. He’s right, and the only chief executive who can
discuss things with the customers is one who understands what his or her
company does. On the other hand, the head of a conglomerate will be hard
put to understand everything the company produces, how it works, and how
it’s marketed. Technological development, global competition, and evolving
markets ensure that chief executives have their work cut out to remain mas-
ters of just one sector.
    So I support specialization. It has suited Nokia well and fits my own style
of leadership. The decision in the 1990s ultimately to focus on two areas –
mobile phones and mobile phone networks – was one for which I was largely
responsible. But the path we followed in turning Nokia from a conglomerate
into a specialized technology company wasn’t logical, easy, or short.
    In 1993 I sat once more with Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo pondering the compa-
ny’s future. In these meetings we spoke of big things and small things alike.
We considered Nokia’s strategy, its investors, and also little practical matters.
I came up with what I thought was a good idea. I asked Olli-Pekka what the
value of our various sectors was. If Nokia’s value on the stock exchange – the
total market value of its shares – were distributed across the various sectors,
what would their value be?
    Olli-Pekka couldn’t answer that straight away, but he promised to work it
out.
    We came back to the matter a couple of weeks later. Once again we sat in
my office while Olli-Pekka went through some calculations he had done in
pencil on some scrap paper. He concluded that our mobile phone and net-
work businesses had a positive value. The cable business was slightly posi-
tive, while consumer electronics was negative to roughly the same degree.
We stared at the figures for a moment and pondered what they signified.
They meant that Nokia was worth what its mobile phones and networks
		
 Against All Odds                                                          189


were worth. Everything else – that is, consumer electronics and cables –
should be sold off. But this should be done in such a way that the company
could be sure of its ability to generate an income in the short term. The com-
pany’s value in the eyes of investors is often a rather different matter from
the company’s ability to generate revenue over the next few months or years.
   I took Olli-Pekka’s piece of paper. I kept it in my leather briefcase, where
it was with me for at least two years. It became an important reminder of
what Nokia had to do. It was on the basis of those calculations that we finally
decided where Nokia’s future should lie. But such decisions were not made
during the course of my conversations with Olli-Pekka. The next step was to
speak to the board’s executive committee, on which the chairman, Casimir
Ehrnrooth, and his deputy, Yrjö Niskanen, also sat. “The rationale sounds
good. But the board needs to consider whether Nokia is preparing too big a
bang. . . . Perhaps we need a third opinion.”
   We decided that the consulting firm McKinsey should conduct an inde-
pendent examination of Nokia’s options, a strategic appraisal of whether
our plans to focus solely on mobile phones and networks were overly bold.
Their study would be ready for the board’s strategy meeting in Hong Kong
in May 1994. The consultants decided to support our recommendations. We
estimated that Nokia could have a 25 percent global market share in 2000,
compared with 20 percent in 1994. McKinsey’s comment on this was simply
“good luck.” Our market share in 2000 turned out to be 32 percent.
   We also set out our own vision of Nokia’s future. We said that we believed
in organic growth in mobile phones and mobile phone networks. We also
proposed that after 1995 our strategy should find a way of exploiting our
home electronics expertise in multimedia products, even though the growth
strategy demanded withdrawal from the actual production of consumer
electronics and cables.
   Once the strategic direction was clear we got down to work. Our cable
business was sold to international investors in 1995–96. Nokia Tyres, which
was very successful, was launched on the Helsinki Stock Exchange in 1995,
though Nokia kept hold of some shares, which it sold in 2003. In October
1993 the board agreed that the chief objective should be to sell the whole of
our consumer electronics business, but the operations needed to be restruc-
tured before we had any hope of selling it. In March 2004 the decision was
made to close the cathode ray tube factory at Esslingen. Our position was
starting to look a little brighter, because our success with mobile phones and
telecoms had strengthened our balance sheet to the point where it could
bear the costs associated with getting out of televisions.
190                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   At the board meeting in June 1994 we set out a future for Nokia right up
to 2001. We estimated that the new strategy could achieve a profit of $819
million in 2001, when our revenue would be $10.6 billion. The figures show
how none of us could imagine the developments of the next few years. We
didn’t know, nor did anyone else, how Nokia was about to find itself at the
very eye of a tornado. In 2000 our profits were $5.9 billion, and our revenue
$31.1 billion. The figures show how I at least was not very good at forecast-
ing the growth prospects for mobile phones back in 1994. All Nokia’s direc-
tors had learned their lessons, however – none of us wanted to promise more
than we could be sure of delivering. In Finnish style our estimates were more
cautious than those of our competitors. Sometimes, during the years of ex-
plosive growth, that left investors and investment analysts bemused.
   The tornado had already started to form in the mobile phone sector. It
would pluck Nokia from the ground and lift it to dazzling heights. Later it
would dash the company back down again, when the company would feel as
if it were breaking up on re-entry. Exciting times were in store for us; excit-
ing times that no one could imagine in Hong Kong in 1994.
   My idea that we should concentrate on what we did best and what we most
believed in was now signed and sealed. In this sense Nokia’s fate was settled
in Hong Kong in 1994 for the coming years and indeed decades. I felt that I
bore the responsibility, but my joy was boundless. Now Nokia was becoming
the sort of company that I believed in and that I wanted to lead. But Nokia
was still very much in a growth phase and still had growing pains to endure.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          191




                          CHAPTER 39


      Turning Off the Televisions



W       e were feverishly trying to find a way to extract ourselves from
        consumer electronics. I had given my trusted friend Per Karlsson the
task of finding a possible partner and an escape route. Per met many people,
heard what investment bankers had to say, and reported it back to me. But
not even he was a wizard or the master of the universe – he couldn’t find a
quick way out. Ultimately Hannu Bergholm was let go as head of consumer
electronics, and all responsibility passed on to Tapio Hintikka. This wasn’t
an easy decision, because Hannu had done all he could to make a go of the
television business. He had been a respected chief controller before his cur-
rent job, but not even he was up to the impossible task of making a go of
consumer electronics.
   Tapio’s job was to sell, to end Nokia’s involvement, and to tie up the loose
ends. He opened discussions with every conceivable television manufac-
turer. We spoke to Philips, Grundig, Sharp, Samsung, and Daewoo. I really
can’t remember now how many television manufacturers we tried to make
a deal with. Week by week, month by month, the situation seemed ever less
hopeful.
   In the autumn of 1995 Tapio got to know Nobuyuki Idei, the chairman of
Sony. The two men had discussed a possible partnership between Sony and
Nokia. Sony’s joint venture with Siemens had failed, and the company was
looking for a new European partner. Tapio set up a meeting in Japan at the
end of January 1996. Our director who covered trade policy, Veli Sundbäck,
came with us. We met the Sony team at two o’clock and we continued the
discussions over a Japanese dinner table.
192                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   Everything flowed very politely. Idei proposed that collaboration should
go wider than the sale of our consumer electronics division to Sony. He was
seeking a new pattern of cooperation, to include mobile phones as well as
televisions. This would have brought a new brand into being: Sony-Nokia.
The Japanese presumably realized that January 1996 wasn’t our finest hour
in any sphere of activity, since our mobile phone division was in the middle
of a logistical crisis. Sony saw a chance to grab a slice of our success with
mobile phones. My polite reply to Mr. Idei was an unconditional refusal of
his offer. Mobile phones were not up for discussion. Nokia would stand or
fall on the strength of its own brand.
   We had spent many months preparing for cooperation with Sony. We set
up working groups and held serious discussions. European television manu-
facturers chiefly wanted to ensure that we would fail, whatever we did, since
they wanted to reduce television production capacity in Europe. It suited
them for Nokia to do the dirty work and close its factories and let them have
its brand names. They weren’t interested in continuing production because
there were too many televisions chasing too few customers. For its part Sony
was seeking a strategic partner, but I wasn’t interested in that. Idei looked
disappointed, but he remained polite. Years later Sony used the same tactics
with more success, though the pseudo-Japanese Sony Ericsson that resulted
never became a major player in the global mobile phone market.
   Our negotiations with Sony didn’t help us solve our problems with televi-
sion production. Tapio Hintikka continued work and met nearly every one
of the world’s television makers. He went to South Korea, Turkey, Taiwan,
Japan, and many European countries. He returned empty-handed from ev-
ery trip: we were still stuck with those money-losing factories. Finally we
decided that we had to do something different. We had to announce our
intentions. Unless we told the world we were closing our factories we would
never find the partners we were looking for. In our position that was the only
thing we could do.
   In November Tapio went to Bochum in Germany to announce our deci-
sion to close the factory there. He had been warned there would be a large-
scale demonstration, and he tried to avoid this by arranging an early flight.
But the flight was delayed, and he came face-to-face with a couple of thou-
sand angry workers. He was warned that he needed to make a convincing
presentation to make the German trade unions understand how serious
things were, but the gruff and taciturn Tapio wasn’t a man for presentations.
He stood in front of his audience and spoke in clear and simple Finnish for
about a quarter of an hour. There wasn’t a single protest or a single aggressive
question. He had achieved what he set out to do.
		
 Against All Odds                                                       193


   When news spread of the closure at Bochum, a possible purchaser ap-
peared. The Hong Kong-owned Semi-Tech wanted to lift our burdens from
us. Negotiations began, facilitated by an agent from New York. We wanted
Semi-Tech to take over our production lines in Germany, and we wanted the
deal to include our long-established television factory at Turku in Finland.
Semi-Tech wanted to transfer production to China.
   Semi-Tech was the creation of a Mr. Ting. James Henry Ting Wei had
founded the company in Canada at the beginning of the 1980s. The com-
pany’s methods were pretty crude: it acquired established trademarks and
then produced the goods bearing those names wherever it was cheapest.
Semi-Tech didn’t bother to develop its own products but instead sucked a
stream of cash from its acquisitions as efficiently as possible. The company
had already taken over the famous Singer sewing machine brand name, for
example.
   After we checked out Mr. Ting, we pressed on with the negotiations. They
were tense. We had to give cash to cover the losses of the Turku factory in
Finland. We also had to surrender our production capacity and our trade-
marks. It was a strange deal: we were selling something, but the net result
was a loss of around 600 million marks ($181 million in 2016 prices). It
wasn’t an especially smart deal, but we didn’t have any other options. We
wanted to give up television production once and for all.
   The negotiations went on through the spring and into the summer of
1996. At the beginning of July Tapio Hintikka, who was on his boat, re-
ceived a forty-five-page fax concerning preliminary negotiations. Hintikka
marveled at the development of communications technology, because the
fax had arrived wirelessly.
   The concluding negotiations with Semi-Tech began on 12 July 1996. They
lasted nearly five days. At around five in the morning on 17 July we had
thrashed out an agreement acceptable to both sides. In those final early
morning hours the negotiators were at their limits of endurance. One young
Dutch lawyer dramatically passed out at the table. In any event, we con-
cluded a chapter in Nokia’s history.
   At the next meeting of the board I offered special thanks to Tapio Hin-
tikka, who had fought hard until the very last moment of the negotiations.
Having sold practically everything Nokia had to sell, he moved that autumn
to become chief executive of Hackman, a prominent kitchenware company.
He will best be remembered as the chairman of Sonera and later TeliaSonera.
   Semi-Tech and Mr. Ting had permission to use the Nokia name on their
products until 1999. With minor restrictions they also used the Luxor, Salo-
ra, Finlux, Schaub-Lorenz, Oceanic, and Guestlink trademarks. Many Finns
194                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


had one of those brands of television. Semi-Tech twice asked for an exten-
sion in the use of the Nokia name, but I didn’t agree to that. It would be bad
enough to come across adverts for Nokia when I turned on the television
in hotels over the next three years; I didn’t want it to go on after that. Our
marketing people were trying with some success to make Nokia a globally
recognized name in mobile phones and mobile communications, and we
didn’t want the public to be confused by other product ranges bearing the
Nokia name. Later things went wrong for Semi-Tech – the company went
bankrupt and Mr. Ting must have lost his money. But that wasn’t our prob-
lem anymore. We had lost quite enough of our own money already: over
seven billion marks of it, over the years, or $2.2 billion at 2016 prices.
   I had promised investors the previous autumn that television production
would no longer be a problem in 1996. I had kept this promise and I was
proud of it. Perhaps we should have made the tough decisions earlier. Still,
it was right to give the people who ran the division the chance to make it
work, even if it were up for sale. The situation had been difficult since we
had conflicting aims, and this causes stress. I was greatly relieved when this
unhealthy phase ended. But I often asked myself if I could have done some-
thing quicker or better.
   It wasn’t just the money. Our adventure with televisions had wasted a huge
amount of time, skill, and nervous energy among our top management, our
planning staff, our experts, and our employees. If that energy could have
been directed toward more productive areas, Nokia could have done even
better. I can’t blame the people who had decided to make Nokia one of Eu-
rope’s largest producers of televisions, but I wish they’d had the pleasure of
seeing the trap they’d set for the generation of managers who succeeded
them.
		
 Against All Odds                                                        195




                         CHAPTER 40


                            The Five
                 A Different Way to Lead




N      okia’s new senior management and management methods took
       shape only gradually. At the end of 1994 we had assembled a manage-
ment team with much more in common than a shared workplace. We shared
our value system, our intuitions, our vision of the company’s future, and an
exceptional commitment to making that vision a reality.
  This leadership model was unusual, perhaps unique. At the core were five
individuals, though in all there were around a dozen people in the senior
management team. But in terms of leadership there were five key people –
The Five – who drove the company forward, with little in the way of formal
structures but much in the way of trust and information sharing.
  I had met Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo in my first few weeks at Nokia back in
1985. Among his strengths were his feel for legal and financial issues and
a solid understanding of commercial law. Olli-Pekka always had the com-
pany’s interests uppermost in his mind, and he looked continually for ways
of developing synergies between networks and mobile phones. He had a
greater tendency toward pessimism than the others and thus often had the
least to say.
  Sari Baldauf was also known to me from my time at the head office in
the 1980s. She had been the first head of mobile phone networks. Sari had
a business education, a gentle approach to management, and an extraordi-
nary ability to inspire people. She was close to the mobile network operating
companies, and the customers’ needs were her bread and butter.
  Matti Alahuhta became head of the telecommunications group in 1993.
Matti was a representative of Finland’s strong engineering heritage and the
196                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


only one in our group who was really academically oriented. His disserta-
tion had been on the growth dynamics of small engineering firms. He was
our technology whiz who systematically assessed technical trends in both
networks and phones.
   Pekka Ala-Pietilä had begun at Nokia Data in the 1980s working on com-
puter software. I met him for the first time at the mobile phone division in
Salo in the 1990s, which he later managed. Pekka brought the consumer’s
voice to our discussions because he had internalized mobile phone users’
everyday reactions to our products and operations.
   Without clear planning or a single deliberate decision our group ran Nokia
from 1994 to 2004. All five of us had a similar background: we were all Finns
who had grown up in the provinces, studied in Helsinki, and come to work
at Nokia. More significant, however, were the differences between us in the
ways we approached issues, both theoretically and practically. Our group
had immense cognitive diversity. This really showed when we had problems
to solve. As chief executive I usually found it anything but easy to find an
agreed line. The disputes, however, demonstrated creativity and forced us to
consider all sides of a question.
   Why five of us? Why not four or seven? It may have been a question of
chance – The Five were there and that was that. But later I came across a
study by an American psychologist; one of its conclusions was that the opti-
mal size for a group was 4.7. Chance, then, sure enough.
   The Five wasn’t a sort of military junta that had usurped legitimate pow-
er within the company. An executive committee of about a dozen people
scrutinized all important matters on a monthly basis. I don’t remember ever
deviating from the correct procedures. We took great care over major deci-
sions and they were only implemented with the approval of the board. But
before that stage was reached The Five would have done the basic planning
and discussion. Usually a few phone calls were enough to shape the issue
to the point where it could be decided. Because the group was completely
open-form, proper meetings were very rare.
   Only when we needed a closer examination, such as a question of a new
strategic policy or a change in the company’s procedures, did we all gather
around the table. This would typically happen on Sunday evening or at seven
o’clock on a weekday morning – these were the only times our diaries would
allow. We would usually meet in my conference room, but sometimes we
would retreat to Båtvik, to the Nokia villa outside Helsinki. We never made
a transcript or formal record of these or other meetings. I often had one-on-
one meetings with the other members of The Five as well.
		
 Against All Odds                                                            197


   The famous Dream Team represented the United States in basketball at
the Barcelona Olympics in 1992. Professional players from the NBA were
part of the team for the first time, which meant that the team was over-
whelming on the basketball court. The media started to call the Nokia Five
the Dream Team too – though, with the exception of Anssi Vanjoki, there
wasn’t much interest in basketball at Nokia. And within the company we
certainly didn’t talk of the Dream Team, though the phrase took on a life of
its own in the wider world, having as many different meanings as there were
people who used it.
   How was it possible for such an extraordinary group and management
style to come about? There were a number of factors. The most important
was our common conception of the direction Nokia should take and how
high it was possible for us to rise. This had been formed over the course of
the years through experience. It meant a shared vision of the way the com-
pany should be led and the organization built up.
   Behind everything was our shared value system. This meant loyalty to and
trust in what was best for the company. Our practical methods included an
intellectual honesty, a willingness to take responsibility, an ability to listen,
and a refusal to play office politics. We tried to avoid decisions that merely
papered over the cracks. We allowed contradictions to flourish, since this
was healthier than an artificial unanimity. A good example was the ongo-
ing tension between the network and phone divisions. We let this continue
unresolved, unlike our competitors who all came down in favor of one or
the other. This approach led to a real collegiality – anyone could challenge
anybody in an argument over facts, but arguments about authority were not
allowed to see the light of day.
   Value leadership was the basis of Nokia’s procedures. It may have helped
that when we started we weren’t particularly close. None of us had been
close friends before The Five got together. Our mutual regard was based on
the knowledge that we each cared for the company in the same way, and that
we cared for people in the company even more, above almost anything else.
This created such a strong commitment to our shared project that it’s not
easy to find a comparison. Our daily work was characterized by communi-
cation and openness – crucial issues were shared between us. So problems
didn’t become surprises, because everyone was working on the basis of the
same information. In this way we maintained trust despite the long absences
forced on us by the need to spend time travelling.
   Over the years we developed a silent, internalized trust. On this basis we
could take risks and make rapid decisions, acting in the company’s name
198                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


without formal processes and rituals of rubber-stamping. Factories weren’t
built without proper approval, but individual members of The Five were able
to make big but routine decisions independently. We weren’t in the habit of
querying decisions retrospectively, either. Everyone understood that if Sari,
Pekka, Matti, or Olli-Pekka had made a decision, it must have been on a
sound basis with the company’s best interests clearly in mind. One can see
this growing trust as a form of human capital, which in Nokia grew by ex-
ample.
   One might describe Nokia’s leadership over these ten years as a free-form
model typical of businesses in their growth phase. Aside from the official
hierarchy one can discern four levels: the chief executive, The Five, the ex-
ecutive committee, and two hundred key individuals. The four levels were
nested, and they communicated intensively the whole time.
   The two hundred or so key individuals were the group through which rou-
tine operations were managed on a global scale. As chief executive I found
that I could speak directly to them, and so did the other members of The
Five. In the 1990s it was still usual to call, since email wasn’t yet in general
use. Bearing in mind Nokia’s area of activity, the phone was indeed a pretty
good way of exchanging thoughts. The other members of The Five didn’t
mind when I got in touch directly with their subordinates. It was part of
Nokia’s culture for its chief executive to speak to those who knew most about
an issue. This was central to the way I worked and ensured a rapid response.
   Our management team worked together for an exceptionally long time,
over ten years. Such a long period is unusual in a major global company
because the pressures are unrelenting and the physical strains severe. At the
same time one must try to be an inspiring leader to one’s own staff. I believe
there were a number of factors behind our especially long tenure. Top of the
list is naturally the rapid change and break with the past and the excitement
it brought – we were living in extraordinary times. Every one of us was faced
with some very difficult issues, and resolving them only increased our confi-
dence in each other. Our productivity brought great personal satisfaction to
us all and added to our motivation.
   Another factor is certainly to be found in the rotation of responsibilities
that every one of the group experienced during those ten years. Matti Ala-
huhta was at first responsible for networks and later for mobile phones. After
running the mobile phone unit Pekka Ala-Pietilä took over new business
activities and strategy. As well as her responsibilities for mobile networks
Sari Baldauf spent two years on Nokia’s business operations in Asia. The
rotation allowed us to examine matters from new perspectives and helped
us maintain the group’s dynamism and creativity.
		
 Against All Odds                                                           199


   There was another reason for The Five’s practical creativity. Because our
values were so closely aligned we had an exceptional ability to work together
– dynamic teamwork at its finest. In particular I mean the way in which
expressions of feelings and sheer passion powered our discussions. Personal
weaknesses and strengths are present in every group working intensively
together. We knew this and tried to channel them for the company’s benefit.
   This was a group in which personal concern for each other was exception-
ally strong. If you were exhausted you got support and were encouraged to
take a break. Losing your temper and other human weaknesses were under-
stood. I have often characterized Nokia as a total experience that was more
than a place to work – it was an emotional journey. In part this comes from
the positive experience that The Five shared.
   All good things come to end. It was natural that at the start of the 2000s we
had to face different pressures. Between 1998 and 2001 our workforce grew
by around 40,000 people to 60,000. This in itself brought about pressure for
change – a growing global organization calls for a more formal mode of
leadership. Nokia’s approach to leadership was refreshed through the early
2000s.
   But time did its work and certainly the whole concept and its allure be-
gan to fade. No free-form structure – if that isn’t a contradiction in terms
– can last forever. It’s always a child of its time. Perhaps the announcement
of my departure from Nokia, made well in advance of that event, caused a
degree of restlessness and allowed little shortcuts in the way things were
done. These were few, however, and in 2004 a handful of critical problems
were taken care of in the usual way in an exceptional spirit.
   One may ask whether The Five model could be adopted elsewhere. Yes
and no, is my answer. The basic principles of our leadership method – trust,
openness, and so on – are suited to any organization and thus can be rec-
ommended for adaptation. On the other hand The Five’s personal working
methods can’t simply be copied. This way of working is clearly best suited
to a fast-growing company where a nimble and responsive entrepreneur-
ial approach is needed. The ability to make rapid decisions brought Nokia
competitive advantages. The more mature the business environment and the
larger the company, the less appropriate our free-form model would be.
200                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                          CHAPTER 41


                The Nokia Miracle?



I  n June 1994 Finland’s equivalent of Newsweek published a cover
   story headlined “The Miracle of Nokia.” This stated that Nokia had “re-
tired from public life” in 1992 to put its affairs in order. Now the company
was ready to conquer the world. The cover told its readers that “Jorma Ollila
has turned the company’s death spiral to an energetic ascent.” The magazine
also explained that 43 percent of Nokia was now in foreign ownership and
that this figure would rise: the company was just being listed on the New
York Stock Exchange.
   The headline shows how little had been expected of Nokia in 1992–94.
The mere fact that we had survived and grown was in itself cause for wonder,
at least to outsiders. It goes against the grain for me to use the word miracle,
though we certainly enjoyed a run of luck, which we desperately needed. But
it was more than luck – we owed our survival to hard work, careful planning,
personal enthusiasm, and concentration on the essentials. We had had to
make sacrifices to focus on the things we did best.
   I am a strong believer in the views of American professor Jim Collins on
how a company should set its strategy. It must identify three key areas: what
the company is best in the world at; what it’s passionate about; and what
it can do to have the greatest economic impact – in other words, how it
can produce the greatest profits. The optimal results will emerge from the
point where these three criteria intersect. That was just how Nokia worked
in 1994–95, though Collins’ excellent theory had yet to be published.
   Our listing on the New York Stock Exchange in July 1994 increased Nokia’s
visibility. It also forced the company to improve its messaging to investors
		
 Against All Odds                                                          201


as we quickly acquired new and demanding shareholders, especially in the
United States. We began to report our results quarterly rather than three
times a year, which was the Finnish practice. We began to hold conference
calls with our investors whenever we published our quarterly or annual re-
sults. We reported the results for each business division separately.
   The New York Stock Exchange became the measure whereby our perfor-
mance in global markets was assessed mercilessly, every second of every day.
The listing also had an impact on Nokia’s internal workings. It became easier
for me to demand results from my employees because I could use the inves-
tors’ reactions both as a carrot and a stick. Investors and investment analysts
responded rapidly to both our successes and our mistakes. Our share price
and Nokia’s market value became the key measure of our success.
   At the same time we became far less a Finnish company. The share of
foreign ownership grew from 43 percent in 1994 to 70 percent in 1997. It’s
worth noting that at that time Nokia had two series of shares. The K-shares
had greater voting strength, and foreign investors owned just 16 percent of
them in 1997, so domestic shareholders still had the decisive voting power.
The two series were combined in 1999. Thus Nokia became an internation-
ally owned company. Finnish banks, which in the 1980s had held sovereign
power at Nokia, were in the forefront of those who scaled back their hold-
ings of our shares. Those Finnish investors who had shown faith in Nokia
and hung on to their shares through the early 1990s saw their value grow
tenfold by 1994. But that was only the beginning.
   Although the Nokia “miracle” was already a reality back in 1994, we still
hadn’t conquered the world. Indeed, the world didn’t know who we were. In
challenging Motorola or Siemens we enjoyed the benefits of anonymity. In
the United States Motorola was still seen as the home team, and the media
often acted as its cheerleaders. For example, Fortune magazine extolled it as
“the world’s best-run company” in its April 1994 issue. The magazine said
it was hard to find a runner-up to compare to the genius of Motorola. In
the article experts and Motorola’s top managers extolled Motorola’s com-
pany culture, its use of technology, and its new ventures such as the Iridium
satellite phone. It forecast that by 2013 Motorola would have grown into a
giant with a revenue of $270 billion a year. The article concluded that there
was only one serpent in this Eden: Motorola could fail if it became over-
confident.
   Fortune magazine’s rosiest dreams of Motorola’s future weren’t realized.
Nokia overtook Motorola’s share of the mobile phone market in 1998. The
Iridium project was buried after immense losses. The biggest company in
202                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


its field is usually the least agile and can’t react quickly enough to new tech-
nology or to the opening of new markets. The battle is endless, and every
company and every chief executive have to determine the opportunities for
growth and renewal for themselves. It’s extremely difficult.
   The year 1994 was a wonderful time for Nokia. Our future was becoming
clearer, and our growth was at record levels. We were a nimble opponent
who could land our blows without difficulty because the bigger players had
hardly begun to notice that we were encroaching on their markets. And we
were also developing new markets that were entirely our own. Finland’s sig-
nificance as a market was diminishing steadily. In 1994 it accounted for only
11 percent of our revenue. Europe’s share was 59 percent, North America’s
13 percent and Asia’s 12 percent. The European share would continue to re-
main high while our North American and Asian sales grew strongly.
   By 1994 it seemed to me that, little by little, we had also succeeded in
transforming Nokia’s mindset. Senior managers – all of us – had champi-
oned our values, held frequent discussions with our employees, and carried
on dialogues about how Nokia should develop. We knew what we were do-
ing. For 1994 I had chosen the theme “Excellence in Execution.” After our
discussion of values it was time to develop our practical side. We needed to
put our decisions into effect, and we had to develop better structures to sup-
port all our processes.
   Every leader knows that rapid growth brings dangers. If we grew too fast
we would lose control and be unable to plan our activities as thoroughly and
effectively as we needed to. But there were few critical voices to be heard.
The black years, with all their worries about our survival and their obsessive
but essential cost-cutting, were at last behind us. We had won that contest.
Even the bankers on whose doors we had knocked with trepidation a couple
of years earlier now came knocking on our door instead. For some reason
they now wanted to offer us money, whereas just a short time before we had
represented a significant risk. For me, a former banker, that felt especially
good.
		
 Against All Odds                                                        203




                         CHAPTER 42


            An Unforgettable Year



I  n 1994 we enjoyed the fruits of great success for the first time. The
   markets for mobile phones were booming, our profitability had improved,
and our production was growing at over 100 percent a year.
  Like the rest of Nokia’s top management I had no experience of great suc-
cess. We knew what hard times were, although we had had times of opti-
mism and growth, too. We had lived through periods when it seemed that
our company could never become as big and strong as competitors such
as Motorola and Ericsson. We had also had some dreadful days when we
thought everything would collapse, and all the risks taken on by the previ-
ous generation of managers would come crashing down on our heads. And
we had known moments of jubilation when everything we did had come
together, when the Nokia spirit and the Nokia team were at their very best.
  We didn’t know how Nokia would operate as a global company in what
was probably the fastest growing area of the century. No one knew anything
about that. Even so Nokia became a global company in just two years, 1994
and 1995. It had to be transformed; we knew that because in the mid-1990s
we had driven at full speed into a brick wall.
  On 16 June 1995 Nokia published its results for the first quarter. Things
had gone as well as could have been predicted on the basis of the previous
year. First quarter profits had grown from 970 million markka in 1994 ($298
million at 2016 prices) to 1.8 billion markka in 1995 ($548 million). Invest-
ment analysts had predicted a figure of 1.5 billion markka ($456 million).
Naturally our share price shot up even before Finland’s summer reached its
greatest glory. I was taking my summer holiday in my usual way, travelling
204                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


to meet our customers in Tokyo, Hong Kong, and Kuala Lumpur. I was back
in the office for a week in July.
   I took some more holiday at the end of the month. I wanted to spend
my short break in peace at our summer cottage in the forest at Orivesi. We
fished, had barbecues, and met our friends – as all Finns do. It seemed to me
that that summer I really deserved it. Most things in the company were on
the right track. I was still troubled by the need to resolve the problems with
consumer electronics, but I knew we could find a way out of our difficult
situation.
   In Finland 1995 was a year of change as well. The after-effects of the eco-
nomic crisis the country had suffered in the early 1990s were still working
through the system. At the beginning of the year the country had joined
the European Union, which would have been unthinkable even five years
earlier when the Soviet Union still existed. That made us part of the Euro-
pean Single Market and more open to foreign investment. The fresh winds
of competition blew into every corner of Finland.
   Companies had to adapt or die: the two biggest banks, formerly deadly
enemies, now merged to form a single bank, which before long became part
of the pan-Nordic Nordea. It also gave a further push to changes already un-
derway in Finnish society. The small farms of my childhood were becoming
a thing of the past, while urbanization grew rapidly.
   Elsewhere the peoples of the former Yugoslavia were bloodily fighting
each other. News of ethnic cleansing started to reach every home from a
country that had been part of old Europe. Suddenly war was again at the
heart of the continent. In the Caucasus, Russia was razing Chechnya to the
ground. In the Middle East it was a relatively peaceful year – at least until
November when Yitzak Rabin was assassinated in the middle of Tel Aviv.
That began a new cycle of violence.
   Also there was talk of the Internet, which would revolutionize the way
business was done. As yet it hardly touched most people’s lives. But scientists
and researchers, businesses and officials were finding uses for this network
that seemed to be joining up large numbers of computers to chat together.
It seemed revolutionary, and Nokia too had to consider its possible uses.
Sadly, not even Nokia’s imagination was up to forecasting the full impact of
the Internet. Besides, we had our hands full manufacturing all those mobile
phones that the world wished to buy. Everyone wanted to talk to each other,
and soon they would want to send text messages as well.
   In 1995 the world was exciting, risky, changing, and also full of new op-
portunities we hoped Nokia could exploit. Now the company just had to
		
 Against All Odds                                                            205




In November 1995, I traveled to Johannesburg , where I met Nelson Mandela,
who gladly listened to business leaders.

grow out of its homespun Finnish garb and don the garments of global suc-
cess. That gave us plenty to think about and do.
  These ideas were certainly revolving in my head as I lounged beside the
lake at Orivesi. That summer was exceptionally warm. We left the cottage
only for a trip to the opera in the medieval castle at Savonlinna.
  I returned to work on the last day of July. Summer ends abruptly in Fin-
land, and by the end of July you can sense that autumn is on its way. August
may be warm, and its evenings fine; but already it’s autumn. And when au-
tumn comes, companies sharpen up. Before the holidays everything seems
to be sweetness and light, but things change over the summer. Sales may
have fallen. Marketing may have soaked up too much money. Products may
have failed to find customers. Perhaps plans haven’t been completed in time.
The moment of truth always dawns in August. Then there’s still time to make
things better, enough time before the end of the year to put many things
straight. But if a complete collapse is on the way August is already too late
to avoid it.
  Different types of business run according to different timetables. At Nokia
we had learned that November was the decisive month, when the mobile
network operating companies and the retail outlets stocked their shelves for
Christmas. If there weren’t enough phones to meet demand in November,
or if we didn’t have orders for those we had produced, the game was up.
206                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


Ultimately the outcome for the whole year depended on sales at Christmas,
especially in developed markets. That was why in August the right sorts of
phones needed to be ready.
   Nokia had a top-quality product ready for the market. Its catalog number
was 2110. It had a large screen, bigger than any of our earlier mobile phones.
It was completely digital. It had many new functions. There was also some-
thing quite new about its design: our new phone was a real beauty, created
by our chief designer, Frank Nuovo.
   The design was completely different from anything we were used to. Some
of its more striking features – its organic, rounded shape and the strong dark
band around the screen – made us hesitate.
   When Nuovo first showed the phone to Pekka Ala-Pietilä, Pekka had to
think long and hard whether such a radical and innovative model would
really sell.
   “Are you sure?” Pekka asked Frank.
   “Damn sure,” replied Frank. And so the decision was made.
   We desperately needed a successful new product, for we had spent the
whole of the early 1990s living off the old 101 model and its descendants.
This phone that Pertti Korhonen and his team had designed had been a
global success. In 1995 we were still selling about 4.5 million of them a year,
42 percent of our total sales of mobile phones. But it was more than three
years since this phone had begun to conquer the markets, and now we really
needed a new model to open a new chapter in the Nokia story, which was
progressing so well.
   The more we tested the new model, the surer we were that it would be a
success. “These are bloody fantastic. We’ll sell more of them than we can
count, beyond our wildest dreams,” said Anssi Vanjoki in his typical way. So
I had good reasons to relax in August 1995. The world’s mobile phone mar-
kets were growing fast, and this new model was our response to that. All in
all the year seemed to be proceeding in line with the positive forecasts I had
made in June, when I presented the results from the first reporting period to
international investors and the media.
   On my first day back from holiday I watched the television news. The
main economic story was that the Disney Corporation had bought Capi-
tal Cities, a media conglomerate that owned the ABC Corporation. Disney
thereby became the biggest media and communications company in the
United States. I was happy that in our own area there was no need to spend
money on expensive acquisitions. Our growth and profitability seemed to
be enough for our investors as things were. Disney’s acquisition cost it $19
		
 Against All Odds                                                              207


billion. Earning so much money back wasn’t going to be easy in the fickle
and fast-moving media market. I didn’t envy Michael Eisner, Disney’s chief
executive, who would have to spend the next decade fighting for profitability
and growth.
   Things were different in the mobile phone market. In 1994, 26.2 million
mobile phones were sold worldwide. The following year the figure was 43.1
million, which was still less than one for every hundred people. If Nokia
kept growing in parallel with the market it would grow faster than anyone
could have predicted. It looked easy. Altogether too easy.
   We were expecting vigorous growth in 1995. If we increased our volumes
and produced enough phones to meet demand, we could make record prof-
its. We reckoned that the markets would grow faster in 1995 than anyone
else would predict. And we had an attractive product in our hands. We were
ready to make a tiger’s leap. We were ready to more than double our produc-
tion, though we really had no inkling of what impact that would have on our
organization or our human capacities.
   Every company should have a proper system for following results, profit-
ability, procurement, and logistics. Nokia did indeed have such a system.
It generated information, but it had been designed for a much smaller en-
terprise. It had grown along with Nokia, but we had grown so fast that no
system could have kept up.
   The previous year we had planned to adopt the German SAP system,
which would bring together our production, stock control, and logistics.
We wanted to bind together all those little threads of information that we
needed to make, market, and sell phones, and to follow cash flows and prof-
its. It was only the Germans who had succeeded in designing a system that
was systematic and reliable enough. But as often happens the project had
been delayed by half a year. Our fine new reporting system wasn’t yet in use
in the autumn of 1995. We had no time to lament this delay, for we had our
work cut out in sourcing components, making our phones, and selling them.
Still, everything seemed to be in order. August’s results would be in line with
expectations.
   I quietly celebrated my forty-fifth birthday in mid-August and went to cray-
fish parties, a traditional way of relaxing with friends in Finland at that time of
year. I was receiving ever more invitations on account of Nokia’s success, and
having to turn down ever more of them. I was also receiving more invitations
to go on hunting expeditions, not all of which I declined. At the end of Sep-
tember I drove with my family to our summer cottage at Orivesi, heated the
sauna, threw the fishing nets into the lake, and enjoyed the Finnish autumn.
208                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   Nokia’s results at this time were still reported three times a year; the next
report was due at the end of August. The results still seemed good – we
would reach those targets we had promised to reach over the whole year. The
investors and the media could hardly ask for more. We were increasingly
satisfied with our progress.
   At the beginning of October Pekka Ala-Pietilä presented me with the pre-
liminary results for September. They were somewhat disappointing: sales
weren’t in line with our targets, and our costs had increased. The result was
that we had broken even, which was far from what we had expected.
   “September wasn’t good. But I’m confident that October and November
will go well,” Pekka said. A little flicker of doubt crossed my mind, but I
decided to take Pekka’s word for it. Really I didn’t have much choice: our
reporting system seemed to work, and I knew there had been problems in
procuring particular components in September and that our costs had risen.
   I knew all about the problems with components. We relied on an Israeli
subcontractor, ATS, which was the only company that could produce the
key components for our wonderful new phone. The ATS factory in Austria
produced those components, and they were absolutely essential. But in Au-
gust we had received only 20 or 30 percent of the components we needed to
meet our targets. It was a catastrophe – usually we received over 90 percent
of our requirements by then. Pekka Ala-Pietilä and I flew to Austria, where
I gave the subcontractor some very direct feedback. But we also discussed
how we could resolve matters.
   We knew that we would face gigantic problems, because by mid-Septem-
ber phone production would be delayed and could come to a complete halt.
But I assumed that the problem would be a one-off, which could be quickly
put right. How wrong I was.
   Later I learned that good news and bad news always come in waves. A
stream of good news is self-generating. Things go well and move forward as
if they had a momentum of their own. Markets grow, people make the right
decisions, success breeds fresh success. By the time you hear the third item
of good news in a row you should start to be suspicious. Somewhere a fire
has broken out, but the smoke hasn’t yet reached the company’s upper floors.
Somewhere one of your tens of thousands of employees has made a seriously
wrong decision whose consequences will take time to make themselves felt.
Or somewhere your subcontractors have changed their working methods
just a little, but just enough for your entire product line to fail and for your
customers to feel permanently let down. All this we were about to learn.
		
 Against All Odds                                                           209




                          CHAPTER 43


             Toward Baden-Baden



T    he results for November would be clear in early December. We
     had to have a lot of phones ready in November if we were to meet the
demands of the Christmas market.
  Pekka Ala-Pietilä came to present the November figures. I saw from his
serious expression that they were bad. As I listened to his presentation I real-
ized that they were not bad; they were calamitous.
  My fingers drummed on the table top, and I looked Pekka straight in the
eye. Nokia’s entire profit for 1995 would be wiped out by those figures. We
would have to give a profit warning the following week. This was not just be-
cause of the results for mobile phones, but also because our consumer elec-
tronics division had entered an even deeper phase of its downward spiral.
  Pekka left my room, despondent. I took a deep breath. I looked out over
Helsinki’s central boulevard: Christmas decorations had appeared in the
shop windows, there was a Christmas tree in the park below, and red tents
were selling Christmas items for all sorts of good causes. This would be a
different sort of Christmas from previous ones. I stared at the figures show-
ing our results, but I still couldn’t take them in. That was odd, because I was
in charge of this company, after all. Had a successful company turned into a
company in crisis without its chief executive noticing anything?
  What figures and forecasts could I trust? And what would happen to
Nokia and to me?
  In the midst of all these questions there were a few clear facts: my basic
view of Nokia’s success and future wasn’t altered at all. We would survive
this too, but how long would it take and how would we do it? It would give
210                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


me something to ponder during the Christmas holidays, I thought rueful-
ly. Meanwhile I started to prepare for the board meeting on 14 December.
That meeting would not, after all, be the celebration of growing profits that
Nokia’s board had become used to in recent years. My stomach was in tur-
moil, my body was trembling. The profit warning would not be easy for me.
And why should it be? I would be answerable for all this in my own name
and in person when the media fireworks began.
   On 14 December I issued a profit warning that stated that Nokia con-
sumer electronics “will continue to lose money this year.” “The downward
trend in the television business accelerated toward the end of the year. All
television makers are in difficulty, not just Nokia,” was how Olli-Pekka Kal-
lasvuo explained the news to the press. He told them that both the growth
in mobile phones and our revenue had been “to some degree weaker than
expected.” He could scarcely have said more: we had no comprehension of
how we had ended up with the results we had in 1995. We simply didn’t
know how serious the crisis was.
   When I had given the profit warning I got into the car to go to the airport.
At 4:30 p.m. I boarded the plane to fly to Baden-Baden, the German spa
town whose sparkling spring waters had been known from Roman times,
and which had been named after its baths in the middle ages. After World
War II the town was the headquarters of French troops on German territory.
I had been told that Nokia had gotten a special rate at the hotel because our
conference was taking place off-season.
   The flight lasted two and a half hours. I looked down on the Baltic Sea
far below and at the forests sparkling with their first snow. I leafed distract-
edly through my papers. My stomach was still uneasy. I had given the profit
warning, but I didn’t know yet what effect it had had on the stock markets.
When I reached Baden-Baden and the Max Grundig Foundation’s spa hotel
I heard that Nokia’s share value on the Helsinki Stock Exchange had fallen
about 30 percent. Nothing like that had been seen in Helsinki since the in-
ternational crash in 1987. On the New York Stock Exchange Nokia’s value
had fallen 25 percent in the course of the day.
   About a hundred of the most important people in Nokia’s mobile phone
group were awaiting my arrival in the pleasant but wintry spa town. The
three-day meeting in Baden-Baden was a kick-off event to help us get off to
a flying start in 1996. I entered the conference room just as Intel’s manag-
ing director, Andy Grove, appeared on a video link. Andy’s book, Only the
Paranoid Survive, had just been published. Its title should have been some
comfort to me just then.
		
 Against All Odds                                                             211


   The conference timetable was tight, though there was room for good food:
the dinner menu included venison pie. Some of the participants had brought
their partners. There was also the chance to play roulette, but I suppose that
buying Nokia shares that evening would have been a better bet.
   And many people certainly did buy shares then and did well out of them.
   My turn came the following morning. I had gone through the issues with
Pekka and the other senior managers late into the night. At dinner news
of the profit warning and the consequent fall in the share price had spread
from table to table like a small bush fire. In the morning everyone in the hall
could see from my expression that I was not at my breeziest.
   I began my speech to the silent audience. The atmosphere was tense, ex-
pectant, and perhaps a little fearful. I don’t remember exactly what I said. I
didn’t smile, but I did make clear what I expected from those responsible for
the mess we were in, which was all of us. We had failed together. “Now it’s
important to analyze why this happened. We can’t keep on having to pub-
licly revise our expected results,” I said. I listed all our problems, or rather I
listed all the problems that Pekka and I had identified.
   “Our forecasts for U.S. sales are going through the floor. The best product
we’ve ever designed isn’t reaching the shelves because we can’t get the com-
ponents to make it. Our financial management systems might as well use
Roman numerals for all the good they are. We have to find a better balance
between our rush for growth and our ability to satisfy it.”
   The silence continued. We all knew it was unfair for Nokia, and for all
of us as individuals, that this should happen now when the outlook was so
promising. But nobody had seen that promising outlook because everything
was in such a mess. In fact our affairs were in such a mess that our reporting
systems were unable to tell us how deep a mess we were in. Serious faces,
nodding heads, tired expressions. But nothing about the audience suggested
that anyone thought the war would be lost.
   After my presentation I left straight for the airport and for Finland. The
participants at the kick-off event stayed to ponder Nokia’s future a little lon-
ger. Anssi Vanjoki, with his grasp of marketing, summed things up brilliant-
ly. When Pekka Ala-Pietilä invited Anssi to conclude the meeting, he pushed
a cassette of Monty Python’s Life of Brian into the video machine and started
to play the film’s final scene. In this scene practically the entire cast of the
movie, suspended on crosses, sings “Always Look on the Bright Side of Life.”
Anssi had asked the participants to join in. And so they did.
   “We’re not going to get anywhere by tickling anyone’s balls. What we have
to do is create a real can-do approach,” said Anssi. He was spot on.
212                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                          CHAPTER 44


                      A Year of Hell



T     he investors were furious with Nokia and with me. Some Finnish
      investment bankers told the press anonymously that just a day earlier
I had boasted about how well Nokia was doing in the United States. Olli-
Pekka Kallasvuo was also said to have been upbeat. So now Finnish inves-
tors felt they had been deceived, and international investors were nervous.
We had managed to build up a valuable stock of confidence following our
listing in New York, but now that confidence was in jeopardy. That meant
that our future operations were also endangered. Once more we needed ad-
ditional capital. Our cash flow was negative, and disposing of our consumer
electronics operation was costing us a hefty sum. We had to get the investors
– both Finnish and international – to calm down.
   “As if God had stumbled,” read the headline in Helsingin Sanomat, Fin-
land’s largest daily newspaper, in its story about Nokia and its PR. There were
other headlines: “The Great Deception,” “A Strange Affair,” and “Communi-
cations Catastrophe.” Finnish investors were particularly angry because the
profit warning had been given after trading on the Helsinki Stock Exchange
had ended for the day, just as it was beginning in New York. But we wanted
to look after our international investors, because they were becoming ever
more important to us. I couldn’t help smiling at the worst headlines, when I
remembered the enthusiasm with which Finnish investors had tried to shed
their investments in Nokia even before the good years of 1993–95. Now they
seemed even keener to do the same thing. And that was the worst mistake an
investor could have made in December 1995.
   Nokia was now on sale at a reduced price. Those who bought shares would
do well when real profits resumed. I knew we would soon be back on track.
		
 Against All Odds                                                            213


I couldn’t say for sure how long that would take, but we would get things
straight. It was just a pity that on that gloomy day, 15 December 1995, I
found it hard to find anyone to believe me. The media had attacked me with
a sledgehammer, and the investors were demanding better explanations
than they had so far received. I either had to give new explanations or to
repeat my earlier ones.
   We decided to set up a conference call with international investors that
Friday evening. It was one of the most difficult phone conversations of my
career. I tried to be as clear and consistent as I could be. I said I had warned
of a weakening in the market for televisions in Europe back in October. At
that time Nokia had published its results for the first eight months. I said that
precise information on the market’s impact on Nokia had become available
only on Thursday. That was when the company’s board had discussed the
matter before agreeing that I should issue the profit warning. We had told
the investors as soon as possible. I explained that the consumer electronics
management team had changed. I promised also that consumer electronics
would cause no further disappointments for investors the following year. I
told investors that our earlier forecasts for the U.S. market for mobile phones
had in fact been rather more pessimistic than our current ones. Our difficul-
ties were the result of growing pains. We hadn’t received all the components
we had needed when and where we needed them, which was why growth
and profitability hadn’t developed as we had hoped.
   I felt that I had managed to extinguish the worst fires at least. Neverthe-
less, the honesty, or at least the consistency, of the information I had given
out was called into question, for the first time. That seemed to me unfair,
wrong, and even repugnant. But I had to admit that I would have thought
the same way if I had been an international investor. “Ollila goes on and on
explaining, but what he says is quite different from what he said a month
ago. Perhaps he doesn’t know where his company is heading? Can we really
trust him as chief executive?” is what I might have said. There would have
been many good reasons for saying it.
   We found out that the mobile phone components had been travelling the
world over, more or less at random. For example, we had ordered 500,000
parts from one supplier in Hong Kong, but it turned out that they were in
Korea and weren’t what we were looking for anyway. When we tried to buy
a further batch of half a million the price rose astronomically, production
slowed down, and our budgeting fell to bits. We had stealthily grown into
a global company, but we lacked a global company’s logistics and efficiency.
No company, and least of all a major global company, can operate without
proper processes. It may have the cleverest and most wonderful people on
214                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


earth: but it needs processes. If it grows rapidly those processes must grow
with it. In major companies at least three things are in circulation: money,
materials, and information. If they don’t circulate at the same pace, the com-
pany is at risk, as Nokia was in 1995.
   About a week after the profit warning Pekka Ala-Pietilä and I discussed
things in my office. Christmas was just a few days away, but we hadn’t spent
much time on our Christmas preparations.
   “Do you have any idea what the results for December will be like?” I asked
Pekka.
   “They could even be slightly worse than November’s – though not much
worse,” Pekka replied a little uncertainly. In November we had just made a
profit, though not much.
   “Look, we’ve got two or three months coming up where we’ll make a loss.
Have you had a chance to consider that at all?” I said. Pekka was quiet for a
moment and looked at his papers.
   “Yes, that could happen. But I haven’t really thought about it,” he said.
   My information was in no way better than Pekka’s. We were in the same
boat as far as real figures and real profit forecasts were concerned. Perhaps
my uncompromising nature made me wonder what the worst that could
happen would be. When things start to go badly you don’t want to think how
they could get worse. It’s natural: accepting a loss is psychologically difficult,
especially when things have gone well. After just one month of losing money
almost every chief executive will try to find at least some positive signals that
say the next month will be better.
   Over the Christmas break I thought hard about everything we needed to
do. The most difficult decisions of my career on Nokia’s internal organiza-
tion awaited me. And it seemed to us that Nokia faced at least one full year
of hell.
		
 Against All Odds                                                           215




                          CHAPTER 45


                 Who Is To Blame?



T    here were many reasons that Nokia collided with a brick wall.
     The complete picture took several months to become clear, during
which my pessimistic prediction of further losses was borne out. The Five
tried to discover what the real problems were, sitting far into the night in the
gloomy head office. We often began our meetings at eight o’clock on Sunday
evenings and carried on until we ran out of steam. The picture began to
become clearer.
   We couldn’t discuss everything in that group. As Nokia’s chief executive
it was my job to determine who had been responsible for this mess; then I
had to decide what to do next. These are matters that a company chief can
never delegate or avoid. The organization expects someone to make the de-
cisions and set the direction, while showing how the company deals with
failure. As I ran through the alternatives I knew that my decisions would set
a precedent. Never before had we failed as badly as we did in the autumn
of 1995. Of course, Nokia had failed even more dramatically in making the
investments it did in the 1980s, but an earlier generation of leaders had been
responsible then. Now we had to be pathologically precise in investigating
the causes of our failure, learning from it, and putting the company back on
track. On this we were all agreed.
   A managing director or a chief executive can never run a company over
the heads of the next most senior people, because that would damage the
credibility of both the individuals and the organization. The people in charge
of divisions have to gain experience of the freedom and responsibility that
make an inseparable pair in developing the business. Chief executives must
216                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


trust the senior managers they work with in all circumstances, because ulti-
mately those executives are responsible for the company’s results.
   They’re responsible to investors, to the board, to the media, to the em-
ployees, and of course to themselves. One of the more difficult elements of
the chief executive’s job is to be responsible for everything while lacking
the practical power essential to run the company. The chief executive runs
the company through its senior managers, by being an example, creating
processes, making appointments, and developing a leadership culture. On
top of all that a chief executive has to know as much as possible about the
company, its products and its prospects, the good news, and, especially, the
bad news.
   There were certainly some strong individuals in Nokia’s management
team. All of them had been used to success since their earliest years. I had
personally selected each and every member of my senior team because that’s
one of the key tasks of a chief executive. Thus I was responsible to the people
to whom I answered for what those team members did. If one of them was
criticized, it was a criticism of me too.
   That was only fair. I couldn’t explain to the board that it was someone else’s
fault that the company had failed – the board would only ask me why that
person was in that position. Who was responsible for that appointment?
That would have been easy to answer.
   Direct responsibility for mobile phones actually sat with Pekka Ala-Pi-
etilä. He took the responsibility for the failure of his sector. Now I had to
decide how that responsibility should be discharged in practice. I had myself
put Pekka in charge of mobile phones: Pekka was my man. I had taken great
risks in trusting to Pekka’s abilities, but those risks had shown themselves to
be justified. Also, I needed Pekka to help develop my own ideas. He comple-
mented my thinking with his analytical approach and his optimism. Pekka
believed the best about people, even when I wasn’t quite so sure myself. We
had grown together, becoming exceptionally close colleagues along the way.
   If Nokia had been an American company the decision would have been
clear. Pekka would have had to pack his bags and clear his desk in the middle
of December, after the first profit warning. In the United States the chief ex-
ecutive is responsible to the investors for everything and in every respect. If
the company fails, someone’s head must be offered up, both as a warning to
other executives and as a sacrifice to the investors. Conversely, in European
companies managers are allowed to carry on regardless of how many fail-
ures happen on their watch. Now I had to decide which road Nokia would
take and thereby what its leadership culture would be. The board, the inves-
		
 Against All Odds                                                           217


tors, the workforce, and the media all awaited my decision. It was one of the
most important of my career. I spent December thinking it through. I also
discussed things at home with Liisa, who worried how much of all this I
could take.
   The external pressures were tremendous. Nokia had many international
shareholders, who were used to seeing a company’s senior managers in per-
son when there was trouble. The media would certainly doubt my decision-
making capacity if nothing happened. The media onslaught had begun al-
ready, and in the New Year it would only become more intense. Some people
thought that the chief executive should resign.
   After Christmas I made up my mind – Pekka Ala-Pietilä would keep his
job. His most important task was about to begin: he would spend the next
few months sorting out the mess Nokia had got itself into. I also decided that
Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo would become a temporary member of the team that
ran our mobile phone operations. His job was to monitor product develop-
ment and to provide financial acumen. From above it must have looked as if
he were acting as my eyes and ears in Pekka’s team. In fact I trusted Pekka’s
reporting, but I also wanted to ensure that his unit would get everything
straight.
   I decided that the responsibility for all this would rest with Pekka and me.
When we met after Christmas we agreed that Pekka would withdraw from
all public activities. He would scrub from his calendar everything uncon-
nected with this firefighting. He would be given the chance to raise his unit
from the ashes. We agreed that I would accept any and all public criticism
for as long as it took to put things straight. That would give Pekka the breath-
ing space he needed to get things back into shape.
   It was important to send two signals to Nokia internally. Earlier I said that
you could make mistakes in Nokia, though no one was to make the same
mistake twice. If I had gotten rid of Pekka I would have gone against my own
principles of leadership. Mistakes are for learning from. Very few people in
a company will make mistakes consciously or from bad faith. We made this
mistake because we didn’t understand what our rate of growth demanded
from the company and from us.
   My message to everyone working for Nokia was that we had indeed made
a mistake but that we weren’t playing a blame game. It was a message that the
next eight months were a serious test of how Pekka’s organization could be
knocked back into shape. If Pekka and his team didn’t succeed I would have
to look at things afresh, but I was confident that Pekka and his team would
get things straight. I really didn’t have much choice when I made my deci-
218                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


sion. I couldn’t give special attention to running one particular unit because
that would have been a misuse of a chief executive’s position and time. I gave
the responsibility to the people whose responsibility it was, but that didn’t
mean I was indifferent as to the outcome.
   I had intensive conversations with Pekka. We met one-on-one and as part
of the management team. I spoke to him at great length. I know that period
was very difficult for Pekka. I was certainly partly guilty of making it so: I
wanted to use every possible means to ensure that this mistake would not be
fatal to us or to Nokia. I was paranoid in my search for weak points in Pe-
kka’s plans, and I continually demanded additional information from him.
I was hard on him, just as I was hard on myself, too. I was demanding the
impossible, but Pekka already knew to expect that – he knew me.
   But I never criticized him publicly. We discussed things together, and I
wanted him to know that I wouldn’t let go of the matter until I knew we were
back in calm waters.
   In January 1996 we agreed that there was really only one person who could
ensure that we did reach those calm waters – Pertti Korhonen. He was the
best person to extricate Nokia from its difficulties. His powers of organiza-
tion, experience, and optimism were an absolutely unbeatable combination.
Pertti’s task would be to create a mechanism robust enough to withstand
the fastest growth, which would bring everything together into one chain of
processes. Everything would be integrated: from product development and
design, through the procurement of components, and on to manufacturing
and even marketing. This was no small challenge, and Pertti wanted a little
time to think. He had some difficulties with the idea. He had run an orga-
nization of three to four thousand people, but now he would become some
peculiar one-man band. It wouldn’t look very good, either inside Nokia or
in the press. It would look as if a successful young manager had been pushed
to the sidelines. There was another problem, too, which made Pertti hesitate
– he didn’t understand anything at all about logistics. But that wasn’t a big
worry for Pekka or me. Good Nokia people that we were, we believed that
Pertti would soon learn all he needed to.
   We had set up a reliable process for manufacturing mobile phones and we
could make large batches efficiently. But that wasn’t enough. We still lacked
control systems that could tell our factories what they should produce and
by when, what components were needed, and in what numbers and where.
The stage was set for an internal battle: the production people said that the
marketing people should be able to forecast what sorts of phones would be
needed. The marketing people said what they thought demand would be,
		
 Against All Odds                                                               219




Liisa and me with Intel president and CEO Craig Barret and his wife Barbara in
Sun Valley in 2003. Intel was a Nokia supplier as early as the 1980s. Barbara later
became the U.S. ambassador to Finland.

but the phones stayed in the warehouse when demand shifted to another
model. But that other phone, the one customers did want to buy, wasn’t in
the warehouse. It was a big mess. Its roots didn’t lie in the company’s strati-
fied structure so much as at its very center. It sat at the center of every west-
ern company.
   For decades now every company has believed in organization by function.
A company will have a production division, a sales division, and many other
divisions, and each has its own job to do. That’s why it’s called organization
by function. This system works splendidly when development is proceed-
ing smoothly. When the markets for your product aren’t growing too fast,
everyone knows what their job is. Also, the company can make it clear what
it expects each division to do – otherwise, individual divisions will start to
pursue their own interests. For example, using machinery at full capacity was
the most important thing for one of our production managers, who had been
trained in Japan. That made production efficient because it minimized the
unit cost of every mobile phone, the essence of efficiency. But the manager in
question wasn’t at all interested in whether he was making phones that would
sell or phones that would stay on the shelves. From Nokia’s viewpoint it was
better for the sorts of phones that stay on the shelves to remain unmade.
220                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   These were points that Pertti quickly identified. But the full picture of
the catastrophe only became clear a little at a time. We understood that the
problem lay with our processes, though we had also suffered from problems
with the supply of components and from unreliable business partners. Be-
fore Christmas 1995 it was clear to us there were problems with chargers
provided by a Norwegian company. Most of them functioned perfectly well,
but some of them caused a short circuit when you tried to use them. The cas-
ing turned into a hot grey mass of plastic. Eventually you would be left with
two pins sticking out of the wall socket, ready to electrocute any passing
adult, child, or pet. It was no wonder that U.S. officials responsible for prod-
uct safety demanded that we do something. We were ever more dependent
on our suppliers – although they made the parts, we bore the responsibility
if anything went wrong. (Later we learned more about this dependence.) We
also had to work with our suppliers to improve our processes.
   Our entire organization was running at full throttle. Pekka Ala-Pietilä
hardly slept at night. He spent a great deal of time travelling to sort out our
problems. Pertti Korhonen put all his energy into working out what we had
gotten ourselves into and how we could get out again. He too shuttled be-
tween our factories, our suppliers, and our sales units. I had at least managed
to instill the feeling that Nokia faced a crisis.
   After he shuttled around the world Pertti began to understand where
our problems lay. Nokia’s distribution centers around the world were full of
stock that had failed to sell. Pertti had seen vast reserves of phones on his
trip. We wondered what we could have gotten for the money tied up in these
phones. How many miles of motorway? How many jumbo jets would we
have been able to buy?
   Had we tied up all the money from our listing on the New York Stock
Exchange the previous year in these phones that no one wanted? We had
indeed done just that. As I listened to Pertti’s account, an impotent fury
coursed through my veins once more. I wanted to rage at someone, but the
only rightful target for my wrath was me.
   Pertti Korhonen was working without preconceptions because he wasn’t
familiar with our old working methods. He knew only that it was his job to
save Nokia, so he could look at Nokia’s logistics with a clear eye. First he had
to establish in his own mind what exactly lay at the heart of the problem.
When he had made things clear to himself it would be easy for him to talk
to others about them.
		
 Against All Odds                                                         221




                         CHAPTER 46


Turning Weakness into Strength



B    efore 1995 I hadn’t encountered failure on a massive scale at
     Nokia. I had been a success in the finance department, although the
entire company was in ruins. I had created the conditions for success when
I was in charge of mobile phones. Later I had taken charge of Nokia when
the company faced formidable risks and failure was a real possibility. I was
unsure how to set about turning the whole of Nokia around in the spring of
1992, but I succeeded nonetheless.
  The events of 1995 were like a bad dream, a nightmare even, that should
never have occurred. In fact the nightmare seemed to go on and on, getting
scarier all the time. I had given Pekka, Pertti, and their teams eight to nine
months to sort things out. I had steeled myself to consider Pekka’s position
again after six months – if he didn’t succeed I would have to remove him.
That would be hard but unavoidable.
  I put pressure on Pekka, I kept him up to the mark, and I spurred him on.
And I supported him. I used every means at my disposal. Some of these were
agreeable enough, but I kept on at him like an angry dog that wouldn’t let
go. I trusted him, but I also wanted to be sure I was doing my own bit. I did
everything I could for him, and of course for Nokia and for myself. We owed
that to the company and to all our 30,000 employees. We couldn’t let them
down. We couldn’t be allowed to fail.
  As far as the press was concerned we had pretty much failed already, and
they had good reasons to think that. At the end of February we issued our
results for the whole of 1995. Our profits had grown by 39 percent, but they
were smaller than the analysts had forecast. All the growth was down to
222                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


our telecommunications division, which had generated over half our profits.
The profit from mobile phones stayed much as it had been, and consumer
electronics did little to make the figures look better. We also announced that
we were finally getting out of television production altogether. I warned that
our results for 1996 would be weaker. I explained that competition in tele-
communications would reduce our profits and would also affect our profits
from mobile phones. My profit warning didn’t please the investors – our
share value sank like a stone. In the course of six months Nokia shares lost
nearly half their value. It wasn’t an achievement I’m going to boast about in
these memoirs.
  Growth in our profits stalled in 1996 and ended up 15 percent lower than
in the previous year.
  Even so, Nokia’s results were the best in its history: they had grown by
nearly 40 percent in a year. Our share of the mobile phone market had risen
from 20 percent to 24 percent. We had almost doubled our sales of mobile
phones from 5.5 million to 10.5 million, but that was still 1.6 million less
than our budget had forecast. The world was becoming an extraordinary
place, I reflected. I couldn’t think of any precedents for the sort of busi-
ness we were doing. We had failed, but we were still growing at an immense
speed. The pace of change was so fast that we could never have predicted
how it would change, even if we had dared to try.
  Besides, the press brought us back to earth. On Friday, 1 March, the Finan-
cial Times, which I have always held in high regard, published a story that hit
home harder than anything before. I had become inured to the comments
of the Finnish press, which were often weak on analysis; I had a thick skin
as far as they were concerned. Nokia was already too big for Finland. It was
an excellent target for journalists who wanted to let their feelings spill out as
long as they could find a little material on which to base a story. I found the
criticisms of the international press much more to the point. The Financial
Times had published a story under the headline “Nokia says Goodbye to the
Golden Days.” It pointed out that I had issued two profit warnings in the
course of three months and that the company’s share value had fallen by 50
percent. In light of these facts it said, “Nokia’s sensational run as one of the
best technology shares” seemed to be coming to an end. The paper said that
the latest profit warning confirmed the view that, at the very least, the com-
pany faced some intractable problems. “The big question is whether Nokia
can return to form this year,” it wrote.
  I received the paper at the office that Friday morning. I felt gloomy as I
read it. Apart from everything else the question touched on my reputation,
		
 Against All Odds                                                          223


my pride, my ability. I decided to show the Financial Times that we would
succeed again, and better than before.
   That year, 1996, was surely one of the most important in Nokia’s history. It
looked to me as if we were fighting on every front. At first we seemed to be
sustaining losses in every battle, but as the year’s end approached we began
to see glimpses of victory.
   Pekka Ala-Pietilä, Pertti Korhonen, and their teams succeeded – Nokia’s
production and distribution had been reconfigured. Earlier our factories
had made products for which we had to find customers. Now we made only
those products for which we knew there was a demand. The whole organiza-
tion knew that Nokia held far too much stock, which tied up far too much
money. Now our wares wouldn’t lie around in warehouses; they would be
sold much more quickly and efficiently.
   One of Nokia’s working methods crystallized during this rescue opera-
tion – people had to move out of their comfort zones. Taking an external
viewpoint doesn’t mean amateurishness, because every outsider should
learn how to do things properly. Ultimately the question is down to the indi-
vidual: if people are endowed with boldness, curiosity, and the right degree
of responsibility, they can move from one area to another without serious
problems.
   The change is always difficult. It’s difficult to move out of areas where
you’ve experienced clear success. It’s difficult to let go of people and struc-
tures that have served you well. It’s difficult to risk failure when things are
going so well. But there are at least two reasons that a company must push
people to take risk to its limits. When the company is in crisis, solutions
are hardly likely to emerge from inside the comfort zone, but will by defini-
tion be high risk. And the organization has to recognize and understand
that the company is indeed in crisis. This knowledge shouldn’t lead people
to despair, it should act as a powerful motivator for change. Between these
two – despair and a desire for transformation – the difference is only a hair’s
breadth. But it’s dramatically important. If senior management signals de-
spair, the game is lost. Besides, a company crisis is never the fault of single
individuals. Blaming people for a crisis will paralyze the company and make
the crisis still deeper.
   Apart from crises people should be pushed to take risks, because at the
risk boundary you’ll often find growth, new business areas, and new think-
ing. When people are dealing with risk they learn how to handle and reduce
it; put another way, they learn from their new experiences. That’s always
good for the company. Unfamiliar areas become familiar. The risk boundary
224                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


is pushed back and the unknown region shrinks. The company has learned
something valuable, which it can exploit in the future.
   Nokia’s logistics crisis in 1995–96 happened at just the “right time,” even if
it didn’t feel that way just then. We managed to put things straight over the
course of nine months. We rebuilt our logistics chains, and we renewed our
methods of production and the ways we worked with our partners. From
now on our sales and our production would work seamlessly together. Com-
ponents would reach the right factories at the right time. And all this would
show up promptly and in the right form in our financial reports. Earlier our
sales people always accused those in charge of production of making the
wrong products. And the production people blamed our sales force for their
failure to sell the goods they had ordered. When everything was overhauled
Nokia’s production machinery was better than that of any of its competitors.
It was the most efficient in the entire industry. The crisis had compelled us to
create something we desperately needed when sales of mobile phones start-
ed their explosive growth. After the crisis Nokia’s machinery was in such
good shape that it could withstand any conceivable demands made on it.
   “Platform thinking” was a central part of our improvement in production
efficiency. This means that several different phones can be mounted on the
same technical base. We were able to extend the range of models we made
while keeping production simple and efficient. The concept has also become
part of Nokia’s internal language. Many a friend or relative has heard talk of
“platforms” in all sorts of situations. One of our employees reportedly urged
his relatives to come to his wedding reception by saying “it’s a wonderful
platform for having a great time.” At Nokia we would find nothing strange
in that, but the wedding guests would disagree.
		
 Against All Odds                                                         225




                         CHAPTER 47


       The World Becomes a Web



T    he crisis compelled Nokia to reconfigure its most important
     processes. The crisis also compelled us to consider what the compa-
ny should really focus on. We discussed that in the corridors, in strategy
groups, and among senior management. Many of us doubted that growth in
our mobile phone business was sustainable. Creating one’s own brand was
becoming more difficult and expensive. Even so, our network business was
growing and turning in impressive profits. Perhaps we should focus more on
joint ventures with mobile network operating companies than on develop-
ing new consumer products. That might be the best way to safeguard our
future.
  Nokia’s network business and its mobile phone business had long been
separate. But in practice this wasn’t a black-and-white distinction. We had
to understand our customers, whether they were individuals who wanted
to buy a mobile phone or operating companies that bought major networks
from us. Operating companies were also customers for our phones. In the
1990s we sold over half our output to the operators, who sold them on to
retail customers through their own sales channels. We tried to make our
brands and products enticing so that consumers would want to buy them
and the operators would have to stock them.
  The winner in our internal discussions was often the division that hap-
pened to be performing best, so our mobile phone operations had to re-
spond to internal criticism. At the heart of the discussion was Nokia’s future
direction. Sometime in March The Five met one Sunday evening to exam-
ine that question. Nokia Mobile Phones, led by Pekka Ala-Pietilä, was very
226                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


much in the position of defendant. “None of the rest of you apart from Jor-
ma knows enough about this business. And even Jorma’s experience doesn’t
go back very far,” said Pekka rather indignantly, which was unusual for him.
   These discussions never became part of Nokia’s formal strategic planning.
Even so they say something about the uncertainty that the year 1996 brought
us and about the real quest that was under way. We couldn’t produce mobile
phones without regard to the operators’ wishes or empathy for their con-
cerns. But in no circumstance would we give up our own brand to become
solely a manufacturer of generic products with some operator’s label stuck
on the casing. We had succeeded in growing the value of our brand on the
global market. We weren’t at the top yet, but we were well on the way. We be-
lieved we would be able to exploit technical advances to make better phones
that did innovative things. We had a chance to become the world’s leading
mobile phone company. For that we needed the will, hard work, good deci-
sions, and, it must be said, a certain degree of good luck.
   We did draw on outside help in developing our own thinking. For exam-
ple, in 1995 we organized a “future seminar” on mobile phones. We invited
the highly regarded Gary Hamel, a management guru whose name is known
to every business student. The seminar generated a fat file of new ideas that
we drew on for years afterwards.
   My own decision was that we should continue our twin-track approach.
We would continue to develop our own brand, our own technology, and
better mobile products aimed directly at our customers. Nokia would also
become a company that developed both industrial production and software.
We would listen very closely to our customers among the operating compa-
nies, because so much of our turnover depended on them. Thus ended this
phase of introspection at Nokia. But I knew that what I had decided was
easier said than done.
   We soon had other reasons for introspection. The world was changing
without asking Nokia’s permission. We had to evolve rapidly, but in which
direction? In many respects Nokia was at the eye of a storm. If we made the
right decisions we would get wind in our sails, but if we failed the storm
would consign us to the deep along with other forgotten shipwrecked com-
panies. There wasn’t much time to make the right decisions, and no one had
enough information about what the future might have in store for technol-
ogy companies in the 2000s. Nor did we know how our customers would
behave, whether they were in Europe, Asia, or North America. But we would
have to find out if we were to survive the coming onslaught.
   We also had to create our own momentum to carry us forward. The new
generation of GSM-standard mobile phones provided some impetus. GSM
		
 Against All Odds                                                           227


(Global System for Mobile Communications) was the world’s most impor-
tant standard, thanks to the combined might of Nokia and Ericsson. We
wanted it to be the global standard for new digital phones. In the United
States operators were free to select their own standards, whereas in Europe
the view was that the standard should be universal. After that it was up to the
operators to compete by offering the best possible service. So a Swedish girl
could call home as easily from a holiday in Spain as when she had popped
out to the shops in Stockholm. In the United States she might not be able to
speak to someone in the next state.
   In the spring of 1994 the U.S. government held an auction of licenses for
mobile phone operators. It was up to the operators which standard they ad-
opted. Nokia’s chief technology officer, Yrjö Neuvo, and I went around to
many American operators and tried to persuade them of the excellence of
the GSM standard. I can’t say we were very successful. GSM became only
the third most popular of the standards on offer. That was why the United
States lagged far behind Europe and Japan when new mobile services were
developed at the end of the 1990s.
   In Europe GSM was already an important standard, which suited Nokia
completely. We wanted the next generation of mobile phones to take GSM as
its starting point. A battle began in 1996 that the press later characterized as
“Nokia’s First World War.” Our goal was ambitious: we wanted the world to
adopt a mobile phone standard that would put our own products in a strong
position. And of course we also believed that such a standard would be best
for consumers.
   In Europe we decided to form a Nordic alliance with our Swedish compet-
itor Ericsson. In the opposite corner stood the Franco-German alliance of
Siemens and Alcatel. At the end of October 1997 I travelled to Brussels with
two colleagues to meet the president of the European Commission, Jacques
Santer. This crisis meeting, however, didn’t lead to agreement on the future
of the European mobile phone industry. The Nordic front needed additional
support. In November 1997 the president of Finland, Martti Ahtisaari, told
the British prime minister, Tony Blair, that he thought the standard pro-
posed by Nokia and Ericsson would be the best for the United Kingdom as
well. A couple of weeks later British Telecom weighed in on our side. Our
global shuttling went on since we needed more supporters from the network
operators both in Europe and in Asia.
   At the end of November I again found myself in Brussels. E.U. Commis-
sioner Martin Bangemann was now having a go at solving the European
dispute, though without success. Finally the European Telecommunications
Standards Institute (ETSI) took the first vote in its history to decide which
228                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


of the competing standards was better and should be adopted. The Nokia-
Ericsson proposal received 58.3 percent of the votes. This ultimate victory
was ratified at a conference in Paris in January 1998.
   We had opened negotiations on future standards with the Japanese back
in September 1996. We wanted to avoid a situation where European and
Japanese companies competed in Asian markets on the basis of different
standards. We took the Japanese delegation go-karting and magnanimously
allowed them to win. Later the Japanese negotiators enjoyed Nokia’s hospi-
tality at Båtvik manor, where the evening culminated in a musical solo by a
senior Japanese director. We were sure that the evening had been a success.
At the end of August the Japanese told us confidentially that they favored
European technology for the next generation of networks.
   In the United States the battle continued even after the Paris agreement.
The American company Qualcomm accused European companies of reach-
ing an unfair agreement. At the end of 1998 the U.S. government made a
formal accusation of unfair competition against the European Union in a
deposition signed by the U.S. secretary of state, Madeleine Albright. The bat-
tle eased off only in March 1999, when Europe and the United States agreed
to end their public dispute over standards. At the same time Qualcomm sold
its network business and its product development arm to Ericsson. The final
flames of the Great Standards War had been extinguished.
   At Nokia we started to believe that the future was digital much earlier
than our competitors did. We did so because we were the challengers and
also because Finnish engineers were keen to try something new. From our
point of view it was well worth investing all our efforts in something that
could transform the entire market. While Nokia was pushing digital phones,
Motorola was still living in the analog era. Nokia surpassed Motorola partly
because we were early adopters of digital technology.
   With hindsight it’s always easy to say that you were in the right place at the
right time. This is as true of companies as it is of individuals. At the time of
the technological tornado of the late 1990s no one knew for sure that they
were in the right place at the right time. The years 1996 to 1999 were a time
of explosive growth for all the world’s technology companies, and the most
important task their leaders faced was to keep their wits about them. As his-
tory relates, we didn’t all succeed in that.
   The Internet generated a tremendous wave of new companies, stupendous
profits, a share price bubble, and the rise and fall of an entire generation of
investors seeking riches. For an instant the Internet resembled the oil indus-
try or U.S. railroads in their early days: unscrupulous entrepreneurs who
		
 Against All Odds                                                           229


could sense a quick opportunity made astronomical profits. The Internet
was like those industries in another way: it changed the way things were
done. It changed the way companies communicated, marketed their prod-
ucts, planned, and made things. The real impact of the Internet only started
to become clear after the bubble burst at the beginning of the 2000s.
   At Nokia we understood that the Internet would change many things for-
ever. But we weren’t sure exactly which things would change. We watched
with our hair standing on end – at least those of us who still had hair – as
tiny companies found their capital value growing to Nokia proportions. In
our own minds, however, we were a serious and profitable company that
made tangible things. Many consultants came to us recommending business
models that would raise our share value to the skies, if only we could get our
heads around the idea of a virtual company. I understood later that Enron
must have listened to consultants like these before starting down the road
to perdition.
   The Internet also affected Nokia through changes in people’s behavior.
People wanted perfect mobility. At least that’s what we believed at Nokia.
We saw people’s lives as divided into three: their personal life, their domestic
life, and their working life. In all these an individual – our customer – need-
ed perfect mobile services. These services were surely to be Internet-based.
230                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                         CHAPTER 48


      Discussions of Public Policy



F    inland was hit hard by an economic depression at the beginning
     of the 1990s. Trade with the Soviet Union had collapsed, revealing the
inefficiency of much of Finnish industry. An asset price bubble burst. We
had to face a hefty dose of reality. GDP shrank by 30 percent and the stock
market lost half its value. This compelled Finland to overhaul its structures
and its thinking. I often exchanged thoughts with the prime ministers of the
time – Esko Aho, who belonged to the Centre Party, and Paavo Lipponen,
who was a Social Democrat – and their respective finance ministers. I met
Aho in January 1992, immediately after my appointment as chief executive
of Nokia. I told him that the company had had difficulties, which we would
overcome because the core business was sound. We could build our future
using our own resources: Nokia would never ask the government for money.
What we wanted was for the government to create a business environment
where companies like ours could thrive. I also stressed that I would do my
best to support him, because a thriving Finland was absolutely crucial for
Nokia.
   At this time there was a vigorous debate on increasing the resources de-
voted to research and development. The government proposed a target of 3
percent of GDP by the end of the decade. This was confirmed by the Science
and Technology Policy Council for Finland, which included representatives
from businesses, universities, and research institutes as well as the key min-
istries. The government undertook to provide a 40-percent share, with the
private sector covering the remaining 60 percent. They both had to sharply
increase their investment in research and development, and we weren’t talk-
		
 Against All Odds                                                            231


ing of small sums of money. There was much skepticism in official circles
but overall the target was reached by 1999. The private sector’s share was
68 percent, and the state’s contribution was also significantly higher than
forecast in cash terms, since growth in GDP had exceeded all predictions.
The increased R&D spending revitalized many universities, which were then
able to contribute to Nokia’s need for able graduates. Universities also be-
came good research partners for Nokia and other high-tech companies.
   In the early autumn of 1996 Nokia’s long logistical crisis seemed to be
coming to its end, but an entirely new sort of problem was now on the agen-
da. Would Finland continue to be the right place for Nokia to have its head
office or indeed for Nokia in general? The question had been floating around
since the late 1980s, but not in any very serious way. In the early 1990s, when
Nokia was rapidly becoming more international, there had been lots of little
practical issues that might have been resolved more easily elsewhere, and
discussions over the location of the head office gathered pace. Many people
thought that if Nokia did indeed become a successful major international
company, it was inevitable that the head office and perhaps other functions
would have to relocate. Speculation always seemed to heighten, in the media
as well as within the company, when results and growth rates were good,
and it would fall back once again when everyday problems pressed down or
results didn’t live up to expectations.
   At the end of October 1996 I summoned The Five for a short meeting.
First we ran through current issues as we usually did; a snapshot of activity
showed that the company as a whole was performing well. Then without any
particular preparation I brought up the question of where the head office
should be sited. I noted that even though we had survived our recent logisti-
cal crisis in mobile phones, it was likely even in the best-case scenario that in
the next five years we would find ourselves in a storm similar to the one we
had just weathered. If we were to emerge victorious from our current phase
of growth we needed to develop our leadership significantly, to recruit new
key individuals and specialists, to strengthen our global organization, and
above all to create a more stable environment for development and renewal,
as we had done at the beginning of the decade. All this was already well in
hand, but my message was that our efforts needed more oomph.
   At the same time Finland seemed to be emerging from its own economic
problems. Its economic policy was steady, pragmatic, and successful. Nokia
had a lot to do in the coming years in terms of its internal development.
There would be no benefit for the company if its senior management spent
its time niggling over where to site its head office or other peripheral ques-
232                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


tions. We had had quite enough of those in recent years – both external and
self-inflicted.
   I proposed to my colleagues that we should not add the question of the
location of our head office to our agenda, but should tersely note that Nokia
would remain in Finland and develop its operations on that assumption.
We could come back to the matter if there were significant new factors to
consider and we needed to check our basic approach. I also proposed that I
would tell the prime minister and finance minister, but otherwise we should
remain silent on the issue.
   To my surprise this didn’t give rise to much discussion, and my view re-
ceived a clear endorsement. For my colleagues it seemed a natural line to fol-
low, which apparently didn’t even need this much consideration, for without
this discussion we would simply have followed this line anyway – it was the
default position. Because there had been so little discussion I checked later
with each of the others that they really were happy with what we’d agreed.
   I told both the prime minister and finance minister toward the end of
1996 that we’d decided to keep our head office in Finland. I added that we
also intended to raise the proportion of the product development that we
conducted in Finland – it was already 75 percent. We had no demands to
make or conditions to impose, and we never would. There were just two
things we hoped to see. First, that Nokia would not be “punished” for this
decision and that the government for its part would sincerely try to look
after the environment for international companies operating in Finland.
   When they had recovered from their initial surprise, both party leaders,
as they then were, grasped the magnitude of the request. We then had an
exceptionally open discussion of what was needed if Finland was to become
an attractive destination for investment and business was to be successful.
I hadn’t brought a wish-list along – and I wouldn’t have wanted that sort
of discussion since it would have gone against the grain of my principles.
I brought up only one crucial point: the high level of personal taxation in
Finland. This didn’t have much direct impact on Nokia, but it had a greater
indirect impact because it affected the dynamism of the economy.
   In Finland the high marginal rates of taxation had long been a problem
for those moving from middle incomes into higher tax brackets. When I
discussed the issue with Finnish engineers at Nokia in 1999 there was clearly
growing dissatisfaction with the punitive tax progression. I did some simple
sums, based on an engineer at Salo who had a wife and two children. These
showed that when a recently qualified engineer’s salary was doubled, his
take-home pay rose by only 15 percent. The higher tax rates were not the
		
 Against All Odds                                                            233


only reason for this; other benefits such as housing support were removed
as the salary increased.
   The message was clear: it was difficult in Finland to motivate engineers to
achieve results or aim for more senior positions because taxes would take
almost all the increase in salary just when they were trying to start a family.
For the best engineers this was an additional reason for seeking work over-
seas. I discussed this several times with the prime minister, finance minis-
ter, and cabinet secretary. These long conversations brought results. At the
start of January 2000, at a breakfast meeting at the prime minister’s official
residence, I received confirmation that the tax progression scale would be
revised and a more rational system of banding introduced. These changes
would be introduced over several years, as indeed they were. This process
showed that the Finnish establishment was working toward sensible struc-
tural change. It also brought the incentive effects of taxation on to the politi-
cal agenda.
   The possible relocation of our head office remained a focus of interest at
the highest levels of government. In 2005 President Tarja Halonen asked me
privately what Nokia intended to do regarding its domicile. The president
sounded very concerned. “My understanding is that the head office will re-
main in Finland,” I replied. “But it’s not out of the question that an individual
division might relocate abroad. The latest software trends come chiefly from
the United States, so we really have to be there in some way. We will be very
pragmatic on this point.”
   I have always followed broader developments in society, taking part in
public discussions where they touch on the challenges of business life and
the problems that companies face. I have also taken a close interest in public
education at all levels. Many people in Finland have interpreted this as a de-
sire to one day take part in politics as an elected representative. (I have never
shown any wish to do so, not even as a remote possibility.) When I went
to study at the London School of Economics in 1977 I left behind an over-
politicized country with an emergency government. Though it felt good to
come back to Finland, my decision was clear: I had returned to pursue a
business career. Life in political circles had absolutely no appeal.
   In May 1999 the finance minister wanted to have a confidential talk with
me, and we met in a private room at the Palace restaurant. I recall a fine
view over the Helsinki market square and the onion domes of the Orthodox
cathedral. The minister hoped I would consider becoming the Conservative
candidate for president. His idea was that the Centre Party might also put
its weight behind me and that I would emerge as an unbeatable “bourgeois”
234                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


candidate. (In Finland presidential candidates stand as individuals, but with
support from political parties.) I explained that I was not available, because
the previous year I had undertaken to lead Nokia well into the following
decade. I couldn’t imagine reneging on that obligation.
  In November 2003 Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen invited Liisa and me
to dinner at his home in his constituency about thirty miles from Helsinki.
His wife had prepared a delicious meal and we all got on very well together,
even if the décor wasn’t entirely to our taste. Over the dinner table we spoke
mostly about international politics. Vanhanen was fascinating to talk to, and
both knowledgeable and passionate about the European Union and the oth-
er issues we discussed. As the evening drew to a close he unexpectedly raised
the forthcoming presidential elections. He noted that the Centre Party didn’t
have a strong candidate and that I ought to think very seriously about stand-
ing. I hadn’t expected the question but my answer was ready. It was a clear
“no.” Although I was already thinking of standing down from the role of
chief executive, I wasn’t ready even to think about becoming a presidential
candidate. This time I didn’t have a follow-up conversation.
		
 Against All Odds                                                            235




                          CHAPTER 49


           What Do People Want?



I  n 1996 Nokia demonstrated a new product, which we proudly
   called the Communicator. It wasn’t simply a phone; it also had an Inter-
net browser, a fax, email, and a calendar. It could have been called the first
smartphone long before that term was invented.
   The Communicator was the creation of one man. Reijo Paajanen, who
worked in Tampere, drove his idea through regardless of all opposition.
Thanks to his perseverance one of Nokia’s technological icons saw the light
of day.
   The Communicator wasn’t quite ready when it was first launched – its
software didn’t work as well as it should, and it didn’t have all the applica-
tions necessary for all its features to be fully functional. It was quite a large
device, and many people found it clumsy. It wasn’t especially significant as
far as Nokia’s revenue was concerned. But its impact on our public image as
a company at the cutting edge of technology was immeasurable. The Com-
municator soon occupied the prime position on the financial pages of the
New York Times under the headline: “Made in Finland, Sold Just About All
Over.” That’s the sort of advertising money can’t buy.
   The Communicator was a product designed for professionals. It was an
implement that salespeople, stockbrokers, estate agents, and even truck driv-
ers might use. It could fit in a pocket, even if it needed to be a large pocket.
With the Communicator we were announcing that we were targeting busi-
ness customers who wanted to work efficiently when they were on the move.
From then on Nokia would make products that weren’t just telephones, but
wireless devices for business use.
236                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   The Communicator didn’t so much belong in an office as it was an of-
fice. Finnish diplomats who attended E.U. meetings in Brussels on a daily
basis equipped themselves with Communicators so they could go through
their email and hold conversations with the Finnish foreign ministry dur-
ing breaks in the meetings or even, undetected, while they were in progress.
   Even though the Communicator wasn’t our greatest commercial success,
it did give us a real edge over our competitors. Our achievements began to
be noticed more widely. People began to mention Nokia in the same breath
as other leading companies such as Microsoft, Intel, and Sony. We were
world class now, and this could be measured. The Financial Times and the
consulting firm Price Waterhouse put together a list of Europe’s most highly
regarded companies: we came nineteenth. In electronics we came third, just
after Siemens and Electrolux. Later we improved our rankings.
   Though these were only lists, they did boost our self-esteem. Years of hard
work had begun to pay off: at last we were among the big players, which is
where we had wanted to be ever since we had asked ourselves, five years
earlier, what our goals should be. We were also moving into a further phase
of spectacular growth.
   In 1997 we had to think about what was going on around us and how
Nokia should change to reflect that. We held a few meetings of The Five at
Båtvik. I wanted us to take seriously what was going on the world. Wireless
technology was exploding in front of our eyes, the Internet was creating a
technological revolution, and digital technology was changing everything.
What did we believe in? In which areas did we want to grow? What should
we think about all this? How should Nokia be structured to face these chal-
lenges?
   We also had a debate on whether Nokia’s future lay in mobile phones or
in networks. We encouraged and challenged each other. Some thought that
concentrating on networks would suit Nokia best. They saw no need for
Nokia to focus either on media or on multimedia; the company should stay
in those areas it did best. That wasn’t my opinion. I thought we should at
least play a more active role in developing Internet technology. I decided
that we would abandon one of our old principles, that Nokia should not
seek growth through acquisitions. I had it noted in the board minutes in
September 1997 that “acquisitions are a possible (but not prioritized) means
of enhancing Nokia’s structure.”
   Nokia would be divided into three parts: its highly profitable and expand-
ing mobile phone and network businesses, and a little Internet unit to give us
experience and something to learn from. So we established Nokia Ventures
		
 Against All Odds                                                            237




Nokia 9000 Communicator (1996) beside the smaller Nokia E7 (2010). Kryštof
Korb photo, GNU Free Documentation 1.2, Wikimedia Commons.

Organization, which bought small but capable Internet technology compa-
nies, most of them American. They never became a large part of Nokia: in
2000 they accounted for just three percent of revenue.
   These discussions about Nokia’s future direction were important. The peo-
ple in my core group had clear opinions influenced by their backgrounds
and personalities. Pekka Ala-Pietilä and Sari Baldauf were particularly good
at seeing beyond their own narrow areas and also at picking up even faint
signals. They were also the most ready to embrace new ways of working and
changes in organization. So Pekka was the most natural choice to manage
the new Internet unit.
   In 1997 we also set ourselves the objective of stabilizing our mobile phone
division. This meant that we never wanted to have another nightmare like
the one we lived through in 1995. I wanted to ensure that our processes were
in such good shape that the right components would always be available to
make the right phones available to consumers at the right time. I was now
quite paranoid about this and I didn’t want to leave anything to chance.
   Our results in 1997 were extraordinary – our profits grew by 98 percent.
I started to feel that I had carried out the task I’d been assigned. Five years
had passed since I became Nokia’s chief executive. Now our position was
stronger than ever before and also stronger than we could have imagined
five years earlier.
   But despite my delight I still saw causes for concern when I looked around:
I knew that the most dangerous was success. I saw all sorts of things that we
238                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


understood absolutely nothing about. We weren’t an Internet company and
didn’t want to become one. But had we perhaps defined ourselves a little too
narrowly, identified ourselves too closely with mobile phones? Many types
of new wireless networks began to sprout toward the end of the 1990s. In the
United States people were starting to use palmtop computers and wireless
local area networks.
  We needed to do some more fundamental thinking and establish what
people wanted. What did New York financiers, Tokyo teenagers, Istanbul
shopkeepers, and cattle farmers in Brazil want? They weren’t interested in
GSM technology, WLAN, UMTS, 3G, or any other technical gobbledygook.
They were only interested in services that would actually help them. In a
mobile world they wanted to find new ways of working; and they would
want to use the products and services we offered as long as they were reli-
able, affordable, and visually attractive. Customer satisfaction would be the
key success factor in the future, too.
  Nokia was stepping into a new era, where success would be determined by
customer satisfaction. But our customers were everywhere, and everywhere
they were slightly different. And lots of things had an impact on them, apart
from our wonderful products. Perhaps we should place customer needs cen-
ter stage and move technical concerns to the wings. If we believed only in
established technologies we would soon find ourselves in the wings when
customers found something that met their needs better than our products
did.
  In 1997 my journey to work became significantly shorter when we opened
our new head office in Espoo, about five miles to the west of Helsinki. The
length of my commute, however, hadn’t been a criterion in the choice of
location, particularly since I spent more and more time globetrotting on
Nokia business. Relocation at Keilahti had been under consideration as far
back as 1982. Pekka Helin and Tuomo Siitonen had won the architectural
competition with a design they called Kide, which means crystal, and this
design was the basis for our fine new offices.
		
 Against All Odds                                                           239




                          CHAPTER 50


    How to Lead a Global Nokia?



W       e realized in 1996 that at Nokia we didn’t know enough about the
        world. We had grown by accident into a global company that was
now being compared to other global companies. We were like a little local
team that suddenly finds itself playing in the big leagues.
  I concluded that the firm’s top leadership should monitor and study our
most important markets. Thus Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo took responsibility for
North America, and Sari Baldauf for Asia, which meant Japan, South Korea,
China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan. I wanted us to know what was going on in
these key markets. I also wanted regional viewpoints to play a more promi-
nent role in our decision-making.
  I wanted to create a matrix system for Nokia that would ensure that a sub-
sidiary wouldn’t find itself buried out of sight in China or America. I wanted
information to flow from these markets back to Finland; and, conversely,
for Nokia’s strategy to take root in those areas. I’m not sure how well all this
actually worked, because Sari Baldauf and Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo had only a
couple of years before I reconfigured the organization again. But I do know
that Nokia would never have gained a strong position in China if Sari hadn’t
introduced new ways of doing things there.
  Changes in the markets, our own growth, and technological development
combined to force us to consider our future strategy more closely. One of the
hardest things was to communicate our strategy to our staff, whose num-
bers were growing by several thousand a year. We had 31,766 employees in
1996, and 35,430 a year later. The following year nearly 10,000 people joined
Nokia: we had 44,543 employees altogether. How was some twenty-five-
240                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


year-old Australian computer expert going to learn anything about Nokia’s
values or strategy in his very first proper job? I had no ready answer to this,
but we tried to construct processes that would project both our values and
our strategy. And projection on its own wasn’t enough: we also had to bring
our employees along with us so that they would feel that they could influ-
ence our strategy and values in their turn.
  We opened our annual strategy discussion by bringing together our four
hundred most important managers. These meetings had originally had two
hundred participants, but we expanded that number to reflect the company’s
growth. We ran through all the most important challenges facing us. These
weren’t occasions for self-congratulation or self-satisfied speeches. In line
with Nokia’s finest traditions these meetings were held so that the compa-
ny’s leadership could hear in plain English exactly what people thought. We
spoke of our successes and how we had achieved them, of course, but we also
homed in on things we needed to do better. On these occasions Finns were
over-represented, but the proportion of non-Finns was growing rapidly.
  I’m not a believer in great strategic theories or consultants. For me stra-
tegic thinking is very mundane work. It’s a matter of operational planning,
which has to include a clear idea of where we want to be and how we’ll
get there. A good strategy should pretty well update itself automatically. A
strategy should also allow room to make continuous adjustments and cor-
rections. When Nokia was growing fast at the end of the 1990s, we simply
didn’t have time to commit ourselves to a single rigid strategy; we had to set
off without knowing where we would end up. We could work out the exact
route when we were on our way.
  Although strategic thinking is routine work, you still have to create struc-
tures where it can flourish. We set up a strategy panel at Nokia that met
once a month. It consisted of the executive committee augmented by a few
other senior managers. An outsider sitting in on a meeting of the strategy
panel might be bewildered. The discussion might take some great issue as its
theme, but it would be equally likely to focus on small details. The most im-
portant thing was that no decisions were reached at the meetings. There was
no agenda, and no minutes were kept. Sometimes discussion was heated,
sometimes everyone was lost in thought. The meetings usually lasted about
three hours. Mikko Kosonen, who was responsible for corporate planning,
usually proposed a theme, or occasionally I would make suggestions for dis-
cussion. I liked to use the strategy panel to test out my own ideas and to find
answers to those questions at the forefront of my mind.
  Over the years the strategy panel demonstrated its usefulness as a discus-
sion forum. I enjoy group discussions but I’m not sure they bring out the
		
 Against All Odds                                                          241


best in me. I suppose I’ve had my best strategy discussions with individuals,
on a one-on-one basis. Often I took away one or two key thoughts from the
strategy panel, which I would later discuss with the relevant colleague. My
leadership style was based on The Five and also on direct connections to the
two hundred or so key individuals within Nokia.
  I believe that wisdom doesn’t reside in the head of some great leader but is
diffused throughout the workforce. Companies usually don’t listen enough
to alternative strategies. If someone has ended up as a chief executive or
executive committee member, he has almost certainly lost not only his hair
but his capacity for fresh ideas. But even experienced managers can revital-
ize themselves if they really want to. Organizations should encourage this
renewal, because otherwise their strategy cannot be renewed. But even more
than that, organizations must find a way for new and dissident ideas to make
themselves heard. A company must be able to question its own objectives
and working methods, otherwise it won’t thrive in the real world, the one
we all live in.
  In our discussions we disagreed over only a few matters. We argued vig-
orously about how we should work with mobile network operators and to
what extent we should tailor our products to please them. We had divergent
opinions about that for at least a decade. The question is one of principle
and goes to the heart of Nokia. Nokia always had to balance the conflicting
demands of its own brand and the needs of its customers among the mo-
bile network operators, whose negotiating power varied over time. Highly
competitive auctions of future telephone bandwidth drove many of them to
the brink of bankruptcy. Then Nokia and others had to keep them afloat fi-
nancially so that business could carry on. Conversely, as in 1995, our sales of
mobile phones were so poor at times that sales of networks to the operators
were the only thing that kept our business afloat.
  But even within Nokia there were extreme differences of view on funda-
mental questions. One of our directors might think that you should never
throw in your lot with the operators but should aim to shake them off even-
tually in favor of dealing directly with individual consumers. Another might
say that the operators were among our most important customers and we
should do things exactly as they want. It would be nice if one could find a
clear answer to this question, but there’s no such thing. So Nokia will always
have to navigate this passageway as best it can.
  It may be that Nokia focused too much on technologies associated with
mobile phones – cellular technologies, in other words. It may be that Nokia
should have learned more about other wireless technologies. If we had been
quicker off the mark we might have developed new areas of business that
242                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


would have flourished in the difficult new decade of the 2000s. But over-
hauling a company’s entire strategy is no longer a simple matter if it’s grown
to become the global leader in its field. The degree of difficulty becomes
many times greater.
  The worst that can happen to a company is to run out of money and be
forced into bankruptcy. Enormous success is perhaps the next worst. It
dazzles you and creates the notion that history will repeat itself. Impressive
growth figures or the opening of new markets make you believe that there
exists a path paved with gold, and that if only you can find the secret of
success you’ll soon find your way back to it. If the company has been suc-
cessful in the past, that’s where you’ll probably look to find this secret. If the
company has grown and become successful it can no longer make its own
decisions. Investment analysts and investors follow its every move at every
nanosecond.
  The worst news an investor can hear is that the company has made a new
and unexpected strategic choice that will lead it away from the golden path,
with its guarantee of success and security. It’s pointless to expect investors
to have a long-term perspective. A company has to show growth in its share
price in the short-term, over the next reporting period. A company has to
do what it promised. Just the idea of a company taking a new direction or
adopting a new strategy is enough to scare people off. The share price might
fall, and the company may have less room to maneuver. Its most important
managers will lose any bonuses linked to the share price. It won’t be able to
use its shares as collateral as it once did. The media will use its share price
performance as a reason to condemn its change in direction.
  If a company’s leaders are to push through a new strategy or a complete
renewal of the company, they must either have immense willpower or face a
crisis. If you set out to renew a company that has successfully launched itself
on the stock exchange you may even put your own financial position at risk.
That makes it very difficult to revitalize a successful global public company.
Even so, some succeed: for example, I admire enormously Lou Gerstner’s
work at IBM. He changed a company that made things into one that sold
software and services, at the same time maintaining the company’s position
in the world.
  Nokia didn’t become a major Internet company at the end of the 1990s. Its
board meeting in Beijing in 1998 looked at the alternatives facing the com-
pany: either remain as a significant force in wireless technology or try to es-
tablish itself in the new markets opened up by the Internet. That would have
necessitated major acquisitions, especially in the United States, at the time
		
 Against All Odds                                                          243




I’m shown here with Georg Ehrnrooth, member of the Nokia board of directors.

the Internet bubble was expanding. Nokia’s profitability and its share price
would have dipped for a few years, and the company could well have become
the target for a hostile takeover. Nobody knows where we would have been
by, say, 2005. It’s possible that Nokia would have been in a stronger position.
But it’s also possible that Nokia would no longer have an independent exis-
tence, that some other company would have swallowed us up. No one can
offer a certain answer to a counter-factual question.
   My own role at Nokia changed as the end of the millennium approached.
My boss, Chairman of the Board Casimir Ehrnrooth, invited me to his man-
or house in July 1997. I had gotten on very well with Ehrnrooth. We had
dealt with each other directly; no fussing around, just discussion and agree-
ment on major issues when we needed it, such as after board meetings. So
I guessed there must be some special reason for this visit, but I didn’t know
what that might be beforehand.
   We took a sauna and were eating supper when Ehrnrooth explained why
he had invited me. “I’ve been discussing with the owners who should be
chairman of the board. We’re all agreed that no one already on the board is
really suited to the job. We’ve thought about it and I wondered whether you
might take on this responsibility, given that operational responsibility would
continue to rest with you?”
   The arrangement that Ehrnrooth proposed, which combined the jobs
of chair and chief executive, was common in U.S. companies but less so in
244                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


Europe. Nokia had gradually been approaching the U.S. model in its internal
structures, and against that background the proposal wasn’t unprecedent-
ed. Studies had been made of which sort of company worked better: those
where the chair had operational responsibility, or those where the chair and
the chief executive were different people. No significant differences had been
identified across a wide range of companies or over both long and short time
frames.
   But in 1997 Finnish company law didn’t allow the two roles to be com-
bined, so we needed to do some work on the legal basis for the decision. In
such a case the company would appoint a new chief executive, who would
be responsible for the company’s operations in the sense demanded by the
law, though it would be agreed that I would be ultimately responsible for the
company’s operations.
   The proposal had been presented. I promised to think about it over several
months, because there was clearly no great hurry. We would revisit the is-
sue the following autumn. “I’m ready to take on this arrangement, though
in Finland it’s a little unusual. But we have to make sure the legal aspects are
properly worked out,” was my answer to Ehrnrooth.
   The company secretary and director of legal affairs, Ursula Ranin, drew
up a long and thorough memorandum, which she submitted in December
1997. As well as the legal aspects it summarized international experience.
The advantage of the dual role was the opportunity it gave for decisive ad-
vancement of the company’s vision and chosen focus. The dual role was
risky in so far as the board might no longer be independent of the execu-
tive committee. There would be an exceptional risk if the board’s members
were linked to or dependent on the company or its executive committee.
The board’s ability to carry out its supervisory duties would be weakened,
and it was likely to be too slow to respond if, for example, there was a need
to remove board members.
   Around this time we carried out another restructuring. Pekka Ala-Pietilä
was no longer in charge of the mobile phone division but was now responsi-
ble for strategic planning and projects linked with Nokia’s future. We had set
up the New Ventures Organization to identify suitable companies for Nokia
to buy. Pekka was in charge of this unit and he also continued as director of
Nokia Communications Products. He was also appointed deputy chief ex-
ecutive, which foreshadowed his appointment as president. Matti Alahuhta
became head of the mobile phone division. Starting at the beginning of 1999
the president of the network division would be Sari Baldauf, who had been
running our operations in Asia.
		
 Against All Odds                                                           245


   Pekka Ala-Pietilä was thus appointed president of Nokia. Pekka also be-
came the natural candidate to take over from me when I eventually stood
down as chairman. Why Pekka Ala-Pietilä? I knew all my closest colleagues
extremely well. Pekka seemed very well prepared for the job. He was good
at managing people and had a strong strategic grasp. He was also a brilliant
change manager and very good at picking up signals. His background as
leader of the mobile phone division also influenced the decision. At that
time we believed that mobile phones were even more central to Nokia’s fu-
ture than networks.
   My conversations with Sari Baldauf also formed part of the background.
Sari had told me that she didn’t intend to spend many more years with the
company. She had already been in charge of networks for nearly a decade.
“This has been a wonderful project, but there must be something more to
life than Nokia,” was how she put it. Her original intention had been to leave
Nokia in 2001, but the combination of the changed circumstances and some
arm-twisting from me persuaded her to stay until the beginning of 2005.
   The official decisions were made at the annual general meeting in 1999.
Casimir Ehrnrooth stepped down from the role of chairman of the board
after seven years. There was no drama about this: Ehrnrooth was sixty-eight.
Pekka Ala-Pietilä became president of Nokia and I was appointed chairman
and chief executive.
   The media didn’t find the changes particularly significant. “Only the job ti-
tles change,” wrote the business weekly Talouselämä. I emphasized at the press
conference that in the last resort operational responsibility remained with me.
   Of course everyone should have a boss. As far as I was concerned it was
the deputy chair of the board who fulfilled this role. From spring 1999 un-
til spring 2000 Iiro Viinanen, who had joined the board in 1996, occupied
the slot. Paul J. Collins, who had joined the board in 1998, took over in
2000. Robert F. W. van Oordt had also joined the board in 1998, which
was when we had made English our operational language. After that there
were numerous board members from outside Finland. The change from the
Nokia of old, where the board had been a wrestling mat for Finnish bankers,
couldn’t have been starker.
   Collins’s background was the world of finance: he was deputy chairman of
Citibank. He took quite an active role and spoke to me even more frequently
and intensively than Casimir Ehrnrooth. He lived in London, so we spoke
on the telephone and met at board meetings. We had a very American-style
dialogue, unstructured and direct. Collins’s role at the beginning of the
2000s was notably bigger and more important than it appeared in public.
246                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                          CHAPTER 51


                Meeting the Media



A     chief executive’s relations with the media are so important they
      deserve a chapter to themselves. While what I write here is obvious-
ly based on my experience in Finland, the lessons I learned are applicable
much more widely, perhaps universally.
   Even when I was at school I actively followed both the Finnish and the
international media. My interest deepened when I was at Atlantic College
in Wales: our economics teacher Andrew Maclehose spiced up his lessons
with the Economist and the Financial Times, which was my favorite paper for
decades. Maclehose taught us that carefully argued articles make an impact,
that the media may describe an issue in different ways, and that it’s essential
to crystallize one’s arguments if one is to get a message across.
   Another eye-opening, or perhaps I should say ear-opening, experience
was the radio editing course I attended in Vaasa in 1966, run by two veteran
broadcasters. In that course I learned my first lessons in how journalism
simplifies issues, trivializes arguments, and insists on having the last word.
   The first time I was the subject of media interest was during my time as
president of the National Union of University Students in Finland between
1972 and 1974. The first media profile of me appeared in 1972 in Finland’s
leading newspaper, Helsingin Sanomat. The over-politicized atmosphere
of the 1970s was not conducive to good journalism. Everything was seen
through a political party lens. The culture of journalism was weak and its
integrity left much to be desired. It was yet another factor contributing to
our decision to move to London for a while.
   As finance director of Nokia I met many investors but fewer media rep-
resentatives, because they focused their attention on the charismatic chair-
		
 Against All Odds                                                          247


man, Kari Kairamo. During his time the main objective of Nokia’s media
strategy was to generate international coverage of its fascinating chairman. I
remember Kari once sighing: “I have to meet every little parish magazine in
Europe that has any interest in us at all.” During the course of a day Kairamo
might meet four or even five different editors, even though there might be
nothing much happening at the time. This was long before there were celeb-
rity CEOs. Kairamo’s passing left a vacuum in Nokia’s publicity.
   Kairamo’s successor as chairman, Simo Vuorilehto, was an altogether
more cautious figure. The man in charge of our corporate communications,
Matti Saarinen, described his media strategy as “low profile, dim lights.”
Vuorilehto didn’t give wide-ranging interviews because of Nokia’s financial
problems and internal power battles. Instead a steady stream of gossip and
rumor issued from the company, which then had to try to explain it away. It
would have been best for Nokia not to appear in the press.
   At that time I was in charge of mobile phones and I had to give more at-
tention to the media than I had previously. In the small town of Salo what
Nokia said was important. The mobile phone unit had financial problems,
and I made a real effort with internal communications. I had to bring my
team along with me in the battle for survival. From time to time I met the
chief editor of the local paper to keep him up to date on what was really hap-
pening. I would call him on my way to Salo and drop in for morning coffee
before my real working day began. I believe these background conversations
helped us both. I learned a lot about local feeling and managed to soften the
general impression in Salo of Nokia as “the great unknown.”
   When I marched into the first-floor auditorium at Nokia’s head office in
Helsinki on 16 January 1992, my first day as chief executive, I was unpre-
pared for the media storm I met there. In those days strategies to communi-
cate such major changes weren’t prepared as thoroughly as they are now. It
was seen as just a matter of clarification. The chief executive’s “megaphone”
came as a surprise: matters I had inconsequentially talked about earlier were
suddenly interesting and newsworthy. I also learned that I couldn’t use such
vigorous and direct language as I had done earlier; I had to soften my mes-
sages so that the wave of news wouldn’t break with unwarranted force. Big
headlines often caused concern among the staff. Anyone in a serious posi-
tion of authority soon learns this lesson, often the hard way.
   According to many accounts, new chief executives of major companies
are surprised at how much of their time is taken up with the media. And
becoming accustomed to the media’s working methods isn’t a simple mat-
ter. At least there’s plenty of advice: it’s better to say nothing than to tell
part of the truth; you should never talk about work in progress; you should
248                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


never comment on your competitors; you shouldn’t discuss internal matters
in public; you should guard against complacency; you should keep a clear
head in a crisis.
   Some of the best advice I ever received came from Marjorie Scardino, our
long-time deputy chair, about ten years ago. Scardino had been a journalist
and was for a long time the chief executive of Pearson, which owns the Fi-
nancial Times. “When your company is in crisis and you feel weak and lack
energy, don’t bother with what journalists write. When things are going well
and your ears are ringing with praise, don’t yield to the temptation to read
the press. In both cases take a break.” This seems very wise to me.
   In January 1992 Nokia’s position was so serious that we had to implement
a lot of major changes at once, which took up all our time. So our communi-
cations strategy wasn’t very high on the list of priorities of the new executive
committee. It may have helped that Finland’s domestic media didn’t believe
Nokia had any chance of success. During the economic depression of that
time there were more than enough horrors to go around without seeking
them out, so we were left in peace for a couple of years to build the future.
   I did however set out a simple policy. We would appear in the press when
it would advance Nokia’s interests, and we wouldn’t “sell” stories using the
chief executive. The difference from Kari Kairamo’s time was evident. The
new policy was possible because mobile phones were entering general use
little by little, and we were becoming more interesting as a result. Building
the Nokia brand had started in earnest.
   In spring 1996 The Five discussed the form our communications should
take. It seemed that my colleagues all had their hands full with other work
and woe. They suggested that I should take more explicit responsibility for
communications and relieve them of pressure from the media. I went along
with this, but I told them that their turn would come. In interviews I took the
line that I was strictly focused on my job and I would give interviews only
when I had something new and interesting to say. Chief executives can easily
fall in love with PR to the point where the job is forgotten and only their vis-
ibility and image are important. In extreme cases they begin to live through
their publicity. I decided to avoid that. Usually in interviews I concentrated
on the most important matters from Nokia’s standpoint, though occasion-
ally I took a position on issues of broader interest to society. I refused to do
interviews on personal topics. I found myself best suited to longer, themed
interviews that allowed me to go deeper into the subject.
   A cover story in BusinessWeek, then highly regarded, had long been one
of our goals. It was finally achieved in August 1998, though stories about us
		
 Against All Odds                                                             249




Nokia’s success made ​​me the desired interviewee of the world’s media. I was on
the cover of BusinessWeek for the first time in 1998.

had been published earlier. We didn’t pursue the cover story for its intrinsic
value but because it would confirm that Nokia had at last become a globally
important firm. A similar article appeared in Forbes in May 2000. These two
treatments of Nokia’s progress through the 1990s were in a class of their
own. No other articles succeeded so well in capturing the essence of Nokia’s
company culture. It was perplexing and astonishing that no Finnish journal-
ist even tried to do so.
   The American specialist media was in a supreme position for grabbing
international attention. Stories spread at the speed of light to the media else-
where, so they had a powerful impact on the way the company was per-
ceived globally. I’d go so far as to say that our listing on the New York Stock
Exchange in 1994 and the simultaneous breakthrough of GSM technology
were the turning points as far as the Nokia brand was concerned.
   When products are launched it’s customary to arrange group interviews,
or to stage them around the production line. I was never very keen on
these, though I did them from time to time. Fortunately at Nokia we had a
large group of media-trained experts, which widened the pool of company
spokespeople. We always used to consider very carefully who would best
represent us at any given interview.
250                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   In Anglo-Saxon style we had delegated some of the spokesperson’s role to
our press office even in Kairamo’s day. This had long been standard practice
in major companies, but it was relatively new to Finland and gave rise to a
lively discussion among editors. For us it was a question of the best use of
the executive committee’s time. The committee needed to focus on develop-
ing the company and meeting customers, staff, and other stakeholders. The
press office, on the other hand, was always ready and available, so Nokia
could meet the media’s needs without delay.
   We had also followed major international companies in insisting that
someone from the press office accompanied senior figures at interviews.
This too was unpopular with the Finnish media, though it had been stan-
dard practice elsewhere for decades. I used to maintain close links with our
communications director so that our press office knew what was going on
at Nokia – and also so I would know what interested the media at any given
time.
   At Nokia I had the chance to work with first-class media professionals,
which changed my understanding of the media for good. Each member of
our media team had their own independent understanding of what the com-
munications director’s role should be, and they acted as key advisers and
sparring partners for the chief executive.
   As Nokia’s position became stronger and it became a Fortune 500 com-
pany, I received more and more requests for interviews. I stuck fast to the
line that the most publicity is not the best publicity. I did indeed do more
interviews, but I tried to limit my media work so that I would appear often
enough, but not too often, in the international media. Otherwise the press
office covered most of our publicity. At the end of the 1990s and even at
the beginning of the 2000s there were many chief executives in the United
States who had a high profile. I regarded this as a dangerous strategy from
the viewpoint of both the company and the chief executive.
   I had always enjoyed background interviews with editors more than tra-
ditional interviews. These conversations were rewarding for both parties. I
gained a lot from them and they gave me the chance to explain what was go-
ing on at Nokia without the distortions of the chief executive’s megaphone.
When you don’t have to plan every word in advance you can concentrate
better on what you’re actually saying and have an exchange of views. The
journalists for their part can benefit from the conversation in the ways that
they want – if they want.
   Ever since Atlantic College I had admired the Anglo-Saxon culture of de-
bate, though it isn’t well suited to an interview situation. On the other hand,
		
 Against All Odds                                                           251


in background conversations one can approach issues in a more provoca-
tive way from different standpoints, which I believe should interest editors
as well. The Finnish and the international media reacted differently to this.
International journalists liked wide-ranging background briefings, from
which they could pluck a few nuggets to quote. Finnish editors, on the other
hand, prized the question-and-answer format and liked to make recordings
– though to my delight I found that a few of them enjoyed a free-form dia-
logue. Many editors have the ability to see all sides of an issue and to analyze
and shape them.
   Our relationship with the Finnish press wasn’t always problem-free. And
no wonder, given Nokia’s position as a large global company in a relatively
small economy. On the other hand I was a blunt-speaking Finn deeply com-
mitted to my job and my company; at times I was very direct.
   Because we were such a big company in such an interesting field, investors
were quick to calculate the cash value of every little story. A single mistake
could have a significant impact on our share price, which is always a prob-
lem for listed companies. Errors are never beneficial to a company, nor is
the rumor mill. They hamper normal activity and speculators make money
from them.
   I remember a number of articles where I disagreed with the editor. My
policy was to say so because I found it hard to take criticism based on misin-
formation or misleading assertions. All editors claim to want feedback, but
my experience suggests differently. The media’s appreciation of dialogue has
sometimes been limited, though things have improved over time.
   When in 2006 I stepped down from the position of chief executive to
become part-time chairman of the board, I tried to draw a clear distinc-
tion between the public faces of the two roles. As a young chief executive I
had enjoyed exceptional support from the chairman of the board, Casimir
Ehrnrooth. He defined his role very clearly while also strongly supporting
me. In the same way I wanted to withdraw from Nokia’s PR work and give
strong background support to Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo and the rest of the ex-
ecutive committee. In some cultures, such as Sweden and the United King-
dom, the board chair is expected to be appreciably more visible, but I like
the Finnish model.
252                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                           CHAPTER 52


                          The Biggest



I  n June 1998 I was sitting in my new office when my mobile phone
   rang. At the other end was Pekka Ala-Pietilä, head of the mobile phone
division. “Jorma, listen . . . it’s happened!” “What’s that?” “We are the biggest,
beyond question. Our June sales have overtaken Motorola’s.” Pekka sounded
relaxed as always.
   We had achieved the objective I had set out at our Salo plant back in 1990.
For the first time we had beaten Motorola on their home turf. That year,
1998, was the year we broke through in the United States: our market share
grew by 15 percentage points to 36 percent, while Motorola’s share fell to 26
percent.
   “Well, what next?” I asked. We were a little nonplussed and simply agreed
we would carry on as we had. Pekka likes champagne a little more than I do,
so a few weeks later when we were on a business trip we raised a glass at the
airport to mark our achievement. And that was the extent of our celebra-
tions. At Nokia we were famously bad at saluting our own success.
   We had survived the 1995 crisis, and by 1997 phone production was going
at a fair pace, though our market share had fallen a little. That year the global
market for mobile telephones passed the 100-million mark for the first time.
Mobile phones were becoming by far the most important consumer elec-
tronics item, way ahead of personal computers, watches, and other prod-
ucts. Nobody could forecast the growth figures. Between 1997 and 1999 the
global number of mobile phones almost trebled: by the end of 1999 there
were estimated to be 278 million in use, nearly half of them in Europe.
   In October 1998 we announced that Nokia had become the largest mobile
		
 Against All Odds                                                           253


phone manufacturer, with about a quarter of the global market. I told the
press that this was only an interim target. Of course, it meant more than that
to me and to everyone else at Nokia. More than ten years of hard work had
not been wasted. The decisions we had made back in 1992 had been vindi-
cated. Nokia had focused on areas with a future, and that future was brighter
than any of us could have imagined in our wildest dreams. The price of that
future was hard work, which many people regarded not so much as work
but as drudgery. The days were long, the breaks were brief, and often the
weekends were taken up with work.
   Becoming the world’s biggest mobile phone company meant many things.
It meant we had overtaken Motorola, which didn’t really take us seriously
before the middle of the 1990s. We had beaten our eternal competitor Erics-
son, which had intended to buy Nokia in 1991 until the Swedes decided we
were too feeble to bother with and so withdrew their offer. We had overtaken
Siemens, which in 1992 had been eager to buy our network business. We had
surpassed all of our competitors.
   We had also shown that we knew how to get out of the crisis that the
media had portrayed as the beginning of the end for Nokia. The crisis had
made us stronger as the markets grew. Our logistics were performing bril-
liantly, our factories were turning out phones for the right places at the right
time, and the markets were growing ever faster. In 1998 we sold 40.8 mil-
lion phones, compared to 21.3 million the previous year. By the measure of
the total number of phones we made, our growth was nearly 100 percent.
And the trend in our market share had also reversed itself: in 1997 it was
19 percent and a year later 24 percent. Our revenue grew by 51 percent in
1998, and our trading profit by 75 percent. In one year our share value rose
220 percent.
   For Nokia the early 1990s had been hard, but after some difficult years
the company began to grow at an unprecedented rate. We didn’t understand
why it grew so fast. During the decade the number of employees doubled,
revenue grew tenfold, and profits grew more than a hundredfold. Our share
value went up by a factor of 312. Our brand, which at the beginning of the
decade was associated with rubber boots, was now one of the world’s most
valuable.
   The rise in share price was driven by expectations of future success. At
the end of the 1990s and in the early 2000s we succeeded magnificently,
though shares in technology companies were generally highly valued at that
time. The value of companies on stock exchanges was becoming detached
from solid business success. Share values also fluctuated wildly. Later people
254                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


would talk of the dotcom bubble. Nokia shares reached their all-time peak
when their price on 20 June 2000 touched $66.
  During the 1990s we completely reorganized our incentive structures. We
introduced the first share option scheme in 1994, covering about 50 employ-
ees. New schemes followed in 1995 (about 350 people), 1997 (about 2,000
people), and 1999 (nearly 5,000 people). Participation in these schemes was
exceptionally wide.
  Options from the first scheme began to be worth selling when their val-
ue rose at the end of the 1990s as the company’s results improved and the
dotcom bubble inflated. The peak years for options in Finland were 1999
and 2000, when many Nokia employees became millionaires. Many of them
didn’t live or work in Finland. It’s also important to remember that options
packages and the circumstances in which they could be redeemed were
different for different employees. And it wasn’t a choice between nothing
and ten million marks, rather that the sums earned through options rose in
stages.
  Finns enjoy a risky undertaking. Now hundreds of senior managers re-
ceived a sum comparable to a lottery win in the middle of their careers.
Getting rich quickly naturally tended to throw people off course, and some
were unable to deal with it. They simply ran out of motivation. In the Salo
plant, for example, a small group of fifty-something engineers decided to
take early retirement.
  My own closest colleagues didn’t find that options made any difference –
work days were no shorter and their lifestyles didn’t change. Their colleagues
in similar positions elsewhere in the world earned even more than they did.
About five years later some of Nokia’s key staff did leave the company, but
they did so because they wanted to do something different with their lives,
not just because they had been granted economic freedom. This was clear
in the choices they made: most of them went on to leadership roles in other
major companies rather than head for the golf course. When Nokia was ex-
panding so rapidly, job satisfaction was the main motivator for senior man-
agers.
  In American culture it’s natural to talk about money. “What’s your net
worth?” is a perfectly ordinary question. But in Finland we’re silent on the
subject, and the question wasn’t broached in Nokia’s business units. But the
popular press unofficially took care of internal communication by reporting
our salaries, down to the last mark, by examining our tax returns, which are
a matter of public record in Finland.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          255




                          CHAPTER 53


        Nokia in Finland, Finland
                in Nokia


T    he lobby at Nokia headquarters was one of the most international
     places in Finland around the turn of the millennium. Each morning
travelers would arrive there, with their luggage, from almost every coun-
try in the world: our partners in joint ventures, software designers, strate-
gic planners, investment bankers, stock market analysts, journalists, and of
course Nokia’s own employees. They all looked around them with curios-
ity and reverence, and many clutched their mobiles and immortalized the
scene and the works of art. The atmosphere was more international than
at Helsinki airport. Many of them knew more about the company than the
country where Nokia was located. The people who used our phones around
the world of course knew even less about the country where they were made.
   Nokia’s “Finnishness” had begun to arouse interest back when the compa-
ny started to grow and become international. Foreign analysts asked whether
the company or its managers were “too Finnish.” For many it was a miracle
that Nokia had transcended its Finnish origins to become a global company
in a business centered on growing markets in the Far East, but where inno-
vations took place mostly in Silicon Valley on the U.S. West Coast.
   Nokia’s leaders had to review the company’s relationship with Finland.
Was Finland too remote a place for Nokia to develop and grow? Did Fin-
land and Finnishness distort its management’s perceptions of global mar-
kets? Ought we to go and set up in one of the world’s real centers of activity?
Could Finland satisfy our needs for creativity and expertise? Was our small
domestic market an advantage or a nuisance? These were just a few of our
questions. We also had to consider how we could attract top talent to Fin-
256                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


land when the country could offer little in the way of sunshine or low taxes.
Helsinki was not a great metropolis, and it wouldn’t become one even with
Nokia’s help.
   On the other hand we knew well that Finns weren’t short of ambition or a
desire to impress – that was how the company’s ascent had begun, after all.
Finnish engineers did excellent work and wanted to make the world’s best
products. Finland had always been an early adopter of new technologies,
such as the bicycle, electricity, and the telephone.
   Despite these deliberations Nokia was part of Finland’s destiny, and Fin-
land was part of Nokia’s destiny.
   The figures showed this clearly at the end of the 1990s: Nokia’s share of
Finland’s exports was nearly a quarter, and the company accounted for over
5 percent of the country’s GDP. Nokia had a huge impact, at times even
greater than these figures indicate. Nokia brought a fresh self-confidence
and boldness to a country recovering from economic depression. Nokia
gave hope to companies and individuals who wanted to become world lead-
ers in their field. “It’s possible to do great things in Finland, because here
there are fewer hierarchical structures and internal brakes on activity then
in many other societies,” the orchestral conductor Esa-Pekka Salonen has
said of his own experiences.
   This encapsulates one of Finland’s strengths. It certainly helped us.
   In the early 1990s two global phenomena occurred that were of great ben-
efit to us: a technological leap forward in telecommunications and the lib-
eralization of trade. These presented an immense opportunity to a company
with its origins in a small country, and we were quick to seize it.
   Finland too needed to break with its past. The landscape was bleak follow-
ing a round of bankruptcies and failure. Finland’s adjustment to liberalized
financial markets and European competition had not been painless. Finland
needed a new spirit of enterprise and business-mindedness. The example of
Nokia’s success was crucial in changing attitudes. There was a virtuous circle:
Finland became more visible, and influential people started to take an inter-
est in what was happening there and what they could learn from it.
   Finland’s economic growth after 1993 was exceptional. Changes in the tax
system helped things along, while attitudes toward enterprise and wealth
creation became much healthier as Finland developed into a modern mar-
ket economy, assisted by Nokia. Nokia brought wealth to Finland by creat-
ing good taxpayers concentrated in the regions where the company oper-
ated. Finland’s new wealth sometimes inspired admiration, sometimes envy.
Ultimately it showed that success enriches those who have thrown them-
		
 Against All Odds                                                        257


selves into creating it. We had created an example in Finland that many have
followed since.
   No winning streak lasts forever. Nokia and Finland were the leaders in
technological development in telecommunications in the 1990s, but their
roles changed during the Internet revolution in the following decade. The
United States was now where new content, services, and applications origi-
nated, and the Finns didn’t really understand the new world, let alone mas-
ter it. This naturally affected Nokia. We should have drawn on global exper-
tise better and faster.
   Finland had its limitations. Nokia was a major company in a Finnish en-
vironment, and this was reflected in discussions about the company. Nokia’s
importance was sometimes exaggerated, sometimes undervalued. Finns
were slow to learn that despite Nokia’s Finnishness all the company’s deci-
sions were made in the face of worldwide competition. Nokia’s growth also
made national figures of its senior people. Some of us liked this, but for
many it was just a nuisance. Basking in the limelight really wasn’t part of
Nokia’s culture, and in any case we had more than enough to do. Members
of the executive committee ran divisions that, if they had been individual
companies, would have been among the largest in Finland.
   I was always proud of Nokia’s Finnishness. If Nokia’s success helped Fin-
land, that was the best psychological salary of all. But I also knew that the
company couldn’t remain the prisoner of Finland’s position or size, because
that would be a defeat for Finland.
   Over the years our own attitude toward Nokia’s domicile changed in a
positive way. As China became more important to us, it became clear that
there was nothing to complain about in being just seven and a half hours
away from both New York and Beijing. Helsinki was suddenly not such a
bad place to be based.
258                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                          CHAPTER 54


      Toward the New Millennium



O     ne meeting in 1999 sticks in my mind. In June I took part in a con-
      ference organized by Allen & Company in Sun Valley, Idaho. This
was an annual get-together of senior businesspeople, major investors, and
other influential people from business and cultural life. The previous year I
had given a presentation on Nokia. At this year’s event the most interesting
speaker was Apple’s acting CEO, Steve Jobs.
   Steve Jobs had been a wunderkind in the field of information technology.
In the 1970s he and Steve Wozniak had set up Apple together. In the mid-
1980s Jobs’s team had launched the Macintosh, which was a major event.
In 1985 Jobs was eased out of the company he had founded, and he made
a fresh start as an entrepreneur, founding a new company called NeXT. He
also started to finance and later lead Pixar, which made the first entirely
computer-animated film, Toy Story. In 1996 Apple announced it was buying
NeXT, and so Jobs returned to the company as an adviser. Apple was in deep
difficulties at the time, and its CEO, Gil Amelio, was forced out in June 1997.
Steve Jobs’s appointment as CEO was intended as an interim measure, but
the word acting was deleted from his job title in 2000.
   Jobs was in Idaho not to talk about Apple products but about the movies
Pixar made. Jobs walked from side to side on the wide stage, and described
how the toys that gave Toy Story its name were summoned to life with the
aid of computers. He was dressed in his signature jeans and black turtleneck
shirt and was wearing round-lensed spectacles. He spoke about the techni-
cal basis for computer animation as intimately and attractively as a natural
storyteller over a campfire.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          259


   Later we met several times at similar events and we had phone conversa-
tions to discuss possible joint ventures. Jobs came across as an exceptional
and absolutist individual for whom everything was either/or; the middle
way and compromises were unknown to him. Apple’s products and services
were “awesome, brilliant, overwhelming, the best.” He believed almost fa-
natically in what he did.
   Our explorations of possible cooperation were preliminary and it quickly
became clear that it wasn’t worth Nokia’s while. Apple had the reputation for
being difficult and for drafting agreements weighted in its favor.
   We didn’t work together, but Jobs had a big impact on me. His background
had given him an excellent understanding of four things: the technical com-
position of a device (hardware), user experience (software), content (sound,
image, and moving image), and external appearance (design). This combi-
nation was exceptionally powerful.
   Nokia’s rate of growth in the 1990s meant that everyone in the company
had to concentrate on production, sales, and improving our processes. We
set up new factories and took on new people all over the world. Our staff
numbers breached the 40,000 barrier in 1998 and by 2000 Nokia employed
over 58,000 people. I did my best to maintain connections with our employ-
ees and paid many visits to our offices and factories around the world. Nokia
was now at least as multicultural as Atlantic College had been. Cultural dif-
ferences made themselves felt in my meetings with employees. The Finns had
no problem with using first names or giving direct feedback about the way
things were organized. But in Asia the chief executive was a great personage,
and my visits were all too often interpreted as meaning that somebody had
done something wrong – which was not at all the message I wanted to send.
Breaking the ice took its time.
   Growth in the mobile phone market was so exceptional that even Nokia
had its hands more than full in adapting to its demands. We needed ev-
ery product development manager we could find in Finland and in other
countries where we did product development. We needed more people who
knew marketing, logistics, and sales. We needed ever more good managers
for all our departments. All our energy was absorbed by growth, bringing
growth under control, and lubricating our machinery. We couldn’t afford to
miss any opportunities that growth offered.
   We looked at just the right issues in 1998, though we were probably not as
decisive as we should have been. It’s easy to say with the benefit of hindsight
that we didn’t invest enough of our profits from mobile phones in new areas,
which might have led to new growth in the 2000s. In many areas we were too
260                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


early. We followed events and wanted to be in at the beginning, but some-
times it would have been better to wait and then taken bolder steps later.
  Nokia placed a strong emphasis on research and product development. In
2000 we had 20,000 staff working on them, with around two-thirds in Fin-
land. Our research centers generated many new discoveries and solutions
to problems: our briefcase was bursting with patents. We had launched one
wonderful model of phone after another, and our position in networks was
also strong.
  But in the future it would not be enough just to manufacture phones –
phones had to have software that made them stand out from their com-
petitors. We understood this and believed we could develop strong software
expertise in our research centers. Later we had to accept that our efforts had
been inadequate.
  In the 1990s Nokia had found itself growing at a unique rate. Finnish pes-
simism ensured that we didn’t imagine an unrealistic future for Nokia. We
began to think about the next phase. We understood that mobile phones
alone weren’t enough to take us into the next millennium.
		
 Against All Odds    261




       PA R T I V


     GROWTH AND
  AN END TO GROWTH
262   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa
		
 Against All Odds                                                         263




                         CHAPTER 55


                     Profit Warning



O     n 12 June 2001 an era came to an end. Or rather, the era had ended the
      previous month, but it became news only in June. On 12 June Nokia gave
a profit warning. We explained that sales were showing growth of less than 10
percent when at the end of April we had still expected 20 percent growth. That
would have consequences for the bottom line: profits for the year’s second
quarter would be 15 to 20 percent less than we had predicted earlier.
   The markets were less than delighted with Nokia’s little summer surprise.
In the first fifteen minutes after the announcement our share price spiraled
down by 15 percent. Put another way, 20 billion dollars were wiped off the
company’s value. Our market worth thus shrank by 1.3 billion dollars a min-
ute. The profit warning was Finland’s main news story and the lead item in
the world’s financial media.
   Summer in Finland was at its most radiant. The trees were festooned with
pale green leaves and the sea shimmered outside Nokia’s head office. People’s
thoughts were turning to their holidays. In a couple of weeks it would be
midsummer, when the Finnish summer really began. In the center of Hel-
sinki there was a brisk trade in ice cream, and the first new potatoes of the
season would reach the open-air market down by the harbor at any mo-
ment. New potatoes and herrings are a special Finnish dish – imagine what
it would be like if bacon and eggs or smoked salmon and cream cheese be-
came available only with the arrival of summer.
   But at Nokia we had other things to think about: with my team I was try-
ing to work out what was going on. Had we come up against a brick wall?
Could we get through it? If not, could we get around it? Or would Nokia
have to turn itself into a different sort of company?
264                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


    On the evening of the profit warning I had promised to speak at a global
conference of communications specialists in Helsinki. Some were technical
experts, some were senior executives. All would want to hear what I had to
say about the profit warning. I tried to appear relaxed, confident, and calm.
“I want to send out a clear message that we remain confident of our future
and are ever more convinced that we’re on the right track. Though as a com-
pany we’re in good shape, the slowdown in economic growth is taking its
toll,” I said. I went on: “Companies have to make what people really need.
Mobile services have to be individual.”
    I also tried to explain that we had moved into a new era and that my con-
fidence in the future remained undimmed. But neither I nor anyone else at
Nokia had a very clear picture of what that future held. What would life at
Nokia be like without frenetic growth? Without constant new challenges?
A life of cost savings, demands for strict efficiency, and battles for resources
between different parts of the company?
    I had learned that growth was as important for companies as oxygen was
for people. Growth didn’t just mean that sales figures increased or that share-
holders could be certain of their dividends. Growth is important for other
reasons. The whole of human life is a matter of physical and psychologi-
cal growth. Individuals must search out what’s best for themselves, to make
more of themselves, to develop toward perfection. Growth in a company
gives people opportunities to do that.
    Without growth a company’s employees turn into conservatives: they’ve
lost the reason to exert themselves. If a company’s leadership doesn’t set suf-
ficiently ambitious targets for growth, it’s delusional if it believes that em-
ployees will stretch themselves. They won’t. In the laboratories researchers
won’t bother to explore that one last possibility. Marketing people will be
happy with the advertising company’s initial proposal for a new campaign.
Over in personnel they’ll be satisfied with mediocre recruits when they
should be taking on the best people possible. Products won’t be fully tested,
and mobile phones that don’t work or are even downright dangerous will
reach the market.
    Without growth a company will shrivel. It will be forced to cut costs if
it’s to have any chance of making a respectable profit. These savings will hit
product development, and the quality of the company’s products will start
to decline. When that happens the company’s market position will collapse
and its targets will again be in grave danger. The cycle will continue until the
company is saved by new management or a new owner, or a merciful death
ends its misery. The shareholders will have to make do with whatever is left
over. Thus ends the tale of the company that’s unable to grow.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          265


   Nokia had enjoyed exceptional growth for around ten years. Perhaps
we should have done more to control the growth. Perhaps we should have
thought harder about how fast our workforce was growing. Perhaps we
should have thought about the organization in a different way. We could
revisit many of our decisions, but everyone at Nokia knows in their hearts
what growth feels like. In the 1990s it was exceptionally rapid. It made ev-
ery heart beat faster. It created ambitious targets of its own accord, or so it
seemed. Many of those targets were achieved.
   We were an efficient machine that produced more money for its owners
than any other company in our area. We had also become one of the world’s
most valuable brands, and promising young people all over the world were
queuing up to work for us.
   By the beginning of the 2000s people weren’t buying mobile phones in
such large numbers as earlier. Or, more precisely, people wanted to buy just
the same number as before, but not more. In spring 2001 I estimated that
about 405 million phones would be sold worldwide that year, roughly the
same as the previous year. Sales of networks were no help in relieving Nokia’s
hangover from its years of growth. In July 2001 I said that better times would
dawn again the following year, but in my heart I wasn’t sure.
   Nokia was a self-confident, efficient, and profitable company with a keen
sense of its own worth and its own values. Its employees had earned this
through hard work, sometimes at personal sacrifice. Many had also received
a more concrete reward: options and bonuses had made many Nokia em-
ployees wealthy. A strong sense of one’s own worth, however, may lead to
self-satisfaction and slackness. When we were recruiting large numbers at
the end of the 1990s, not all the applicants wanted to simply do their best
or excel. And it wasn’t a question of weakness within the company. Every
expanding firm has to take on new people who are paid to solve ever more
tightly defined problems, which isn’t always good for efficiency.
   Anssi Vanjoki came up with a telling example. “Now it really has hap-
pened. Nokia is now completely bureaucratized. A bloke came into my
room, and I asked him what he did, and he told me he was a ringtone expert.
Just imagine, now we have our own ringtone expert!”
   Some of our new employees just wanted to grab a slice of the enchanted
cake that Nokia had baked for itself. These people had seen only the years
of exceptional growth, and they didn’t experience the self-sacrifice that
lay behind the company’s initial phase of growth. When growth suddenly
stopped, many of these people were lost. They slowed down the changes that
Nokia had to make. Analysts wrote in the summer of 2001 that Nokia was
no longer “immortal.” Nokia had never been immortal, but many people in
266                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


the company had experienced only those times when it had felt immortal.
They didn’t comprehend that companies are always mortal. Economic his-
tory is full of formerly well-known “immortal” companies, of which nothing
is now remembered except the name, if that.
   In 2001 the dotcom bubble burst and companies went back to square one.
The mobile network operating companies had spent loads of cash on new
mobile networks, but their ambitious plans evaporated as quickly as the
money invested in them.
   The dangers for Nokia were both internal and external. Internally we were
following the same path that had brought such success at the end of the
1990s. We hadn’t noticed that the world had changed. Our competitors had
invested in product development, in the design of new phones, and in open-
ing up new markets. The market share of the Korean company Samsung had
started to grow. In China local firms were doing well. The average price of
mobile phones had started to fall. Phones still sold well, as long as they were
cheap, fun, and colorful – the sorts of items that teenage girls would want to
be seen with and use on the streets of Beijing or Tokyo. The mobile phone
seemed to be becoming so cheap that you could trade it in for a newer model
on a whim. But phones also needed to become more complex. People, and
especially companies, wanted phones that would enable you to work, read
emails, and browse the Internet. Such phones required extra features and
additional software. Nokia had made phones; now we had to become a soft-
ware company as well.
   Every firm that aspires to become a global software company will sooner
or later run into Microsoft. Analysts and journalists started writing about a
titanic battle that Microsoft and Nokia were waging against each other. We
started to believe there really was such a battle when Bill Gates announced
at ITU Telecom World in Geneva in 1999 that Microsoft intended to chal-
lenge Nokia. We started to prepare for victory in a struggle that seemed
inescapable. Before that, though, we had to think about how we could get
our company to start growing again.
   In the early 2000s Nokia employed nearly 20,000 people who had com-
pleted a serious academic education. They were thinking people: they cer-
tainly took satisfaction from their salaries and other perks, but their real
motivation came from elsewhere. It came from the company’s ambitious
goals, from growth, and from the fast-moving stream that carried them for-
ward toward greater challenges. Now we had to find a way of creating those
challenges or we would have trouble later on if our best people left us while
we were still hoping for growth to turn up from somewhere.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          267




                          CHAPTER 56


             Timing Is Everything



T     he chief executive is responsible for changes in senior manage-
      ment, whereas a change in chief executive is a matter for the board. But
the chief executive should know when he has led the company long enough.
In reality many chief executives want to hang on to power, even after they’ve
lost their passion, their energy, and even their grip. The CEO’s job isn’t sim-
ple: there’s more than enough to do twenty-four hours a day. You have to
maintain your enthusiasm for new things, even if you’ve been in the job for
many years. You have to recognize the limits of your own power if you’re to
keep your wits and your health.
   By 2001 I had been Nokia’s chief executive for ten years, and I had worked
at Nokia for sixteen years. Nokia was a completely different company from
the one I had joined. I had seen and experienced a great deal: ten years as
chief executive of a leading technology company was an exceptional length
of service. Our competitors had all changed their leaders rather often. One
reason for that, of course, was that the companies’ boards and shareholders
hadn’t been satisfied with their performance. I didn’t have that problem.
   I had told the board two things: I would carry on at least until 2003, and
I thought Pekka Ala-Pietilä, who had been managing director since 1999,
should be my successor. Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo was an excellent alternative;
he was currently finance director. This was my “last will and testament,”
which I entrusted to the board in case something serious should befall me.
   I had begun to discuss these issues with the board in the summer of 2001.
I was the board chairman, but it wasn’t for me to decide my own future. I
spoke to the board members; the deputy chairman and chair of the person-
268                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


nel committee, Paul Collins, played a leading role. The board wasn’t at all
keen even to discuss a change of the CEO in 2003. Nor were they ready to
nominate Pekka Ala-Pietilä as my successor.
   “Fine. Then I propose that I stay on until 2006. I’ll put that down on paper
and we’ll make it public,” I said to Paul Collins. This seemed to have the sup-
port of the board, and that was how agreement was reached that I would stay
at Nokia at least until 2006. The formal announcement was made at the end
of October 2001. The press described this as “exceptional,” perhaps because
other companies seemed keener to change their CEOs than to keep them.
For their part the Nokia board wanted to ensure that I would stay a few
more years. The board felt comfortable having a familiar leader during such
a turmoil in the industry.
   The timing of a change determines everything. The wrong change, even
when the time is ripe, may bring down a successful company once and for
all. The right change, but at the wrong time, won’t help the company but
will cause opportunities to be lost. Perhaps the markets aren’t ready for the
change; or perhaps the consumers aren’t ready for the new products.
   Why can’t chief executives time their decisions right, if everything de-
pends on their ability to do so? Ultimately, the timing of a decision is based
on intuition alone. There are no compelling, objective reasons, either gen-
eral or specific, on which to base the change. To carry out a major change
within a company is never a democratic decision. It’s for the heads of the
company to bear the responsibility for the changes. Very often their most
important task is to sense when those changes should be made.
   Complex changes are an everyday matter in the areas where Nokia is ac-
tive. Technology changes. The consumption patterns of hundreds of mil-
lions of people change. Competitors change their way of operating. All this
makes Nokia the world’s most fascinating place to work. I have lived in the
middle of it and made an impact. I couldn’t hope for more.
   I tried to sense those moments when the organization had to shake itself
up and transform itself into something new. Change is in part an absolute
value: people shouldn’t be left to loll around in comfortable chairs in beauti-
ful offices because human nature resists change. Without change we have no
way of going forward: our development as human beings grinds to a halt.
That’s why I rotated, changed, and reorganized Nokia’s leadership so many
times. It’s easy to push through changes if the company is in danger or if
difficult times clearly lie ahead. Everyone then understands why change is
necessary. The old road is no good. A better route to a brighter future has to
be found. Crisis is the best catalyst of change.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          269


   The hardest thing is to sense the need for change, and then to put change
into effect, just when everything seems to be going well. When the figures
look good, revenue is growing, and profitability remains high, it’s difficult
even to talk about change. It’s also very difficult to shift a manager whose
life story is one of uninterrupted success. Even so, a transfer may be the only
sensible thing to do if the old methods aren’t working where it matters – in
the market.
270                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                          CHAPTER 57


                   Is Everyone Safe?



I  n October 2001 the world’s media had other things to think about
   than the timetable for the departure of Nokia’s CEO. In September 2001
the world had changed in an instant into a different sort of place: even its
most powerful people could no longer feel safe.
   On 11 September Nokia made a preliminary announcement of its latest
results at two in the afternoon, Finnish time. A little later I sat in my office
on the seventh floor. The view out toward the sea was distinctly autumnal,
though one or two sailing boats bobbed about in the distance. I was fol-
lowing on my computer how Nokia’s shares were doing following our an-
nouncement. We were satisfied with the figures. We had said that our profits
would be very much in line with what we had forecast.
   Investors could trust Nokia. We expected a favorable reception, which is
indeed what we got immediately; the share price rose by ten percent. We
said we would organize a conference call for analysts, investors, and editors
– anyone who wanted it – at 4 o’clock – 9 o’clock in the morning in New York.
   Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo was responsible for the conference call. I continued
to follow Nokia’s share price on my computer screen. I felt rather carefree
for once. Suddenly, at about two minutes past four, the share price plunged.
I looked at the screen, perturbed. “What on earth have they told the inves-
tors?” I thought aloud as I sat in my office, which had neither a television
nor a Reuters screen. I had always tried to keep these out of my room so that
headline news couldn’t deflect me from the fundamentals. And now head-
line news was fundamental.
   I managed to find a news item circulated by the Finnish news service,
Startel. This said that an aircraft had hit the World Trade Center in New
		
 Against All Odds                                                           271


York, after which stock exchanges had started to slide the world over. About
five minutes later came a report that a second plane had crashed into the
World Trade Center. Then I dashed to the television in the adjoining confer-
ence room and turned on one of the Finnish channels. The finance minister
was giving parliament an appraisal of the strengths and weaknesses of the
Finnish economy. Then the opposition leader spoke at length, and then the
finance minister defended his budget. The politicians were carrying on as
if nothing had happened; for a moment they seemed to be part of a news
blackout on global events. I couldn’t afford not to know what had happened
in New York. Next I invaded the sixth floor where our head of communi-
cations, Lauri Kivinen, and his team were tuned to international channels,
which were broadcasting ever more shocking pictures of the terrorist attack.
   At five o’clock Finnish television was still showing the budget, though a
band of text informed viewers that a catastrophe had happened. It still only
referred to an “aircraft collision,” however.
   I quickly called a little crisis meeting in my office. Veli Sundbäck, our di-
rector responsible for trade policy and an experienced diplomat, and Olli-
Pekka Kallasvuo took part. We rang everyone on the executive board and
tried to establish where our staff had been at the critical moment. Nokia had
twenty employees at its Manhattan office. By about nine o’clock we knew
that twelve of our employees had been in the office that Tuesday morning,
and all were safe. We contacted the other eight and learned that they too
were unharmed. Only the following day did we ascertain that none of our
employees had been on the fatal flights.
   We had survived the terrorist strikes in which thousands lost their lives
or their health or loved ones. We had been lucky at Nokia, and we were pro-
foundly grateful. Some of our employees might well have been visiting the
World Trade Center that very morning, for many of our business customers
had their offices in the Twin Towers.
   At Nokia we had to tell people that all our own staff were safe. Our em-
ployees around the world were starting to send us their comments, ques-
tions, and views of where all this was likely to lead. I was shocked when I
saw the pictures showing how the familiar landscape of lower Manhattan
had been transformed into a smoking ruin filled with people fleeing for their
lives. Most of my family was travelling abroad, and I had to make sure that
they were safe. Liisa, my wife, was on a visit to Madrid with other officials
from her department. I caught her on the phone in Spain, where the atmo-
sphere was nervous and gloomy.
   I’d promised a while back to have dinner with my daughter Anna that eve-
ning. On the one hand, I felt that I should stay at Nokia with my team on this
272                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


particular evening; on the other, Liisa was away, there was no food at home,
and I had to eat something. Perhaps, too, Anna would like to see her father
on this evening in particular. She had spent the day coaching young gym-
nasts, and at around six one of the other coaches had told her that “some-
thing weird” had happened in New York.
   “This is the most important thing to happen to our generation, because it
really is going to change the world. Sadly it’s both the most important thing
but it’s also really negative,” I thought as my car took me to the center of Hel-
sinki, which seemed empty. People had gone home. Everyone was watching
the news on television. Everyone who could was sitting next to the people
they loved. Many people were taking refuge in the familiar and the secure.
Travel – and indeed globalization – came to a standstill that day. The belief
in trade, in progress, in a civilized dialogue between cultures seemed to have
died at the same time, overwhelmed by the clouds of smoke and dust the
terrible explosions in New York had released.
   My driver took me from our headquarters over the bridges to Helsinki. As
we drove, the sun was setting on the Baltic horizon. There were still leaves
on the trees on Helsinki’s boulevards as the last rays of the evening sun re-
flected off the walls of the austere white Swedish theatre. I was a few minutes
late at the cool new Italian restaurant, Via. Anna and I sat in a window seat;
with my back to the window I surveyed the restaurant. There weren’t many
people there, and those who were didn’t take much notice of me, which was
unusual in a Finnish restaurant. Perhaps people had other things to think
about. We ordered a stir-fry, which came promptly but represented no sort
of culinary landmark. We talked about what would happen if the United
States curled up into its shell or withdrew from the rest of the world.
   My son was on a business trip to San Francisco, where his conference was
carrying on as normal. On the West Coast they knew only that there had
been a “plane accident” in New York. At dinner we still hadn’t had word
from him, and we were both a little worried though we tried not to be.
   I made a few calls to Manhattan and got through to some of my friends
surprisingly easily. Pentti Kouri was in good shape and ready to analyze
what the terrorist attack meant for the world’s future. Most of the mobile
phone networks were working superbly. Only one network stopped operat-
ing, because its key antennae and other equipment had been mounted on
the World Trade Center. I said goodnight to Anna and returned to Nokia at
about nine-thirty. I checked the bulletins we were sending out and sent an
email to the entire workforce. After an hour I left for my empty home, where
I watched the news on CNN.
		
 Against All Odds                                                               273


   Well before midnight I got hold of my son and his wife. Now I knew that
the whole of my international family was safe and well.
   The following morning the world had changed. Companies had started to
look at their own security arrangements. Travel was restricted. I was all too
conscious that the arrangements for my own security had been beefed up: it
meant I could no longer move around freely just anywhere as a private indi-
vidual. Somebody somewhere knew all my movements, all the trips I made,
everything I did. It wasn’t a particularly inspiring thought.
   But that following morning many other things carried on as before. I had
promised to speak at a seminar at the labor ministry at 9 o’clock. At half
past eight I rang the chief of staff at the ministry to ask whether the seminar
would go ahead now that circumstances seemed to have changed. The of-
ficial listened to me as if I were an idiot. “Of course it will,” he said, so I went
to the seminar and gave my presentation. We observed a moment of silence
in memory of the victims of the terrorist attacks in New York.
   I wanted at once to say something that wouldn’t sound completely sorrow-
ful. I said that the event was indeed tragic. It could well change the way in
which we related to the world, to work, and to each other. It was, however,
too early to say what its ultimate effects would be. In the midst of tragedy it
was important to maintain a positive attitude. Although a knowledge-based
society was extremely vulnerable in some ways, it had new strengths that
would help it to function in a crisis.
   “I managed to reach my friends in Manhattan from here in Finland with-
out any trouble all yesterday evening. We should try to ensure that such
things work in the future, whatever the circumstances,” I said to the televi-
sion cameras. The quote was then extracted and broadcast for the delecta-
tion of Finnish viewers on the main news bulletin that evening. A few days
later I really got it in the neck for that. Some journalist or other complained
that I had made a marketing speech when the world was trying to come to
terms with its grief. He can scarcely have known what I said or meant. But I
was labelled a greedy capitalist who tried to sell his phones even when more
sensitive souls were mourning the tragic deaths of thousands. That wasn’t
how I saw it, but I didn’t enjoy a right of reply to the media’s condemnation.
   I think the whole seminar should have been postponed. The morning after
the attack Finland still seemed to be taking the whole event very much in its
stride, though it would have a real impact on Finns, Americans, Muslims,
and Christians. I didn’t have any idea what would come next, but I could see
that it wouldn’t be anything terribly good. I knew that much already that
first morning.
274                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   When I had given my speech at the seminar I returned to Nokia to see
how things were. The world’s future now looked different, and that meant
that Nokia’s future was also different from what it had been on Tuesday. Now
we had to make a quick assessment of what had changed and how much.
   We had arranged for a board meeting to take place in Bangkok and Singa-
pore the following week. A first round of phone calls showed that life went
on and our customers would value the visit. This was a good sign: Nokia
would be there for its customers in bad times as well as good. That Wednes-
day I decided that the meeting would go ahead as planned. On Thursday I
thought things through again and talked to my fellow directors. On Friday I
changed my decision: the strategy and board meetings would be held in Fin-
land. That was the surest and safest thing to do. Suddenly Finland seemed a
rather wonderful location for the headquarters of a major company.
   The terrorist attacks in themselves hadn’t made any difference to Nokia’s
plans. The meetings didn’t lead to changes in our objectives or our view
of market fundamentals. But we did look more closely at the figures, and
we reduced some of our forecasts. The global economy had been slowing
since April, but now there was a separate discussion under way: what im-
pact would the terrorist attacks have on the outlook for growth? How much
would the U.S. recession deepen? What would it mean for growth elsewhere
in the world? How long would the impact of the attacks be felt? My view
was clear – the attacks would have a deep and long-term effect on the global
economy. They were no small thing. The board didn’t want to take firm posi-
tions or make hasty decisions; there would be time for that later.
   Before the board meeting we considered many everyday matters. We de-
cided that we should do something to help those who had suffered in the
terrorist attacks. We would support the International Youth Foundation and
set up a million-dollar fund for the education of children who had lost one
or both parents. In addition we would at least match the money donated by
our employees.
   The terrorist attacks also affected Nokia’s travel arrangements. We had
8,000 employees in the United States who now had to get used to tight secu-
rity controls and new travel rules. We also needed to ensure that our supply
chains would hold up. What would happen to our production in the United
States? We lost a little production, but things were back to normal after a
couple of days.
   Almost the first thing we did was to look again at our marketing cam-
paign. We were selling the Communicator on the basis of a lively television
and newspaper campaign that showed a company chair brandishing a phone
		
 Against All Odds                                                         275


and jumping through a glass door so that the splinters flew in all directions.
I decided we would drop this campaign as soon as we could. There were
enough splinters in the world without Nokia adding to the debris.
  Nokia’s internal discussion on the impact of the attacks went on for some
time. Our employees wondered in emails why the world had become the
place it had. People were worried and panicky. They were also depressed:
for about ten days Nokia didn’t function at its usual energy levels because
the horror of the recent events had demoralized people. Suddenly the future
didn’t seem quite as appealing as we had always believed it would be. Sud-
denly it seemed frightening, threatening, and unpredictable. People didn’t
try to put these thoughts into words, but I only had to look around me to see
that the organization was running in a low gear. Our usual energy and en-
thusiasm had evaporated. People began to ponder ethical issues more than
they had before.
  At the beginning of the decade I had seen criticism of globalization grow
ever louder as it became a stronger force for change. In Genoa 150,000 young
people had protested against those they saw as responsible for globalization.
These included leading politicians, the leaders of the biggest companies, and
the international organizations that assisted them. I was certainly among
them, although Nokia never appeared on the list of the five worst compa-
nies, perhaps because Nokia’s products helped the demonstrators organize
their own events. I suppose our market share among them was around 70
percent. The oil companies, Shell among them, tended to top the list, just
ahead of clothing companies and pharmaceutical giants. The Finnish for-
estry industry came in for its share of vitriol too. In the summer of 2001 I
asked two of Finland’s most senior politicians what the anti-globalization
movement meant. What would happen next? The politicians couldn’t an-
swer. They just said everything looked dreadful.
  Jeffrey Sachs wrote in the New York Times that defenders of globalization
shouldn’t head for their bunkers when the demonstrators attacked. When
the G8 leaders did that, and increased their security measures, the demon-
strators started to go for companies and their leaders.
  There hasn’t been enough discussion with the critics of globalization. No
one tries to understand the arguments against globalization before trying to
defend it. I didn’t then and I don’t now believe that the world would be such
a thriving place without a strong global economy. But we should listen to
what the critics of globalization have to say. Our customers’ understanding
toward business will soon disappear if companies screw things up, though
from the point of view of morale it’s even worse if employees lose their pride
276                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


in the firms they work for. Democracy and economic well-being always go
hand in hand. If markets open on a global scale it’s more likely that democ-
racy will prevail.
   Nokia is a business, and it can do good things only if it’s both profitable
and growing. Nokia can’t save the world at the cost of its own profits, but we
can try to make those profits responsibly.
   Some people think that a company’s only job is to turn a profit regardless
of the costs or consequences. At the opposite extreme there are those who
believe that companies should forget about profits and concentrate on good
works. In my view both are wrong. A company’s job is to produce a profit
while recognizing its wider responsibilities. Otherwise the profits may turn
out to be short-lived and the company will do badly.
   The world rightly expects much from companies and their leaders. But
it shouldn’t demand that they do what they can’t do. Senior executives are
paid to think of where the interests of the company lie and how to develop
it. Politicians are chosen, often through a democratic process, to balance
wider interests. They carry their own responsibility and are answerable to
their electorates. Company executives cannot replace politicians; that would
wreck both political and business life.
   Sometimes even talking about things can be difficult. In 2001 I was invited
to a World Bank event where about ten leaders of global companies took
part. The World Bank president, James Wolfensohn, wanted to talk about
the global future. One of my American colleagues adopted a resentful tone
when it was his turn to speak. “What is this international community you
talk about so much?” he sneered. If you come from the Nordic countries the
international community is a clear concept, but Americans think differently.
My colleague was given the World Bank’s official definition of the interna-
tional community, but the answer didn’t seem to satisfy him at all.
		
 Against All Odds                                                       277




                         CHAPTER 58


            Nokia Needs Renewal



G     rowth had come to a halt at Nokia, sending us back to first prin-
      ciples in search of a future for ourselves and our company. At the end
of 2001 I had kicked off discussions aimed at making Nokia readier to face
the challenges of the future. The Five – our core group of the five most se-
nior executives – held intensive meetings over several weeks. We asked our-
selves all the fundamental questions: What should Nokia do? How should
it be structured? Where will future growth come from? How can ideas and
people circulate within the company to best effect? How can we ensure that
our products are the ones the world’s consumers want to buy?
   I had decided it was time to reorganize Nokia, and this time I wanted to
change the basic structure of the company. For years Nokia had been di-
vided into two parts: mobile phones and mobile phone networks. For too
long now we had served all the world’s mobile phone customers through
a single organization, without considering what customers really wanted. I
also believed that Nokia needed to become stronger in software. We had to
gear up for a possible battle against Microsoft.
   We didn’t fight in those meetings. No one shouted at anyone. We were
used to talking things through with each other. We were sensitive to when
someone was getting irritated, or when someone ought to give in. We had
worked together for over ten years. We knew every mood, every glance, ev-
ery frown; we knew who would start the ball rolling and who would have the
last word. Sari Baldauf compared the relationship between the five of us to
an enduring marriage where there wasn’t any need to say much but every-
thing was understood. It was our strength, but also our weakness.
278                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   This major reorganization of Nokia was the last thing the five of us would
do together. We had had many adventures, we had created a great company,
but now we had to prepare it for a new era.
   I battered the group with endless questions. “What if we put mobile
phones and networks together? Would we achieve greater growth and would
we offer a better service to the operators?” Or: “What if we had four business
units rather than two?” Or: “What if Nokia was organized along geographi-
cal lines rather than by business units? Perhaps then we would be better at
taking local cultures into account?” I carried on with my questioning and I
made the directors present counter-arguments, which enabled us to rule out
unworkable ideas. After many meetings, after many sketch pads had been
filled up with diagrams and ideas, we made our decision. The new organiza-
tion was ready.
   We hadn’t used consultants because I don’t believe they add much value to
a company’s deliberations on its basic strategy. I’m well known to be a bad
customer for the services they offer. One of them once told me that when he
was selling his ideas to the head of a company he wouldn’t take a single piece
of paper along with him, because top executives either couldn’t or wouldn’t
read a word. He said that about half of chief executives never open a book,
either for business or pleasure. So consultants needed the ability to sell The
Next Big Idea to their clients as if they were Stone Age people sitting around
their campfire. That technique wouldn’t work with me: I need arguments
and justifications, preferably set out on paper. If you need to read a couple of
books, bring them on, let’s do it!
   Nokia has employed consultants, but their work has started only when
we’ve completed our groundwork. My experience is that consultants have
the most to offer when it comes to implementing a strategy. Creating the
strategy is a task for the company’s leadership, who must present it to the
firm’s owners and the board that represents them. After a dialogue the board
accepts the agreed-upon strategy. The board is generally not the place where
strategy or important organizational changes should be planned, except per-
haps in small companies or those active in very mature areas. Otherwise
the chief responsibility for pushing the strategy through must lie with the
operational leadership.
   “For the last ten years this company has made all its own decisions without
outside help. There’s no reason to assume that consultants can resolve our
current challenges better than we can. Let’s keep things in our own hands,”
is what I said to my colleagues.
   Some consultants and management gurus did influence our thinking.
I’ve already mentioned Gary Hamel and the ideas he gave us for search-
		
 Against All Odds                                                          279


ing out new openings. I’ve always urged people to read all the new books
that come out and to learn something from them and apply what they’ve
learned. But you have to have your own ideas and reach your own deci-
sions, good and bad.
   Nokia had long been one of the companies that management gurus fol-
lowed closely. They told us what they thought, but often they asked us what
we thought. This created a synthesis between how Nokia and other compa-
nies operate. The gurus summarize their ideas in books or in articles in the
Harvard Business Review. I often saw Nokia’s working methods described
there and compared to those of other firms. But company cultures and cir-
cumstances will ultimately determine how ideas will be used and adapted.
   Nokia’s new organization was put in place at the beginning of May 2001.
In Finland people go off on their summer holidays at the end of June, and
I wanted to achieve something before that. The change was great, and ana-
lysts, investors, and journalists all picked up on it. And of course so did all
Nokia’s employees, who did their best to adapt to the new thinking.
   We had split up our enormous mobile phone division into nine smaller
units. About $28 billion-worth of revenue was divided between these units,
some of which looked more like start-up companies than parts of the world’s
biggest mobile phone company. The names of these units showed the direc-
tion we were taking: Time-Division Multiple Access Unit, Code-Division
Multiple Access Unit, Mobile Phones Unit, Mobile Entry Products Unit, Im-
aging Unit, Entertainment and Media Unit, Business Application Unit, Mo-
bile Enhancements Unit, and Mobile Services Unit. The first two focused on
two standards: TDMA-phones and CDMA-phones. The first of these was on
its way out, though it was still important to Nokia in the United States and
Latin America. Nokia’s share of the market for CDMA phones was really too
small, and the importance of this standard was growing, especially in Asian
countries. We needed to get better at this technology.
   The Mobile Phones Unit was the heart of our entire business. Its role was
to concentrate on high-quality GSM phones and new models developed
from them. This unit had to produce over half the company’s profits in the
next few years. The Mobile Entry Products Unit focused on developing mar-
kets and looked for opportunities for growth in countries such as China,
Russia, and India. The phones it made had to be cheap. The unit was also
expected to develop low-cost services in conjunction with local operators.
   The Imaging Unit was just on the point of releasing the long-awaited cam-
era phone, model number 7650. This unit’s task was to design additional
camera phone models, which Nokia had been too slow to develop. The En-
tertainment and Media Unit would develop new phones that would also
280                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


play music, provide a platform for games and other media content. Nokia
had just launched its model 5510, which had a music player and other media
applications, but the phone didn’t sell as well as we had hoped.
  The Business Applications Unit was dedicated to phones and applications
for professional use. Our main product was the Communicator. It hadn’t
made much impact yet in terms of sales, but it was very important in devel-
oping our brand.
  Two other units, the Mobile Enhancements Unit and Mobile Services
Unit, focused on accessories for mobile phones, such as earphones, cov-
ers, and loudspeakers, and on Club Nokia, which was intended to create a
community of core customers. They would be offered special services, ap-
plications, and ringtones. This would also enhance loyalty toward Nokia as
a brand.
  Our new structure said all there was to say about what was happening in
our business. We had different sorts of customers. There was no longer one
mass of people to whom we could sell identical or even similar phones. For
a while we had been like Ford in the 1920s, which had sold all customers its
Model T in “any color as long as it’s black.” Ford’s dominance ended when
General Motors started to offer customers a range of cars with names such
as Chevrolet, Oldsmobile, and Cadillac. The auto market was now divided
into segments. If customers wanted to buy a different kind of car they didn’t
have to transfer their loyalties from General Motors to another manufac-
turer; they could simply switch to another of General Motors’ brands. We
thought the market for mobile phones would evolve along similar lines, as
indeed had happened for many products since the 1920s. The world was no
longer one gray mass but was differentiated into a rainbow palette according
to tastes and desires, and this offered many new opportunities. Our reorga-
nization put seizing those opportunities at the forefront.
		
 Against All Odds                                                         281




                         CHAPTER 59


                Bill Gates Picks Up
                     the Phone


I  n 2002 we realized that we definitely had a new competitor in
   the mobile business. It was based in Redmond in the United States and its
name was Microsoft.
   Microsoft had emerged from the shadows in 2000. The company an-
nounced then that it intended to move into two new areas of business. The
first was games consoles, so that it could dominate home entertainment and
electronics. Otherwise Sony would continue to reign supreme in home elec-
tronics. Microsoft’s second target was mobile phones, where it didn’t want
Nokia to dominate the software and hence the consumers’ souls. Microsoft
didn’t use those exact words, but that was how we interpreted their actions
at Nokia. Microsoft had announced that it was coming to our patch, and we
knew they played a hard game.
   Microsoft had become an icon of the 1990s and 2000s and a monument
to American enterprise. It had also grown into a colossus of the markets and
went on the attack and defended itself from attack with varying degrees of
success. The company concentrated on protecting its source codes and de-
fending its rights in every part of the globe. Microsoft’s culture didn’t have
much in common with Nokia’s. It was a pure software company whose cash
flow came from licensing payments. In the value chain Microsoft dominated
one horizontal element, namely software. Nokia, on the other hand, grew
through its products: mobile phones, for which it developed ever more so-
phisticated software as phones became more complex. By 2000 our mobile
phones had capabilities similar to those of small computers. Our Commu-
nicator in particular was interoperable with computers and with Microsoft
282                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


software, since it was only useful to an executive if information could readily
be transferred between it and a computer.
  We had actively sought out areas of cooperation. Pekka Ala-Pietilä and
his team held discussions at Microsoft; from these had come the idea of a
wireless phone with an Internet connection for office use. This project began
in 1998 but it was quickly dropped as it became clear that there wouldn’t
be much demand for the product. After that we agreed that Nokia’s smart-
phones would also work in the Microsoft Outlook environment. This didn’t
call for particularly dramatic steps since both sides had much to gain from
the deal, and we quickly reached an agreement. It was an ordinary business
decision.
  In 1999 the founder and chairman of Microsoft, Bill Gates, introduced the
Stinger phone and promised that it would be available by the end of 2001.
Microsoft was trying to win over Nokia’s competitors. They held discussions
with at least Motorola and Sony Ericsson. They didn’t succeed, but they did
collaborate with Samsung to some degree, and they made arrangements for
the production of the Stinger. The phone was never launched, however, but
was buried in the graveyard where stillborn technology projects are laid to
rest.
  Microsoft had wanted to supply software for mobile phones, but we want-
ed to develop the software ourselves. The major mobile phone manufactur-
ers had set up a software company called Symbian for that purpose. When
we realized what Microsoft was trying to do we focused our software devel-
opment ever more on Symbian. Its first achievement was the camera phone
7650, launched in 2002. Other companies, such as Sony Ericsson, Siemens,
and Samsung, also invested more money in Symbian.
  When Microsoft noticed that it was difficult to fight against Symbian, it
changed its strategy once more. This time it focused on operating systems.
Nokia’s countermove was to bring together the Open Mobile Architecture
Forum, which attracted two hundred practitioners from the mobile phone
markets and elsewhere. This was such a high-profile move that Microsoft
saw that it had to give up its dream of single-handedly dominating the mar-
ket for mobile phone software.
  Competing with Microsoft is never easy. We had the resources needed to
do it, but once again we came up against cultural differences. The biggest
problem was the software development community – Microsoft could mo-
bilize a million software developers, where we could call on fifty or a hun-
dred thousand at best. Symbian seriously lagged behind Microsoft in this.
  I met Bill Gates for the first time in Sun Valley, Idaho, at one of the annual
conferences that bring IT and media industry executives together. I don’t
		
 Against All Odds                                                           283


have any particular mental image of Gates. He may well have seemed just as
I had expected: he was more focused on technology than on leading people.
I invited Gates to Finland, and he did indeed come to Nokia’s new head of-
fice, which he immediately called PowerPoint Palace after one of his own
success stories. We were certainly Microsoft’s biggest customer in Finland,
and PowerPoint perhaps loomed a little too large in what we did. Sometimes
I banned its use when we were working on strategy, because it too readily
became a substitute for independent thought.
   We sat in our conference room for an hour and a half. Gates was on a
post-Davos tour of Europe; he had just come from Brussels, where a Belgian
anarchist had thrust a cream pie into his face. He was still slightly shaken up,
at least to the extent that he had difficulty in firing himself up that morning.
   Shortly after his visit I received a letter thanking me for the meeting and
saying he looked forward to cooperation with Nokia.
   In June 1999 I was with Liisa on a brief visit to our summer place in Orive-
si. We were driving through the Finnish countryside. The fields where black
and white cows grazed contemplatively were broken up by little huddles of
trees, the sun was shining, and Finland’s summer was at its zenith. It was all
very restful. The phone rang, and at the other end was Bill Gates, straight
from Redmond.
   “Nokia has been anti-Microsoft,” he yelled into the phone. He continued
without a break for a quarter of an hour. I had to stop the car at the side of
the road to avoid crashing. Liisa was astonished. Usually I manage to get
a word in, but this time all I could do was listen. Bill Gates was accusing
Nokia of unfair practices in some aspect of standards, which of course I
knew nothing about. At last the call ended, I started the car again, and we
continued on our way.
   A month later I met Bill Gates again at another Sun Valley meeting. He
apologized for the call. He explained that he had gotten the wrong company:
the miscreant was Ericsson, not Nokia.
   I went to Sun Valley again in 2002. After midsummer I had sent a message
to Bill Gates telling him I hoped to meet him at the conference. At half past
two in the afternoon of 12 July we met in a little meeting room, called the
Sage Room, at our hotel. Bill Gates was armed with one of his own weapons,
a laptop computer. I had brought Nokia’s new model, the 7650, along with
me. This was a camera phone, for which Symbian had developed some won-
derful software. You could take photos with this camera, but you couldn’t
send them to anyone yet.
   I put my brand new phone on the table. Gates had in front of him his lap-
top, which naturally had Microsoft’s latest software. On the table there was
284                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


also mineral water for us. We looked at one another, through our respective
pairs of metal-framed glasses. “The markets aren’t looking too good right
now,” Gates began. I couldn’t have agreed more. The world had yet to recover
from the shock of 2001, and technology seemed to have lost its appeal. No
one could say what The Next Big Idea would be, or if there was to be one.
“Things will get worse before they get better. We have three bad years ahead
of us,” Gates predicted. The chairman of Intel, Andy Grove, put it even more
succinctly the following day: “The world is a shitty place.”
   The chairmen of the world’s biggest technology companies were certainly
not bubbling with optimism in the summer of 2002. Even so, I was satisfied
with my conversation with Bill Gates. If we had started to discuss coopera-
tion with Microsoft two years earlier they would have eaten us for breakfast.
We wanted to be in a position where we would be playing with a reasonably
strong hand.
   Our strategy of defending open-source software and cooperating with
many manufacturers had paid off. We had also managed to keep control of
our own software development. Microsoft had perhaps begun to understand
that mobile phones weren’t as simple as laptop computers.
   In a mobile phone the software and the device itself were almost indis-
tinguishable: you couldn’t tell where the software started and the hardware
ended. The mobile phone had already started to become a personal product
in which the design, features, software, and user interface were packaged
into the smallest possible product, which was also a brand in itself. Nokia
was on top of all this, while for Microsoft it was unknown territory. Micro-
soft was a software company, which had developed products that the whole
world depended on. Nokia did its best to create attractive products that
would appeal to individual consumers in an extremely competitive market.
   We agreed with Bill Gates that almost everything possible in our world
was going badly. The phone operators were in a bad way. Nokia’s competi-
tors had become weaker and we had our own problems, though I wouldn’t
have used quite those words to Bill Gates. “It would be a pity if our actions
or arguments splintered the market so that there would no longer be just one
single market for mobile phones,” I said. Gates suggested we discuss what it
was that Microsoft did that annoyed Nokia, and vice versa.
   “What annoys me about Microsoft is that you believe you can use the
same value chain for mobile phones as you use to create personal computers.
But they’re two very different things. Our model of vertical integration is de-
signed to produce phones that appeal to consumers,” I said. I didn’t say that
the way Microsoft was acting was hostile to Nokia, though in reality it was.
		
 Against All Odds                                                            285


   “In many decisions on standards you’ve opted for something other than
the Microsoft model. You’ve chosen Java technology and RealPlayer for your
phones,” Gates said in his turn. “That’s true,” I replied in a conciliatory tone,
“but now I’m sitting at this table in order to look again at these issues. That’s
what compatibility is about.” I said. We spent twenty minutes or so on these
painful questions. Then we sketched out a direction for future discussions
on a notepad. We also agreed that Pekka Ala-Pietilä and Pertti Korhonen
would soon get in touch to discuss strategy with their counterparts at Mi-
crosoft.
   Two years earlier Microsoft had intended to capture the market for mo-
bile phone software, come what may, and push Nokia into the sea. The only
question had been which sea Bill Gates would choose for that purpose. Now
his approach had changed, and all the arrogance had gone from the thinking
of the world’s biggest technology company.
   There were two moments in our discussion when Gates got jittery. The first
was of no significance. The second was when he shouted as he told me that
three months earlier Nokia had supported a court indictment against Mi-
crosoft. We had to decide whether to intervene to give Microsoft a chance to
offer an expert opinion in a court case. I had concluded that Nokia shouldn’t
get mixed up in courtroom disputes between Microsoft and the U.S. federal
government, that we shouldn’t intervene. It wasn’t our business. But perhaps
our representatives had said something incautious in the corridors that had
found its way up to Bill Gates.
   Finally I asked why Microsoft had ended its cooperation with Sony Er-
icsson. Cooperation had started a couple of years earlier but had come to a
sudden end after a short time. “It wasn’t going anywhere. It’s impossible to
work with a company that’s falling to pieces the whole time,” Gates said in
his straightforward way. Directness was the Gates trademark, by which I had
learned to know him. I knew it was better to be with him than against him. I
also knew that if our efforts at cooperation didn’t work, Microsoft would ac-
quire fifty or so tanks from somewhere and try to crush Nokia beneath their
tracks. Bill Gates was a typical exemplar of Andy Grove’s famous dictum that
“only the paranoid survive.” Microsoft’s methods had been extremely brutal,
but its software had created entirely new ways of working and processing in-
formation. I had respected Bill Gates’s clear intelligence and willpower when
I first met him in 1998, but four years later I knew that Microsoft wasn’t
invincible.
   “We realized that we would never make money in the wireless world,” Gates
said now. I drew a deep breath. I knew that Nokia had reached a critical point.
286                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


We shook hands after a long discussion. I picked up my mobile phone, Bill
Gates his laptop, and the mineral water bottles remained on the table. Peace
descended on the Sage Room as I returned with Gates to the dinner table in
Sun Valley.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          287




                          CHAPTER 60


                     Back to Reality



W       e had reconfigured Nokia so the company could seize opportu-
        nities for new growth. We believed that the nine new business units
were focused on the areas where growth would be found.
   We were looking for growth over five years since we didn’t know how long
our current crisis would last. Our key aim was to build up our software capa-
bility so we could develop more complex products. We thought that mobile
phone users should be able to read email, take pictures, and even regulate
their heartbeats.
   We were gearing up for a battle with Microsoft for supremacy of the wire-
less world. If we hadn’t played our cards right I would have been in no posi-
tion to take on Bill Gates when I met him in the summer of 2002. We had
won our battle with Microsoft, even though we didn’t yet know the final
result. At the end of 2002 Microsoft’s British partner, Sendo, switched sides;
the company accused Microsoft of stealing its business secrets. Work on the
smartphone that the two companies had developed together came to an end
just before the phone was due to be launched.
   We seemed safe from attack. About this time the Economist wrote about
a new type of information technology: its cover featured not a laptop com-
puter with Microsoft software, but Nokia’s new phone. We were doing well
in this battle, but for some reason we didn’t notice that the real war was tak-
ing place somewhere else.
   Companies usually make mistakes because they focus too much on the
short-term future. Our mistake was the opposite: we were thinking too hard
about what the world would look like in five years. We were losing our grip
288                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


on what might happen next year. We believed our customers would move to
more sophisticated and smarter phones and, at least in developed markets,
leave the simpler models behind. We expected cheap phones to be dominant
in developing markets. We had set up a unit to focus on just those markets
– which is where all the growth in the world’s mobile phone markets would
come from.
   In February 2003 we launched an entirely new line of Nokia products:
phones on which you could play games. We called it N-Gage. It had been
Nokia’s dream to extend its range from phones to games consoles. You could
load games on to the new phone by inserting a diskette. It looked more like
a games console than a phone, and it was aimed at people aged sixteen to
thirty-five. As well as games and a phone it contained a radio, a music player,
and a web browser. For technical reasons, using it to make calls was a little
awkward since you had to point its narrow edge toward your ear.
   N-Gage had a big marketing budget. The phone had been designed by
Anssi Vanjoki’s unit, and Anssi was a marketing professional if anyone was.
It was a rare individual at Nokia who wished to or would have dared disagree
with Anssi on a marketing matter. The N-Gage was launched to a great fan-
fare at the London Eye, the giant Ferris wheel on the south bank of the River
Thames.
   N-Gage received a crushing reception from the very people who should
have fallen in love with it. Young people thought it looked like a “taco gone
wrong.” As a phone it was rather clumsy because it was too big, and the
way you had to hold it to make a call seemed ridiculous. The selection of
games was too narrow and unsatisfactory in other respects. I even heard of
one thirteen-year-old boy who, after he had seen our splendid new games
phone, recommended to his father that he sell his Nokia shares.
   We tried to put on a brave face. We put more money into marketing, and
of course we received some positive or at least neutral publicity. We also
started to think about what we might do with the N-Gage and why things
had gone as they had. Perhaps we hadn’t fully understood our new custom-
ers, or perhaps it wasn’t as easy for Nokia to move from phones to games
consoles as we had imagined. We believed we had created something new
that would rewrite the rules of the game. We were sure we had succeeded in
that, but our customers took a different view.
   The sales figures for N-Gage fell far short of our targets, of course. We
learned many new things, though some of that knowledge was quite expen-
sive. N-Gage cost us around $352 million, which may sound like a great deal
of money, but it’s worth remembering that at that time Nokia’s cash flow
		
 Against All Odds                                                          289


was around $587 million a month. N-Gage was our biggest single individual
investment of those years. It wasn’t a success but, partly through Nokia’s sup-
port, Finland gained significant expertise in games design. In recent years
Finnish companies such as Rovio and Supercell have again shown how Fin-
land can compete at the top levels.
   Our mistake was not that we took too big a risk, but that we made a loss.
Our mistake was that we didn’t take big enough risks when it would have
been cheap to take them. Nokia’s great profitability meant that our cash re-
serves had grown so big that stock exchange analysts kept demanding to
know how the money might be returned to the shareholders to whom it
really belonged.
   Our focus on the N-Gage and other multimedia products cost us dearly
in 2003. That spring we also launched a new media phone, which was a fine
product, but it also failed to achieve much success. We were perhaps a little
too early once again. It was only a little later that games and media content
became common in phones.
   In 2003 I took a two-week summer holiday, which was a record. I hadn’t
had such a peaceful break since 1980. In 2000 we had acquired a new holiday
home, a manor house on a lake about seventy miles northeast of Helsinki.
I looked out over the lake and realized how much I needed a holiday. We
had acquired a puppy, Teri, and training her seemed much more demand-
ing than running a global company. She was still bursting with puppyish life
and energy and disobedience; these qualities were less in evidence at Nokia.
   I had set major organizational changes in motion at Nokia. I assumed
that splitting the mobile phone division into nine smaller units would be
enough and would soon lead to fresh growth. Now I had to admit that I had
been wrong. I should have overhauled the whole of Nokia, not just the way
mobile phones were organized. Besides, the new division of responsibilities
was pointing us in the wrong direction. We had focused on complicated
smartphones and on cheap models for markets in the developing world. But
between the two there remained a key market for mid-range phones, and we
hadn’t paid enough attention to that.
   On top of that, in early 2003 our relationships with the mobile network
operators had deteriorated. They wanted us to deliver tailored phones, as
other manufacturers had, but that wasn’t our preferred approach. The opera-
tors wanted specialized software for mid-range phones, such as high-reso-
lution color screens and other high-quality features. We were gearing up to
deliver large numbers of new phones, but we couldn’t meet the requirements
until 2004. Also, many operating companies thought Nokia had become too
290                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


strong a company. They had difficulties of their own since the new 3G net-
works had yet to make a return on investment.
   Nokia had smaller competitors who were ready to comply with the op-
erating companies’ tiniest wish. We had grown so big that every one of our
competitors had just one aim: to attack Nokia’s market share and push us off
our pedestal. We had given many of our competitors the tools to do just that
– every new product that failed or was late, every customer complaint, and
every critical review gave them something to smile about in the boardrooms
of Samsung and Motorola.
   As well as the reorganization, I had made another decision. I would leave
Nokia in 2006, whatever happened. My contract would have made it pos-
sible for me to stay on if the board and I both wanted that, but I had decided
to do something else. Back in 2003 I didn’t have any idea at all what that
might be. For now I wanted to put Nokia back in shape and on the path to
growth one more time; only then could I leave the company to my successor.
It also seemed to me that I could no longer summon up as much enthusiasm
as I needed to. And The Five had worked together long enough.
   Nokia needed to enter a new phase; something had to be done. This wasn’t
the first time I’d found myself in this position: I had turned the company
around twice already; I had made surprising organizational changes; and I
had made all the necessary moves at the necessary times, to my own satisfac-
tion. Of course, I hadn’t achieved all this just by myself: Pekka, Matti, Sari,
Olli-Pekka, as well as Anssi Vanjoki and Pertti Korhonen and others had all
certainly done their bit to ensure that Nokia ascended back into the strato-
sphere just when the trees below had begun to seem too close for comfort.
   At the moment of crisis there was more at stake than there had been ear-
lier. Nokia was bigger than ever. It had become our life’s work. It was a tale
that we knew would go down in economic history. I didn’t want to go down
in history as the chief executive who raised Nokia to a commanding position
and then let things fall apart and allowed its competitors to overtake it. No,
I certainly didn’t want that.
		
 Against All Odds                                                        291




                         CHAPTER 61


      Reorganization Once More



N     okia needed a complete makeover once more. I had to give every
      one of our employees a clear message about the direction the company
should take. You mustn’t send an organization too many messages at one
time. A company always has to seize the day and the opportunities it’s of-
fered. When in 2003 Nokia started to focus on work that wouldn’t reach ma-
turity until 2006, it started to fall behind. In every company the structures
and the support functions should be designed with the front-line business
in mind. If we had started to put our reporting systems or logistics straight
in 1992, we would never have achieved our market position at the end of
the decade. But neither would we have encountered the problems we did in
1995–96.
  A company can’t motivate its employees by sending a message saying: “get
the structures into shape, and then we can expect growth.” Employees can’t
strike a balance between objectives of different kinds, such as promoting
growth on one hand and putting the right systems in place on the other. A
company can’t instruct its workers to step on the brakes and the accelerator
at the same time. It is the job of senior management to see further. They
should change the company’s direction when it seems to be heading for a
wall – not after it’s already crashed into it.
  At the end of the 1990s Nokia’s revenue grew rapidly. Perhaps we should
have been satisfied with a little less growth and left some energy for im-
proving our systems. But that’s a hard message to get across when people
are relishing new victories, making the most of exciting new products, and
experiencing new triumphs in China. An organization will never value the
292                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


people who develop systems as much as it values those who innovate or
sell things – someone who develops a new internal accounting system will
rarely receive the same respect and recognition as someone who has just
sold a million phones. It’s the job of a company’s board to strike a balance
between these different factors. As the chief executive, responsibility for that
ultimately rested with me.
   In March 2003 I began to sketch out a new organizational structure. My
core group gathered each morning in my meeting room. The days were
lengthening; the sun had risen sometime around seven and would set again
an hour or two after most people got home from work. The Finnish spring is
a good time for everything new because the light increases so rapidly from
day to day. We sketched possible models on notepads but didn’t worry about
who would go where. Our discussion concerned only what would be the
best structure for Nokia regardless of who would do what. The time to con-
sider individual roles would come later. I wanted to have that discussion
with everyone separately. I already had some ideas of my own on where
people should go, which would become clear later on.
   The discussions went well and took the reorganization forward rapidly.
The model was a simple but ambitious matrix: many people would now find
themselves working with their colleagues, rather than competing against
them, for the good of Nokia. That would demand a new maturity.
   By 11 August I knew which individuals would change their jobs. In a way I
also had to take a stance on who my successor would be, because the new ar-
rangements would have an impact on who held power within Nokia. Some
people would find themselves in a stronger position, while others would
find their positions unchanged or apparently weakened. But I didn’t want
to have the press placing bets on who my successor would be. Indeed, my
successor could in principle come from outside the matrix. Two of The Five
would not be part of the group from which my successor would come. They
were Matti Alahuhta and Sari Baldauf. Sari and I agreed, at her request, that
she would leave Nokia in 2004. Matti would move to become the director
responsible for strategy; later he would become chief executive of the eleva-
tor manufacturer Kone.
   In itself the new organization was simple. There were four business
groups: Mobile Phones, Multimedia, Networks, and Enterprise Solutions
(which provided services for business customers). The matrix also included
cross-cutting support functions. Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo would lead the Mo-
bile Phones Unit, while Anssi Vanjoki would be in charge of Multimedia,
where he would focus all his energies on smartphones and services linked to
		
 Against All Odds                                                        293


entertainment, music, and pictures. Sari Baldauf would continue to manage
Networks.
  Pekka Ala-Pietilä would move to run the global organization responsible
for marketing, sales, logistics, and procurement. Pertti Korhonen would be-
come Nokia’s new chief technology officer, responsible for all technological
development. We would find someone new to promote our services to busi-
ness customers; Mary McDowell of Hewlett-Packard later took on that role.
A second American, Rick Simonson, took over from Olli-Pekka as finance
director later in September.
  Our new structure was unveiled at the end of September and was in place
by the beginning of January 2004. From September to December thousands
and thousands of Nokia employees pondered their future, looked for new
jobs in the new organization, and moved to work for new bosses. Those
in charge of the new units fought the usual turf wars. Not all of them had
enough good people to start with: there was certainly no long queue of gifted
people outside the door of Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo’s “ordinary” Mobile Phones
Unit, for example, while Anssi Vanjoki’s “unusual” group seemed to inter-
est a disproportionate number of ambitious people. Despite that, the center
of gravity of Nokia’s business still lay with the Mobile Phones Unit. But the
hard times weren’t over.
294                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                          CHAPTER 62


       The Customers Strike Back



S   uccess is the gravest danger of all. Success potentially makes ma-
    jor companies complacent and arrogant. Once a successful company has
managed to change the rules of the market, it believes it can do so again and
again. A successful company imagines that it understands its customers per-
fectly. It believes it knows what people want in Europe, in Asia, and in North
America. Its board members watch well-crafted PowerPoint presentations
showing how the customer base is evolving and what the new trends are. A
successful company slips into talking about controlling its customers, when
it should be talking about how the customers really control the company.
   Many journalists and analysts thought that Nokia would be unable to sus-
tain its profitability at such a high level. Mobile phone prices were falling, so
they assumed Nokia would have to drop its prices too.
   But we thought we could teach customers to use more expensive products
and thus safeguard our future.
   In 2003 we had launched the mobile games phone, the N-Gage, and also
camera phones, but we weren’t focusing on mid-range phones. We thought
the future lay in expensive models for developed markets on the one hand,
and very cheap, mass-market models for developing countries on the other.
We believed we knew the customers, the markets, and the future, which
we tried to control as best we could. Because of our success we were used
to making our products the way we believed was right. We had become a
proud company and didn’t want to imitate others. For us it was a matter of
honor that every insight and innovation was our own. It was important that
we believed strongly in our own expertise and capability, but we might have
		
 Against All Odds                                                        295


done better if we had been humble enough to follow the moves our competi-
tors made and the trends our customers followed.
   Customers bring even the largest companies back to their senses. The mo-
bile phone market moves so fast that no established position lasts more than
a few seconds. Somewhere someone is coming up with a new way of making
a phone. Somewhere a new fashion is catching on that dictates that phones
have to be a certain shape and color. Somewhere in the world your custom-
ers are inventing a new way of using the camera in a phone. Somewhere
one of your competitors is adopting a new kind of distribution system. The
possibilities are limitless.
   The telecom operating companies were important customers for Nokia.
Our Networks Unit sold them mobile phone networks. Through them we
sold vast numbers of phones, and they increasingly wanted us to tailor those
phones to their own requirements. Phone manufacturers complied with the
operating companies’ wishes according to the degree that they wanted to or
could.
   The mobile network operators and the manufacturers carried on an in-
terminable debate over who owned the customers. Inside Nokia’s Mobile
Phones Unit there were conflicting views on this: the more fundamentalist
types thought that the operators were in much the same position as compa-
nies that make railway sleepers. Their view was that the operating compa-
nies didn’t add any value for the customers, whose experiences depended on
having good phones with lots of interesting features. The operators didn’t
provide significant services, because services and content were already com-
bined in the manufacture of the phone. Nokia was involved in many projects
where new content was installed directly into the phone. That was how mo-
bile television got under way in 2005.
   But many people did understand the role the mobile network operators
played in business. Close to 50 percent of phones were sold by the operators.
The operators saw and knew what was happening in the market, so it was
worth listening closely to what they had to tell us.
   In the summer of 2003 the operators’ concerns reached our ears. Their
trade association was adopting a more critical tone: Nokia was rapidly
becoming their Public Enemy Number One. One of their representatives
called on us to say that they wanted to buy clamshell phones, but all Nokia
had to offer were the familiar “candy bar” models.
   Nokia had already started to design a clamshell phone, but it was running
late. Once again we had decided to do everything ourselves even though
we hadn’t previously made clamshell or hinged models for the mid-range
296                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


market. We encountered many technical difficulties that we tried to explain
to our friends, but we didn’t take their concerns seriously enough in 2003.
   In September the anti-Nokia front gained strength. Many operating
companies feared that Nokia would tread on their toes as it developed its
Nokia Club concept. Customers would find themselves directed to Nokia’s
web pages rather than to the operating companies’ pages. Our initiative had
never been directed against the operators, but to some it looked as if it had.
   The board of the association of mobile network operators, the GSM As-
sociation, met every third month. At the end of 2003 the meeting took place
in Milan, where several major operators declared open war on Nokia. Their
war cry was “Kill Nokia!” The phrase undoubtedly contained more rhetoric
than reality, but it reflected the thinking among the operators.
   Our friend in the world of the mobile network operators got back in
touch. He was worried about what the future would hold for Nokia if its
relationships with the operating companies didn’t improve. He had taken it
upon himself to tell us what was bothering the operating companies. From
Milan he rang Matti Alahuhta and said that death threats were raining down
on Nokia from every direction. Matti took his concerns seriously, which
led to an immediate reappraisal in the Mobile Phones Unit. The operators’
concerns had registered with Nokia, but our reaction speed left much to be
desired.
   One of the world’s largest operating companies, Vodafone, was in the van-
guard of the anti-Nokia movement and found it easy to bring smaller com-
panies along with it. The operators’ secret operation culminated in Cannes
in February 2004, when over a hundred operators gathered for their annual
meeting. They simply agreed to reduce their purchases from Nokia by a cer-
tain proportion.
   They wanted to teach Nokia a clear lesson. Someone had asked at Cannes
if what the operators were doing was even legal. The lawyers were clear on
that point, however. This wasn’t a matter of a cartel, but a recommendation
for a common action. Nokia had to go back to school, to a hard school where
rapid results were expected.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          297




                          CHAPTER 63


              Clams Are Predators



I  f I know things aren’t going well, I feel it physically, as a horrible
   sensation in my stomach. I feel it when I have to give a profit warning,
even when everyone has done their best. I feel it when I’ve been subjected
to unfair criticism. And I feel it when someone I’ve trusted can no longer be
relied upon.
  From time to time I also have an unpleasant feeling when intuition tells
me that things aren’t going in the right direction. I get annoyed when things
don’t seem to be fully under my control. I always try to look as far into the
future as possible, to head off any little problems that might cause uncer-
tainty.
  In 2003 we had decided to change direction. Nokia’s leadership had been
reorganized. The whole company had taken on a new form and thousands
of people brigaded in line with the new structures. We made vast numbers
of decisions, large and small. Business Week was really talking of past glories
when it placed Nokia sixth in its annual survey of the world’s most valuable
brands. It was the most valuable in Europe and the most valuable mobile
phone company. Our profitability and market share remained high. How-
ever, it felt as if we were losing the battle on several fronts.
  In November 2003 I gave an interview to the Wall Street Journal. They
asked what kept me awake at night. I replied that I always slept well, even
on airplanes. I said I was pondering what would happen in the next three or
four years. In 1999 and 2000 everyone had believed in the triumph of tech-
nology, until 11 September 2001 changed everything. Thus my worry was
whether Nokia was structured to absorb every unexpected change the fol-
298                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


lowing years would undoubtedly bring. I couldn’t know what those changes
might be. But I reckoned that any surprises were likely to come either from
technology or from Nokia’s competitors.
  It was a good guess. I still didn’t have the faintest idea of what awaited us
as we entered 2004. Everything looked good at the beginning of January. The
last quarter of 2003 had been a good period – our results were better than
they had been for a long time. When I returned to Nokia after my Christmas
break, morale was high. Our order books were still full in the first week of
January.
  In the second week there was a turn for the worse: we didn’t get any or-
ders. Our phones weren’t selling as we had expected. Things didn’t get better
the following week, either. This wasn’t a good start to the year. I quickly real-
ized something was wrong.
  These situations have their own charm. I feel energized when I can roll
up my sleeves and solve problems, and I expect a great deal from the people
around me. They have to carry heavy responsibilities and make almost su-
perhuman efforts. But innovation and failure are both permitted. If people
give everything in a crisis you can’t punish them if they make mistakes. At
Nokia I’ve always tried to strike a balance between the demands I make and
the excitement that work can bring. We won’t achieve anything if we don’t
expect enough from people. But we would quickly lose good people if they
didn’t enjoy their work. This balance is absolutely essential.
  In a crisis the chief executive’s job is to show by their own behavior and
actions what’s important. They have to go where changes have to be made.
They also have to admit where the company has made mistakes, and where
they have made mistakes; but they must also look ahead to the future. They
must demand systematic results when the crisis begins to be resolved. Their
decisions have to be right and proportionate. Everyone has to do their bit,
but not more. In a crisis no one wants leaders who are weak or have lost
their nerve.
  It soon became clear that the mobile network operators were acting on
their threat. Their share of Nokia sales in Europe was usually around 50
percent; they had decided to bring that down to 30 percent. The major com-
panies were reducing their purchases, but the smaller ones were buying as
many phones as before. When we calculated the impact of the partial boy-
cott, we found that our market share in Europe had fallen by 12 percentage
points in six months. The meeting at Cannes in February had sent a message
to Nokia, which we had most certainly received. Nokia fell off its pedestal in
a matter of weeks. The operating companies’ smart weapon had hit its target,
		
 Against All Odds                                                         299


with destructive force. Our market share had fallen from 38 percent in 2003
to 32 percent in 2004.
  Nokia started to do its homework. Our discussions with the operating
companies began on a new basis. If we had shown arrogance in the past,
we certainly couldn’t afford it now. I divided responsibility for dealing with
individual operating companies between the members of our management
team. I wanted my most experienced colleagues to report directly to me on
their dealings with specific operators. I jumped on planes to meet the most
important companies myself. I talked through our problems with Vodafone
at their head office. I wanted to show them that we were serious and were
offering a concrete response to their concerns.
  The world would have been a simpler place if we could have blamed our
difficulties entirely on our relationships with the operating companies. Un-
fortunately, we had to look in the mirror. There we could see an inadequate
range of products, defective processes, carelessness, and arrogance.
  On top of that, we had concentrated so hard on maintaining our profit-
ability that we were shutting ourselves out of expanding markets.
  Suddenly we found ourselves competing in the market for mid-range
phones. Really it was only now that mid-range phones had appeared; they
were a new phenomenon for us all. They didn’t compete on the basis of their
new applications; they competed on the basis of their design and physical
properties. They were called flip-phones or clamshell phones because they
opened with the aid of a hinge.
  Our competitors had tried in various ways to destroy Nokia by chang-
ing the rules of the game. Now the clamshell phones brought them success.
The phones weren’t a step forward in technical terms, but they offered a
different experience to customers using old technology. The fault for Nokia’s
problems also lay in our organization, for which I was responsible. In 2003
Matti Alahuhta was in overall charge of Mobile Phones, but Anssi Vanjoki
was responsible for the product development and reported to Matti. With
hindsight this arrangement turns out to have been our Achilles’ heel.
  Matti and Anssi were, and are, very different in their approach to leader-
ship. Matti is a strategist who likes to work things through to their conclu-
sion, while Anssi moves fast like a cruise missile. He works on the basis
of intuition, paying close attention to market signals. Anssi was a strong
believer in smartphones and didn’t believe at all in clamshell phones. He
thought we ought to make a handful of them because the operators seemed
to want them, but basically he believed that clamshell phones were a passing
fad. He turned out to be right. But that didn’t help Nokia when our competi-
300                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


tors’ clamshells were nibbling away at our market share and profitability. We
didn’t have the phones on the market we should have had.
   Matti Alahuhta was committed to producing Nokia’s own clamshell
phone. But Matti and Anssi couldn’t find enough common ground for the
investment that was needed, for positioning the new product in the market,
and for allocating the necessary resources. The upshot was a failure to create
phones that were good enough. We were out of the game in this particular
competition.
   Asian manufacturers, especially Samsung, made money from clamshell
phones, which went down very well with young people in Asia and beyond.
This wasn’t Nokia’s only problem. Our arch-rival Motorola rose again thanks
to a phone called the Motorola Razr. The Americans ingeniously combined
three things: a large screen, a slender body, and a clamshell casing. All this
was wrapped up in a marketing campaign that had touches of genius. The
Razr started out as a phone aimed at rich and tech-savvy customers at the
upper end of the market. Then Motorola lowered the product’s price and the
results spoke for themselves. The phone was designed in 2003, launched in
2004, and by 2006 there were 50 million of them in use. Eventually 130 mil-
lion Razr phones would be sold, a record for a clamshell.
   For the second time in Nokia’s recent history we had to examine the anat-
omy of the clamshell, because Motorola had surprised us. The previous time
had been when Pertti Korhonen took a Motorola phone to bits in Nokia’s
Oulu laboratory back in 1989. Now there was no need to disassemble a
phone because we could already see what had happened.
   In 2004 Nokia finally succeeded in producing a clamshell phone for the
European market, six months late. Some people predicted that in a few years
half the world’s mobile phones would be clamshell models. The clamshell
had become a dangerous beast of prey, which Nokia attempted to domesti-
cate much too late. Our first clamshell phone couldn’t compete.
   Samsung had achieved not just lift-off, it had practically gone into orbit
on the fuel provided by its clamshell phones. They were now in their third
or even fourth generation. Samsung knew how to stuff its mid-range phones
full of features that would appeal to consumers: cameras, big screens, and
designs that were easy to use and worked well. Suddenly Nokia’s phones
were no longer enticing.
   We had thought once more that we could change the rules of the game and
everyone else would fall into line. When we decided to make our clamshell
phone we wanted it to be different from everyone else’s. So we developed a
new type of hinge. We tried to go through two stages in one leap. The new
		
 Against All Odds                                                            301


phone too was notably late, and we had come up with such expensive solu-
tions that the customers weren’t satisfied. They wouldn’t pay extra for our
education in the fine art of clamshell phones.
   We should have thought longer and harder about what customers real-
ly wanted. Looking back, it appears that customers didn’t want clamshell
phones as such; what they wanted were phones that looked and felt different
and new. If a customer had bought a phone costing $130 a year or two back,
we should have come up with a much better phone that would cost $260.
Now all we had to offer was a supermodel costing $650. We were victims of
our own elementary mistakes.
   My agonies intensified. Responsibility for the Mobile Phones Unit had
moved to Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo, and I knew he would get things right. There
was a profit warning ahead, which would knock billions off our market val-
ue. The press was saying that I was in exactly the same position that I had
been in a couple of years earlier. We had to make some major corrections.
   The CEO of a company can never escape responsibility for his or her own
mistakes. On 6 April I made a conference call explaining to shareholders
where we stood. I had travelled the previous day to Atlanta to meet one of
our important customers, Cingular. From there I flew to New York in the
evening. I woke at five in the morning to read my papers, had breakfast at
the Peninsula Hotel at seven, and knew then that I had a long and arduous
day ahead. There was a shortage of financial news: only the results for Rupert
Murdoch’s NewsCorp and for Nokia were due. I could see that we would
attract a great deal of attention, all of it negative. The worst of it was that I
couldn’t really make promises to anyone. All I could do was repeat the same
message to the investors: things are under control. We’re doing the right
things. This is a much smaller crisis than the one we faced in 1995. But I
didn’t know when our profits would improve, or to what extent. All I could
do – and it was what I wanted to do – was trust our new organization. It had
to succeed. Otherwise everything would go badly for us. My stomach was
burning for three or four days. At least my body understood what was up.
   The first thing we did was something straight out of textbooks. If your
goods don’t sell, you should drop the price. Our phones were well packaged
and commanded premium prices. We could afford to sell them more cheap-
ly, though that might go against our traditional principles. A price cut would
stop our market share crumbling, though of course the markets wouldn’t
like the move. Our profitability would also be in danger.
   The crucial thing was to crank our machinery into action. At its heart sat a
group of product directors responsible for designing new phones that would
      302                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


                              sell in our various markets. A product director’s job
                              was to ensure that the customer’s voice was heard at
                              an early stage in our design process. If, for example,
                              we wanted to create a phone for developed markets
                              costing $200, it would be up to the product director
                              to say which compromises could be made in the de-
                              sign and which weren’t possible. A product director’s
                              job was made up of countless small decisions that
                              were the basis for a new product that would stand
                              or fall in the market for which it had been designed.
                                 In the mid-1990s we launched perhaps three new
                              models of phone a year. By the mid-2000s this figure
                              had grown to at least forty. Ten years earlier a product
                              director had a great deal of power and responsibil-
                              ity – every new model was a major event that could
The Nokia 6101
                              determine Nokia’s fate for the coming years. Now a
                              product director’s job had become more mundane.
        Our announcement that Nokia intended to develop new and complex mul-
      timedia phones had brought a new creative glow. There had certainly been
      a glow when we developed N-Gage. The company devoted its most valuable
      resources to these products, which were not yet ready to be launched. We
      had also skimped on design. The ease of use and features of our mid-range
      phones were not on a level that would win back our market share.
        Now the product directors had to focus on new tasks with a fresh attitude.
      Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo queried almost every aspect of the Mobile Phones
      Unit’s conventional wisdom. He was enough of an outsider to do that; but
      he also knew practically everything and brought a great deal of authority
      to bear. He didn’t want to hear old explanations of why Nokia hadn’t made
      clamshell phones. He asked basic questions until the people he spoke to had
      to admit there was really no rational basis for how things had been done.
      The product directors had to be transferred to different roles and new people
      brought in, and we also had to find new experts.
        In spring 2004 I gathered all our mobile phone product directors together.
      I opened the meeting and put my neck on the line as far as I could. I tried
      to acknowledge both my own and Nokia’s mistakes. I emphasized how im-
      portant this issue was to the entire company. Once again I saw serious faces
      in front of me. Everyone knew, once again, that Nokia’s future was at stake.
        Matters gradually started to move in the right direction. In spring 2004 the
      decision to produce a new clamshell model was made, and it was launched a
		
 Against All Odds                                                         303


year later. This model – the 6101 – worked well, sold well, and showed that
Nokia was an organization that could learn. Before this Olli-Pekka Kallas-
vuo had started to turn the whole organization’s thinking in a new direction.
Copying good ideas wasn’t forbidden.
  Design, colors, features, and marketing were all ways of creating added
value for individual customers. If customers wanted cameras in their mid-
range phones, Nokia’s job was to find a way of making them. If Americans
were only interested in buying clamshell models, Nokia had to make them.
We at Nokia wanted to be reasonable, but our customers around the world
didn’t necessarily want to be as reasonable as we were in Finland. At the last
moment we had admitted that it was the customers’ money that kept us go-
ing, and that they might well be right.
304                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                          CHAPTER 64


                        Three Crises



I  n Greek culture the word crisis originally meant a turning-point. As a
   medical term a crisis means simply a fork in the road: the patient either
recovers or dies. The same holds true for business life, though the diagnosis
isn’t always as exact as in the medical world. In business it’s only with hind-
sight that you can work out where things went wrong, why the forecasts
turned out to be inaccurate, or how a major company came to lose not just
its place in the market but its credibility and its brand as well. And, by the
same token, how the company came to lose its senior management; or to put
it a better way, how the senior management came to lose the company and
their jobs. Then a new age dawns, and no one wants to remember the bad
old days or undertake detailed investigations into what went wrong.
   Nokia went through at least three crises in the 1990s and 2000s. In 1992
its cash flow dried up and it was on the point of sinking. That crisis was all
too visible. Confirmation of its existence came from the Swiss bankers, who
were unwilling to extend finance to Nokia, and from Ericsson, who decided
not to buy us in 1991 because we were in such bad shape.
   In 1995 we encountered a new crisis. We had been growing fast – we had
taken off like an airplane built in a back yard. Just as soon as we were prop-
erly airborne and had started to congratulate ourselves that the plane could
indeed fly, we began to hear some alarming noises. The engine was starting
to cut out and the steering didn’t seem to work. We had to make an emer-
gency landing and rebuild our craft. Our system couldn’t stand up to vigor-
ous growth. Within eight months we got things back into shape, and we
were soon aloft once more. If we hadn’t succeeded Nokia would be no more,
and you wouldn’t be reading this book.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          305


   We came up against the real world again in 2001, though crisis might be
a little too strong a word to describe the situation. Growth was now much
weaker. Instead, there was ever more aggressive competition, ever more
ambitious products, and ever more demanding customers, both individual
consumers and operating companies. The market for mobile phones was
growing, but Nokia seemed to be getting a smaller share of that growth.
Nokia was also suffering because it wasn’t strong enough in the Japanese
or American markets. Nokia hadn’t focused enough on the technological
requirements of those markets, which worked to the CDMA standard.
   From March to June 2004 Nokia was again on the critical list. We had
made some very serious mistakes. We had aimed at the wrong target, and we
had lost touch with our customers, both the operating companies and indi-
vidual consumers. These were the worst mistakes a company could make. I
bore my own responsibility for them.
   The crisis in 2004 showed that we had to stick coolly and deliberately to
our own line, regardless of what anyone else might say. That did not, how-
ever, mean withdrawal from reality, from customers, from markets, from the
right technology. Building a major company means humility, practicality,
flexibility, alertness, and responsiveness. Although Nokia made mistakes,
getting back on the right track was possible. We found in spring 2004 that
the company could be guided; we could still dispense with the automatic
pilot if we needed to.
   By June our figures still hadn’t improved. In July we issued our results for
the first six months, and our share price slumped further. But July was also
the turning point. This wasn’t visible in the first week of the month, but by
the second week, when practically every Finn is on holiday, Nokia’s figures
seemed to be turning the corner. The battle had perhaps been won, after all.
   In that year we didn’t manage to address the reasons for our failure. We
altered our course, but it took time to implement lasting changes. By 2005
we were back on track for growth. At the beginning of 2006 we succeeded in
improving our market share and our profitability, and Nokia was once again
a growing company. It had taken a year and a half.
   We had, however, learned something from our earlier crises – even
though one of the most important things we’d learned was that crises don’t
resemble each other. In 1992 there hadn’t been time to weigh alternatives
because Nokia was running out of money. Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo, then our
finance director, and I had had to go to the banks, cap in hand. We had to
create confidence in the company’s future, even though our own confidence
almost ran dry at times. The company was small and in bad shape. If money
and confidence had run out, the Nokia story would have ended there and
306                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


then. When finally we got our hands on some money, we started to worry
that someone would buy the company, because it had become far too cheap.
   In 1995 we had bumped up against the limits of our own growth. We
had not stocked up in advance. We lost control of the company. Over the
course of eight months Pekka Ala-Pietilä and Pertti Korhonen in particular
managed to put the company back on the rails. If we had failed, the Nokia
story would have ended abruptly. It was only on account of the crisis that we
learned how to configure a global company for sustainable growth.
   In 2004 we were the biggest company in our own field. We had reached a
position where the main dangers were arrogance, indifference, and remote-
ness. We had become such a big player that our customers and our business
partners began to see us as a threat. We hadn’t listened closely enough to the
telecom operators. After the crisis we were sharper and more sensitive and
travelling on the right track toward the next round of change.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          307




                          CHAPTER 65


           The Right Ideas,
      Some Wrong Assumptions,
       and Prisoners of Success

N     okia has been accused, in retrospect, of failing to understand how
      the world was changing in 2004 and thereafter. I simply don’t agree.
We knew what was happening: where we failed was in applying our knowl-
edge effectively. We made poor decisions, we didn’t think things through
clearly enough, and we didn’t get where we wanted to go. We were also pris-
oners of our own success. Nokia’s results were good, even exceptional, once
we were clear of the crisis of 2004. In 2007 we had our best results ever. None
of us would have imagined that just a year or two later the company would
produce one of the worst results in its history.
  It all began in 2004, however. The previous year we had planned a radi-
cal reorganization, intended to reflect what had happened in the market for
mobile phones. Markets evolved, and every company tried to predict the di-
rection, speed, and intensity of change. We believed that smartphones were
on their way. We believed it so strongly that we established a new business
unit to focus on them, and we poured lots of money into product develop-
ment and marketing. The purpose of the reorganization was to ensure that
we would make the right phones for new markets. Nokia’s Mobile Phones
Unit – NMP – had grown too big within Nokia. It made vast numbers of
mobile phones, and quantity had become a substitute for quality.
  Logistics, procurement, and sales all worked well: NMP was an efficient
machine.
  But the efficient machine was unable to make the new products that Nokia
sorely needed. If production is directed solely at satisfying the demand that
already exists, there’s no room for new ideas. Furthermore, Nokia’s struc-
308                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


tures had stayed pretty much the same since 1998. As one by one the other
business units ceased to operate, only two were left: Nokia Mobile Phones
and Nokia Networks, which built and sold networks to operating compa-
nies. These two giants were like companies within the company, and their
managing directors ran them in the style of CEOs.
   We needed a new organization where NMP would be divided into three:
the Mobile Phones Unit, the Multimedia Unit, and Enterprise Solutions.
Nokia had tacitly admitted that smartphones and mid-range phones now
formed distinct market segments. Also, in the new matrix structure market-
ing wouldn’t be treated as a single function; it would be integrated verti-
cally with the new business units. The same was true of technology, which
was perhaps the single most important driver of activity: we reconfigured
Nokia’s engineering department as well. It suited some of the engineers, but
others found the new structure uncomfortable.
   In fact the new organization was unremarkable. This is how major compa-
nies were and are organized everywhere and in all areas of business. Matrix
organizations compel people from different units to make decisions together
and to take notice of other people’s views. They demand the maturity to
understand the interests of the whole firm, which is not the same as the
profit or success of one’s own unit. They also compel senior management
to be where the action is, because there are always issues that only the chief
executive can rule on. Lastly, matrix organizations develop friction and heat,
which are essential for creativity.
   Some have assumed that Nokia’s later difficulties resulted from the matrix
organization introduced in 2004. I don’t agree with them, though not all of
Nokia’s senior managers functioned effectively within the new structures.
Perhaps we didn’t train people enough, or maybe power struggles caused
problems. Perhaps I too was unable to work in the best possible way in the
new organization. And maybe people were jostling for my position and this
had started to affect their behavior.
   I think now that the reorganization of Nokia put in place in 2004 was cor-
rect and an improvement on what had gone before. Even so, we weren’t huge-
ly successful. The problem is perhaps that organizations are made of people.
   In 2004 one strand of Nokia’s history was coming to an end. Perceptive
people sensed this. From the early 1990s the company had developed a par-
ticular culture, which its closely-knit leaders sustained for many years. I was
of course one of those leaders. When I announced that I was stepping down
the situation changed, though of course the question was not only about me.
After that the position of many other senior managers and divisional chiefs
		
 Against All Odds                                                          309


changed: people were concerned about their future, there were more discus-
sions in the corridors, and the large-scale reorganization took many people
out of their comfort zones.
   All of Nokia’s most important people had put a great deal of energy into
the company over decades. By 2004 Pekka Ala-Pietilä had been with the
company twenty years, Matti Alahuhta twenty-seven, Sari Baldauf twenty-
one, Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo twenty-four, Pertti Korhonen eighteen, and Anssi
Vanjoki thirteen years. These wonderful people had shaped the company
with their own energies and after their own characters. Within the company
they were living legends. Of course media exposure, success, and their fi-
nancial rewards all had something to do with this. The Five and some other
senior managers were more than just salaried staff: they embodied the com-
pany’s values.
   When I restructured the senior leadership at Nokia for the last time in
2003–04, I may not have given enough thought to the significance of these
people. They helped plan the new organization. I didn’t foresee a future in
which they wouldn’t be around. But that soon became the reality: by 2006
Pekka Ala-Pietilä, Matti Alahuhta, Pertti Korhonen, and Sari Baldauf had all
left Nokia. My role changed too when I moved to be chairman of the board
of directors and Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo took over as chief executive.
   The change in senior leadership was great. Perhaps we lost too much tacit
(and indeed vocal) knowledge at the time of the restructuring. Some of the
departures were agreed upon well in advance, but some were more surpris-
ing. Either way, the result was that only Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo, Anssi Vanjoki,
and I remained of the core team that had led Nokia from the mid-1990s on.
I don’t want to disparage the new generation of leaders who had grown up
at Nokia, who tried to step into their shoes in the restructured company.
But the break with the past was perhaps too abrupt. Many employees were
perhaps too ready to believe that the good times would continue to roll, and
that both they and the company would continue merrily on their way.
   We wanted to create structures that weren’t built around individual man-
agers. Our goal was the world’s best organization in the service of the world’s
best manufacturer of mobile devices. It didn’t occur to any of us that the key
managers would depart, taking with them their expertise, energy, ideas, ex-
perience, and leadership ability. Perhaps we should have done more to hang
on to at least some of them.
   I certainly made other mistakes. The new structure forced the chief execu-
tive to be more intimately involved in the management of the company. Ever
smaller issues started to cross my desk. In the new model I should have been
      310                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


                                closer to the machinery, but psychologically I was
                                already moving to my new position as chairman of
                                the board. I recognized this problem and did ev-
                                erything I could, but as so often happens it was a
                                state of affairs that I needed a twenty-fifth hour in
                                the day to resolve.
                                   Companies often do things either too early or
                                too late. Nokia restructured itself both too late and
                                too early. Only later did it become clear that we
                                had invested in the right ideas, but too soon. We
                                believed that the market wanted expensive, high-
                                performance phones, but we were wrong. It was
                                only later that the operating companies could offer
                                the services that made smartphones appealing. The
                                Apple iPhone came on the market only in 2007.
The Nokia N95
                                   The new structure didn’t mean just new leader-
                                ship; our working methods had to change as well.
      We were addressing the right issues, but even so our results remained weak.
      We were trying to do the things that Apple, Google, and Microsoft would all
      implement later.
         The old Nokia had made many basic products and modified them when
      necessary, whereas we wanted to focus on a handful of software platforms
      and the products based on them. Now this change seems self-evident, but in
      Nokia’s thinking at the time it was revolutionary. It was a change in Nokia’s
      behavior that has continued to this day. I understood also that the world of
      software was changing. Previously, every phone model or group of models
      had its own software, but now we had to move to wide software platforms.
      Phones had to be designed to fit the software, not the software to fit the
      phone. This was a crucial change, and we wanted our restructuring to enable
      us to move forward with it.
         I put Pertti Korhonen in charge of this. At the beginning the changes in
      organization produced a brilliant result. In 2006 Nokia announced it was
      launching a smartphone named the N95. It had a cover that slid back to
      reveal a keyboard. It also contained our first 5-megapixel camera.
         The new phone was launched in 2007, immediately after Apple announced
      its own alternative smartphone, which was called the iPhone. Steve Jobs
      talked about this phone at a trade fair in the United States in January 2007,
      and it came on the market at the end of June.
         Thus began a duel between Nokia as reigning champion and Apple as its
      challenger. The prize was the global smartphone market. Many put their bets
		
 Against All Odds                                                       311


on Nokia. We knew how to design, manufacture, and market our phones.
Our infrastructure was far superior. You could use our phones with confi-
dence in every country, on every network, in all conditions. Nokia’s engi-
neers were the world’s best. We had conquered all the world’s markets; even
if our market share had dropped a little in the United States we were trying
our hardest there as well. If anyone who followed mobile phones had been
asked in 2007 who would win this duel, the answer would have been clear –
Nokia was overwhelmingly the best bet.
312                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                          CHAPTER 66


        Could Nokia Have Been a
          Software Company?


W       hen a company runs into difficulties they always seem new and
        unpredictable. In fact they will have been around for a while, in the
form of unanswered questions, careless thinking, or half-baked decisions.
Every company tries to evade difficult issues, and it’s the leader’s job to spot
them in time and try to find the right solutions before they become too big.
Solving them on paper isn’t enough: you have to find a way of putting your
decisions and solutions into effect.
  Companies have to change, and sometimes extremely fast. As with a sail-
ing boat tacking to windward, the turn has to be extremely smooth, fast,
controlled, and decisive, otherwise the craft will capsize. You can only turn
rapidly if you’re sure of your direction. Uncertainty and differences of opin-
ion will slow down the decisions. The boat may already have washed up on
the rocks because the turn should have been made much earlier.
  We tried to change at Nokia between 2004 and 2007. We wanted to change
direction but didn’t know what, in practice, that meant. At the same time we
were all – and I mean everyone at Nokia – prisoners of our own past.
  We had long seen that Nokia was shifting from manufacturing to service
provision, which demanded greater expertise in software design. We knew
that Nokia had to become a software company. We talked about this inter-
nally and to the media. We also announced, long before our competitors,
that the Internet would soon fit in people’s pockets. And so it did, though
much later than we had forecast.
  Nokia never had its own operating system or a unit within the company
that might produce one. Nokia had established itself as a developer of tele-
		
 Against All Odds                                                         313


phone equipment. We had acquired the template for an operating system
by taking over a small company that had by chance come up for sale in
1998. The company was based in England and its name was Symbian. It was
bought jointly by Nokia, Ericsson, and Motorola.
   Symbian had begun as a company called Psion, which had made little
palmtop computers. One of its most successful products was the Psion Or-
ganizer, which had a database and a diary. Psion continued to operate after
it had sold its software expertise along with Symbian to the mobile phone
companies. Motorola took over what was left of the original company in
2012.
   Phones were no longer just phones by the beginning of the 2000s. They
were smart, high-performance devices with numerous applications – they
had become computers. The phone that offered the best experience to its
users would be the victor, and the operating system was the very heart of
the battle.
   Anssi Vanjoki and Pertti Korhonen disagreed about many things, but
about this they were of one mind. They both believed that Symbian software
would give us a competitive edge, if we could use it as a base to which we
could add applications. If we could create a smartphone in this way, it would
be a roaring sales success. Central to our thinking was a conviction that our
more expensive smartphones would eventually use a Linux-based operating
system, which at some point would replace Symbian. This line of thought
eventually gave rise to the MeeGo operating system.
   Naturally there was one question that made us pause: was Symbian still a
competitive option in the new world? We had a brisk internal debate on this
issue from 2005 to 2007.
   At Nokia it was our long-standing practice for each model of phone to
have its own version of the operating system. Now we tried to change things
so that a single software platform would support a common operating sys-
tem for many different models. The basic idea was clear and simple, but it
demanded a major cultural shift inside the company. This was anything but
easy. The mobile phone mentality had to move to the smartphone era.
   I really wasn’t an expert on software, so I had to rely on my key advisers,
Pertti Korhonen and Anssi Vanjoki. Pertti knew more than anyone at Nokia
what our products were made of and how they worked. But Pertti wasn’t a
child of the new software age: his experience came chiefly from the 1990s
and the beginning of the 2000s. Still, he was the one who knew most about
software in our senior management team. Anssi had a comprehensive un-
derstanding of our products and the demands that users made of them.
314                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   Once again, looking back, it’s easy to be wise after the event. None of us
– Anssi Vanjoki, Pertti Korhonen, or me – were software experts. Nor were
Matti Alahuhta or Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo. We could ask penetrating ques-
tions, but to answer them we depended on the expertise of the next level
down in the organization. What would happen in the software world in the
next five to ten years? How could Nokia best turn itself into a software com-
pany? And if it could, what would be the consequences? What should we
do? We feverishly sought good, evidence-based answers to these questions
in 2004–07.
   Nokia really needed its own home-grown software experts, with a deep
knowledge of the field, to tackle these burning issues. But we didn’t have
them. Indeed, there didn’t seem to be such people anywhere in Europe. As
far back as 2001 we had talked of strengthening our software expertise, and
we had begun to get a grip on the problem.
   First we applied the lessons of some positive experiences from the 1990s.
We had boosted product development, in both mobile phones and networks,
by bringing in Finland’s leading experts in radio technology. We had worked
closely with the universities on that. The best example was Yrjö Neuvo, who
joined us in 1993 and became the chief technology officer. As the world’s
leading researcher on digital signal processing his fingerprints were all over
Nokia’s technological lead. The results were exceptional, truly world class.
   We tried to repeat this in software. Nokia took on a large group of profes-
sors and key researchers from the universities and polytechnics. They spent
a year or two either at Nokia’s Research Centre or in individual business
units. But the second time around the results were modest, downright feeble.
   When around 2005 we really started to understand what we were up
against, we tried to recruit more experienced software experts. We also
strengthened the Research Centre and our product development work in
the United States, both in Boston and in Silicon Valley. Again the results
turned out to be very weak. Using these methods it simply wasn’t possible to
develop a strong team of software experts in a short time.
   Symbian was Nokia’s smartphone operating system until 2011, when the
company announced it was moving to the Microsoft operating system.
		
 Against All Odds       315




        PA R T V


       WHAT’S A
 CHIEF EXECUTIVE FOR?
316   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa
		
 Against All Odds                                                          317




                          CHAPTER 67


             The January Decision



I  have made many major decisions just after Christmas. I usually
   take a break then until the second week of January. When I returned to
my office on the seventh floor of Nokia’s headquarters in January 2005, I
knew I wouldn’t continue as the company’s chief executive much longer. Ac-
tually, I had known that for some time, but I hadn’t let anyone know. Now
it was time to leave and to choose a successor. I was relieved, but I knew the
process wouldn’t be easy.
   I had wanted to relinquish the CEO responsibilities earlier as well. I had
thought of leaving in 2003, but it would have looked as if I were fleeing from
the difficulties that were then just starting. The company’s board of directors
appealed to me to stay on. I had an agreement whereby I could leave the
company in 2006, if I wished, though I was committed to staying at least
until then.
   Not everyone had taken the agreement seriously, but for me it was im-
portant. It seemed to me that I had done everything I could do as the CEO
of Nokia, and from now on I really didn’t have anything more to add. Also,
I felt that Nokia needed some clear changes. There should be opportunities
for new people, the executive committee needed to be more international,
and I wanted to do something different. In January 2005 I still didn’t have
any idea what that something might be.
   When I was chosen to become Nokia’s chief executive, the company’s
owners at the time, Finnish banks and insurance companies, invited me to
a dimly-lit conference room and asked me to take on the role. That was how
Finnish companies still did things in the early 1990s. They didn’t interview
318                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


other candidates, or even consider them. Nor did anyone ask whether the
new CEO should come from inside or outside the company. Some Finns
wanted Nokia’s CEO to be selected the same way even now. I couldn’t have
disagreed more. I wanted the alternatives to be examined closely. I wanted
the candidates interviewed. I wanted to explore the option of an external
candidate, even though I thought there were many brilliant candidates for
the job within Nokia.
   When Nokia’s new leadership structure began to operate at the beginning
of 2004, many people saw it as the first stage in the competition for the new
CEO. But the organization hadn’t been transformed in order for potential
candidates to compete, although the new organization certainly gave them
a chance to demonstrate their competence, motivation, and ability to work
with others.
   Pekka Ala-Pietilä, Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo, and Pertti Korhonen were the
key candidates. Matti Alahuhta, after becoming strategy director, left the
company in the autumn of 2004, and Sari Baldauf had also decided to leave
at the end of 2004, so they were no longer in the running.
   I discussed the selection of the new CEO with Deputy Chairman Paul
Collins, since he was preparing personnel matters for consideration by the
board. He was fully abreast of modern governance procedures and told me
bluntly at the outset that “you’re not to participate in the selection process
at all.”
   He did however have one request to make. He asked if I would compile
a list of between five and ten possible internal candidates to succeed me.
I spent half a day thinking the names through. My list consisted of Pekka
Ala-Pietilä, Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo, Anssi Vanjoki, Pertti Korhonen, Timo
Ihamuotila, and Mary McDowell. I wanted to give the board of directors
the opportunity to weigh the merits of both familiar figures and candidates
from a new generation. Pekka, Olli-Pekka, and Anssi were in the former
group, Pertti had risen to his current position a little later than them, and
Mary and Timo belonged to Nokia’s new generation. It was a good list and
gave the board enough to proceed with.
   It was then the board’s job to interview these candidates. At some stage a
consultant was brought in to tell us whether our internal candidates would
satisfy international requirements. If they weren’t good enough we would
have to consider external candidates.
   A working group set up by the board bore the main responsibility for the
selection process. It consisted of Paul Collins, Marjorie Scardino, and Per
Karlsson, with Bengt Homström as an additional member. I wasn’t there
		
 Against All Odds                                                         319


when the candidates were interviewed, and I don’t know how well each of
them did. The working group did, however, ask me to write for them a page
on each candidate, describing their strengths and the areas where they need-
ed development.
   The only genuine surprise in the whole process came on Saturday, 19
March. Pekka Ala-Pietilä told me that he didn’t want to be the CEO. He had
thought about it and talked it through with his family and decided that he
didn’t have the necessary fire for the job. He would leave Nokia later that
year.
   Pekka’s announcement made the selection process more difficult. He had
been appointed deputy chief executive in 1998, and a year later he had be-
come president when I was appointed chairman, after which he had been a
clear candidate to be my successor.
   I had told the board back in 2001 that I wanted to step down as CEO in
2003, and that I saw Pekka as my successor. When the board didn’t go along
with my proposal I agreed to extend my term until 2006. Pekka was visibly
younger than me. We had worked together for many years. I valued his bril-
liant grasp of strategy and his ability to lead people within an organization.
I was disappointed and sad at his decision, and I couldn’t help thinking that
Pekka should have seen it as his duty to pursue the CEO role. On the other
hand I respected his decision and his decisiveness. He didn’t want to be in
the public eye, as a media target; but as CEO of Nokia you can’t avoid that.
It’s one of the less agreeable features of the job.
   After Pekka withdrew, the process needed speeding up. If Pekka had in
principle decided to leave Nokia, we had to move up a gear to appoint a
new CEO at the board meeting in July. If we did that we wouldn’t lose time
or cause uncertainty within the organization. The board met in London on
26–27 July. The most important item on the agenda was the appointment.
Having deliberated the matter, the working group had whittled the list down
to two candidates, and Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo was the stronger. The board
wanted a chance to explore whether Nokia should be led by a younger man.
I too had said this option should be examined closely.
   As the meeting went on I debated with Paul Collins whether Nokia should
go for experience or for youthful promise. The board clearly tended toward
experience, and I really had no objections to raise. Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo
would be my successor as the CEO of Nokia. He was on hand if the board
wanted to talk to him, but no further interview was needed – the board
knew him well enough and the working group had given him a thorough
grilling already.
320                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   Nokia had appointed a new CEO, who would assume his duties in June
2006. Responsibility for this decision was in part mine, though I had not
participated at all in the official selection process. We also discussed my own
role. I’d announced that I wanted to do something new in a distinctly dif-
ferent field. Paul Collins told me that the board wanted me to continue as
their chairman, even though it was extremely important to give Olli-Pekka
the space he needed to build his own management team organization and to
develop his own plans and strategy.
   I wasn’t keen on staying on as chairman. After some persuasion I agreed to
it, but only after my role had been clearly defined for the benefit of the media,
investors, and Nokia itself. We agreed that my role as chairman would be the
same as Casimir Ehrnrooth’s in the Nokia of the 1990s. I would spend one or
two days a week on Nokia business, and I would focus on being a support-
ive but challenging interlocutor to the chief executive. Marjorie Scardino,
who headed the appointments committee, informed the company’s general
meeting of this arrangement in spring 2006.
   All the candidates to succeed me were excellent, and some were outstand-
ing. I was proud of my company, which had nurtured people who could
continue my work. I felt we had reached the right decision, even if there had
been some surprises along the way. I was also satisfied that everything had
been done thoroughly and by the book. As well as the interviews, we had
commissioned comprehensive external analyses of the candidates’ strengths
and weaknesses. We had gotten to know them inside out: no one had a right
to just walk into one of the most difficult but fascinating jobs the business
world could offer.
   At the beginning of August the world’s media were told who would take
over from me. At the same time we announced Olli-Pekka’s appointment as
a member of the board with operational responsibility starting 1 October
2005. Although I would be responsible for the company as CEO until 1 June
2006, I wanted to give Olli-Pekka full responsibility for the planning process
for 2006.
   On 3 August Pekka, Olli-Pekka, and I sat at the front of the auditorium at
our head office to give a press conference. There was a slight air of sadness
in the room, a sense that an era was drawing to a close and a new one was
beginning. Pekka spoke honestly about the reasons for his own decision. He
wanted to do something new after all the years he had spent at Nokia. He
explained that he didn’t really have the fire in his belly to take over the role
of CEO. Olli-Pekka, for his part, was certain that he did have what it would
take to lead Nokia into its next phase.
		
 Against All Odds                                                          321


   With these men, these two men who were so close to me, I had fought
for Nokia fifteen years before. They both belonged to the elite of the world’s
business leaders, and it was good to sit between them. For me it was time to
do something else.
   Our press conference was open and honest. I suppose the foreign journal-
ists suspected that some complex plot was going on behind the scenes. No
one could have spoken more openly of their motives than Pekka and Olli-
Pekka. The journalists seemed to believe them since neither of them had any
other agenda. All three of us said what we thought and how we had reached
our decisions.
   Two weeks later there was more news. The Financial Times wrote on its
front page “Shell snatches Ollila.” Shell had decided to appoint me as chair-
man of the board. A firm of headhunters had rung me back in March and I
had given my preliminary agreement. I confirmed this in the summer when
I saw that Nokia would reach a quick decision on my successor. I was over-
joyed. At Shell I would have a chance to apply my long-standing interest in
the global economy and in energy. It had been a long journey from the world
of high school nature clubs, and later my economic awakening during the
1970s oil crisis, to my new role as chairman of the board of one of the world’s
largest energy companies.
322                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                         CHAPTER 68


         Twenty-One Years and a
           Few Months More


P    eople talk of the lame duck phenomenon, when a leader has an-
     nounced his departure and then finds his powers ebbing away. But with
so much happening at Nokia there was no danger that I’d run out of steam
during the transition.
   In 2005 and 2006 we had made major decisions on the future of our net-
work business. The changes were significant. Mobile network operators had
begun outsourcing their network operations and maintenance, so our ser-
vice business was growing at a remarkable rate. Nokia no longer merely sup-
plied base stations and other network equipment – now we also looked after
its care and maintenance. Networks required constant research and devel-
opment. We did fewer deals, but those we did were significant. Competition
to sell services, equipment, and software to operators was intensifying. We
had beaten off our competitors, especially Ericsson and, above all, the new
companies emerging from China. We had to show some muscle.
   There had also been changes within Nokia. Simon Beresford-Wylie, an
Australian who had joined Nokia at the end of the 1990s, had taken over
from Sari Baldauf, who had been responsible for the success of mobile
phone networks. Sari had run the unit like her own start-up, with strong
support from a small, dedicated team. Simon Beresford-Wylie’s role as Sari’s
replacement was truly a challenge for him.
   The market had given us clear indications that the American company Lu-
cent might be for sale. We took a closer look, and when our hunch was con-
firmed we approached the company. Lucent had been split off from AT&T
as an independent enterprise. As a listed company it had become a favorite
		
 Against All Odds                                                           323


with investors in the 1990s. It had a voracious appetite and grew through
acquisition into a global enterprise. But at the beginning of the 2000s Lucent
found itself in difficulties and was forced to divest some of its non-core busi-
nesses.
   Negotiations began in the early spring of 2005. I met Lucent’s chairwom-
an, Patricia Russo, whom I already knew slightly. Russo had long experience
in the IT field and had led Lucent since 2002. She was regarded as one of
America’s most influential women executives. Later the negotiations were
conducted between the business leaders and finance staff, and we got a good
idea of where Lucent was coming from and what sort of company it was.
   I didn’t make any major acquisitions when I was the Nokia CEO. We had
grown organically for the most part, and I was cautious about acquisitions.
Their success rate isn’t very high. Too often they’re pursued for the wrong
reasons – to expand egos and empires. Too often executives underestimate
the energy needed to acquire and absorb a company and successfully merge
two company cultures. Economic history is full of sad tales of unsuccessful
acquisitions, which on occasion have sunk the company making the pur-
chase. Perhaps my subconscious caution was due also to Nokia’s little ban-
quet of acquisitions in the 1980s. I had spent a long time cleaning up the
consequences.
   Our position now was perhaps a little more complicated than that. Lucent’s
shareholders had concluded that the company couldn’t survive on its own. If
Nokia didn’t buy it, one of our competitors would. We knew Lucent was also
in negotiations with two other companies. One was the French company
Alcatel. The other was probably Motorola or Ericsson, but we weren’t sure.
   While I was pondering whether to buy Lucent, I was also considering the
future of Nokia’s network business. The Americans, who were commendably
clear cut in everything, always thought that if they couldn’t buy, they could
at least sell – and at a good price. Business there was a constant round of
deals and trades, where the shop was always open. In Europe things were
a little different. Siemens, for example, had rarely sold any of its businesses.
   Should Nokia have sold its network business? Absolutely, if you asked a
stock exchange analyst in the spring of 2005. It would have freed up some
cash and made the area more dynamic. And of course it would have left
Nokia as a mobile phone company, pure and simple. In practice, the only
possible buyer would have been Siemens, and I for one would have been
emotionally allergic to that.
   Lucent wanted a quick answer, however. Our first impressions were that
the company’s fixed costs were far too high and that it was too well staffed:
324                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


it had 30,000 employees and its revenue was $8 billion. The more closely we
looked at the company, the more strongly our impressions were confirmed.
On the plus side, the company’s market share in the United States was grow-
ing. But the negative factors became clearer, too. Lucent needed a complete
restructuring, with its unprofitable units in various parts of the world shut
down. There were questions about many liabilities on the company’s balance
sheet, which was not uncommon.
   After painstaking deliberation we decided that buying Lucent wouldn’t be
a smart move for Nokia or for its shareholders. The board made this decision
before Easter, and we knew we were setting in motion a series of changes in
the market for networks. We had made the opening move, and other moves
would necessarily follow. Lucent announced at the start of April 2006 that it
would merge with Alcatel, which was one and a half times bigger.
   Time showed clearly that Alcatel didn’t get the benefits from the deal that
it had expected. The hoped-for opportunities for cooperation didn’t mate-
rialize, as is so often the case. Alcatel had to write down much of the value
of Lucent, which showed that the deal had wasted the shareholders’ money,
which was now available for the sellers – Lucent’s shareholders – to enjoy.
Another common story.
   After all this we had no reason to mourn our decision on Lucent. We knew
that it was time for us to plan our next move. Thus in the spring and summer
of 2005 we began to negotiate with Siemens, which for Nokia was a familiar
story. Back in the 1980s Nokia’s prowess in selling to the Soviet Union had
aroused the interest of Siemens in West Germany. In 1986 its CEO, Anton
Hasholzner, proposed that we undertake joint projects in telephone tech-
nology, but the talks didn’t reach a conclusion. Early in the 1990s Siemens
approached Nokia again, wanting to buy our network business. At that time
we decided to turn down the offer. Now we were discussing new forms of
cooperation – in other words, a joint enterprise. Siemens had other joint
ventures, such as the computer company Fujitsu Siemens, or Bosch and Sie-
mens Hausgerate, which made white goods. But such cooperation was a de-
parture from our normal way of doing business.
   Negotiations went ahead on two levels. I discussed the concept and broad
direction with the Siemens CEO, Klaus Kleinfeld. The director of Nokia’s
network unit, Simon Beresford-Wylie, discussed the operational side with
his German counterparts. During the spring and summer we developed an
excellent mutual understanding on most issues. But we couldn’t agree on
one key principle: how was the company to be led? Siemens drew on its pre-
vious experience in cooperative ventures and stressed that the firm should
		
 Against All Odds                                                         325


be run so that both parent companies had equivalent powers and responsi-
bility. We didn’t agree. We warned that this model would lead to two head
offices, uncertainty over who was in charge, and duplication. There would
be no economies of scale.
   Between Christmas and the New Year I was skiing in Switzerland. I gazed
at the stunning Alpine scenery and for a moment thought of something oth-
er than Nokia. Until my mobile phone rang. At the other end was Olli-Pekka
Kallasvuo, Nokia’s CEO-in-waiting, who had taken on additional operation-
al responsibility in October. During the call we decided that we couldn’t
accept the model Siemens proposed. There would be no agreement unless
Nokia took charge of the nascent joint enterprise. In the spring we discussed
practical issues, and Siemens finally came around to our way of thinking. On
19 June 2006 we announced a joint venture with the name of Nokia Siemens
Networks (NSN). At the press conference Nokia was represented by Olli-
Pekka Kallasvuo. I was in Canada on Shell business, learning about the oil
shale project and the gas fields there.
   The new company would bring together the bulk of Nokia’s and Siemens’
network operations. Nokia and Siemens each owned half the company,
which officially began its work on 1 April 2007. The launch was delayed be-
cause Siemens was caught up in a bribery scandal. Nokia’s Simon Beresford-
Wylie was the CEO – Nokia was in the driver’s seat, as we had demanded.
Siemens saw its investment as a purely financial decision, which it would
relinquish if the occasion arose. Nokia did eventually buy Siemens’ half of
the company, taking the whole firm into ownership in the spring of 2013.
   Preparation of the NSN deal was the last major event of my time as CEO.
On the afternoon of 31 May 2006 Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo took over the CEO’s
office and the meeting space that went with it. I was given another room
at Nokia HQ, a long way from Olli-Pekka’s. Now that I think about it, I re-
call that I never visited the CEO office after that day, though Olli-Pekka did
come to mine.
   Removal crates had been stacked up in my room for weeks, full of books,
papers, and photographs. I also took one important painting that had long
travelled with me to the room of the chair of the board. I had gazed at it in
good times and bad. The painting was by Akseli Gallen-Kallela, a key figure
in Finnish culture. As often happens when one is moving, the picture spent a
long time leaning against the wall and was put up only after several months.
   I had received many email messages from colleagues at Nokia, and these
were collected into a little book. Every message was truly heartwarming. In
my last days as chairman there was, however, a sad undertone, because our
326                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


colleague on the board, Édouard Michelin, had died tragically and unex-
pectedly five days earlier. It was a shock for all of us.
   How at Nokia did we celebrate an employee whose career with the com-
pany had lasted twenty-one years and a few months and was now approach-
ing its conclusion? Modestly, that’s how. I’ve already explained that Nokia’s
culture had no room for elaborate ceremonies, and at my own wish we made
no exception for me. At 4 o’clock Olli-Pekka, my secretary, and I raised our
glasses of champagne.
   The event lasted barely fifteen minutes. The removal crates were trans-
ferred that evening out of the CEO’s room and into the room of the chair of
the board, in another part of the building. The celebrations were over and
work would continue with Olli-Pekka at the helm.
   The following morning I was at Helsinki airport. The flight to Amsterdam
left at 8:15 a.m. and I was in The Hague at 10:35 a.m. local time. I had taken
an apartment in the city and agreed to spend two to three days a week on
Shell business.
   My concluding months as the CEO were as hectic as the preceding four-
teen years. The business correspondent Anna-Liisa Lilius of the Finnish
magazine Talouselämä (Business Life) reported on my last hundred days.
When she began she was particularly struck by the fact that the longest time
slot she’d be allocated in my diary was just two minutes. Perhaps I would
have a little more time in the future.
		
 Against All Odds                                                            327




                          CHAPTER 69


     What Did I Learn at School?
  Fourteen Years as Nokia’s Chief Executive




N     okia is a story of growth on many levels: of how the company
      took shape, developed, and grew, and of how Nokia’s young leaders
took on the greatest responsibilities in Finland’s economic history.
  Nokia was a place of growth in many senses. I worked as chief executive
for over fourteen years, which in this field is a truly exceptional length of
time.
  “Those are my principles and if you don’t like them . . . well, I have others,”
said Groucho Marx. He was scarcely serious, but talk of values and com-
pany culture is sometimes regarded as pointless waffle. So the most senior
people must show by their own example that creating and following clear
principles is both important and appropriate. Every enterprise competes for
good employees, and the company’s identity, values, and leadership culture
are crucial to attracting them.
  “Maailma alkaa Arlandan lentokentän takaa,” was the slogan at Nokia in
the early 1990s, when Finnish was still our working language: “The world
begins at Stockholm airport.” Later, political changes and better connections
brought unfamiliar cultures closer together. The change was captured in the
phrase “the world is flat.” That meant that Finland should treat the whole
world as its domestic market. Top management must live and breathe inter-
nationally and ensure that the company knows in every fiber what it must do
to succeed globally. Because it is possible.
  A company is healthy when it grows, and the emotional bonus that growth
provides for its workers is remarkable. Ambitious growth objectives are an
important motivator, though one must guard against growing pains. An in-
328                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


ternationally listed company can’t work in the same way as a start-up. The
need to balance ambitious growth objectives and disciplined behavior was
one of the most important lessons from the Nokia story.
   A company’s most valuable assets lie between its employees’ ears. As chief
executive I was ultimately responsible for Nokia’s staff. I tried to get to know
the most senior three hundred to four hundred executives well while also
keeping in touch with all our areas of activity. Factories, research labora-
tories, and canteens are better places to learn than the boardroom. Until
they’re given the opportunity, gifted individuals can’t show what they’re ca-
pable of. That’s why I promoted some talented young people into some sur-
prising positions. We also respected education and expertise and supported
continuous learning. Intuition and creativity are important, but you also
need careful research and good analysis if you’re to make the right decisions.
   Leadership is about discussion. As chief executive I tried to take both in-
ternal and external communication seriously. It’s all too easy to be seduced
by PR because you have to work with the media. A company’s position is
never as strong as the most positive stories suggest, or in such a deep crisis
as the most negative accounts would have you believe.
   The chief executive’s work is very lonely. It’s important to have people
with whom you can discuss things openly, say what’s on your mind, and
be understood. I often spoke to Lew Platt at Hewlett-Packard, Michael Dell
at Dell, Andy Grove at Intel, and Scott McNealy at Sun Microsystems. But
discussion with the external world isn’t enough on its own – you have to
have people inside the company who will be honest with you. That’s why
a company needs an open, supportive culture with the right processes un-
derpinning it, such as a comprehensive appraisal system. No one can make
decisions on the chief executive’s behalf. Consultants and investment bank-
ers are important advisers, but one must take rigorous care that the desire
and ability to make decisions are kept strictly within one’s own organization.
Consultants all too easily become too cozy with a company’s top manage-
ment as it grows and matures. I tried to stay sensitive to areas where the
organization seemed at risk of getting stale.
   Consultants aren’t the only people worth talking to. But some senior ex-
ecutives’ understanding of wider society seemed to have a bewilderingly
rickety base. They didn’t understand how politicians set about solving prob-
lems, and they couldn’t talk to the trade unions or shop stewards. I tried to
set up a continuing conversation with the political elite both in Finland and
abroad. My years as president of the National Union of University Students
in Finland helped in understanding wider society. When I say “talking to
		
 Against All Odds                                                         329


politicians” I don’t mean that business people should try to make their de-
cisions for them, or that they should start to operate like politicians. I had
observed how Kari Kairamo and Simo Vuorilehto operated as chief execu-
tives, and I had seen their successes, defeats, and the pressures they’d been
under. But I understood what such work was about only when I experienced
it for myself.
330                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                          CHAPTER 70


                  China is Different



W        HEN I STEPPED DOWN AS CEO OF NOKIA, China was our big-
         gest market. We had a market share of 31 percent in mobile phones
and had left our arch-rival Motorola far behind. Our achievement was no
mere matter of luck, for Nokia had a long history of involvement in China.
Nokia had exported cables there as far back as the 1950s. By the 1980s cable
machines and computer networks had taken their place, and a decade later
Nokia was exporting mobile phone networks and handsets. Nokia set up its
first office in the country in 1985.
   At the beginning of the 1990s we learned that the Chinese were thinking
hard about which digital mobile phone standard to opt for. Nokia and Erics-
son naturally encouraged them to go for GSM. The Chinese ultimately made
the right decision, and Nokia sold its first GSM phone in China in 1994.
   The Chinese presumably decided early on that their inadequate and poorly
maintained fixed landline network wasn’t worth bringing up to scratch. If they
had, the impact on the global economy would have been dramatic: the Club
of Rome forecast back in the 1970s that a comprehensive, fixed-link phone
network in China would have used up the world’s entire reserves of copper.
The Chinese decided early on that the future lay in a wireless network, and the
country leapfrogged into a new era, but the resulting network was a mixture
of fixed and wireless. In the mid-1990s China also acquired a CDMA network
at the behest of our American competitors, after intense lobbying.
   In the mid-1990s we saw that the Chinese market would also be the de-
cisive battleground for mobile phones. The country was forging ahead eco-
nomically, and a new, prosperous, middle class was emerging. Young Chi-
		
 Against All Odds                                                           331




Nokia opened a factory in China in 2003, accompanied by fireworks. Finland is
represented by Veli Sundbäck , Minister of Finance Sauli Niinistö and me.


nese people wanted fashionable phones. We had arrived in China at a good
time and we tried to do our groundwork. I had learned the most important
lesson on my first visit to China in 1988: you had to get to know the country
inside out. If a company wanted to know what was happening in the markets
there, the chief executive had to meet politicians, officials, and the managers
of Chinese companies – that was the only way to make the contacts every
company needed. Only by talking to Chinese people could you get solid
information about the country’s politics and economics. For me China was
always a vivid experience. I saw firsthand how the world’s new economic
locomotive was gathering power, and how Chinese decision-makers saw the
world and put their own ideas into action.
   The traffic was not one way – the Chinese were very interested in Nokia
in the 1990s. I remember very well how they paid their first “state visit” to
Nokia. On 10 April 1997 Deputy Prime Minister Wu Bangguo landed at
Helsinki airport after having wangled himself an invitation to Finland. His
team wished to spend two days with Nokia: in Espoo near Helsinki and at
Oulu in the north. The Chinese wanted to find out whether the company
would be a partner with adequate resources for China in its expanding GSM
project. I remember the meeting especially well because my mother had
died the day before. The Chinese guest of honor gave the matter due atten-
tion in his elegant comments, since mothers are greatly respected in Chinese
culture. We became good friends of the deputy prime minister later on.
332                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


   On my trips to China I also tried to meet people outside of business and
look around a lot. Visits to regional cities often give a clearer picture of what
the future holds than dry reports or PowerPoint presentations.
   At Nokia I shared my interest in China with Sari Baldauf. She built up
our network operations, and became a world-class expert on doing business
with China. We often held long discussions of how Nokia could best succeed
there. I travelled to China three or four times a year, Sari even more often.
Together we established a unique network of decision-makers, entrepre-
neurs, and other people, and through our Chinese managers and employees
we learned about the country’s political and social climate.
   On a visit to China in 2001 I listened to a young and gifted Chinese wom-
an who had just started work at Nokia. She could have gotten a job at any
international company on the basis of her top-class education. But she had
chosen Nokia on the grounds that there “she could one day become chief ex-
ecutive.” When I heard that I smiled to myself. Her remark rang true: Nokia
appealed to talented Chinese because it was so much less concerned with
bureaucracy or the pecking order than even American firms. Promotion
could be much quicker at Nokia, and the company felt informal.
   As a country China was not in the least informal. On my own visits I often
received a reception tantamount to what a head of state might expect on a
state visit. A police escort would conduct the procession of cars along the
streets of Beijing. My active connections with China were recognized when
I was formally awarded the Freedom of the City of Beijing.
   Nokia’s hike around the Chinese markets was not always as glorious as
in 2006, however. In 2003 we received a timely reminder of our mortality.
Nokia had three offices in China. We found ourselves off balance when Chi-
nese manufacturers began opening up the distribution network for mobile
phones. We rapidly found a new way of selling phones. In a few years we
had seventy distributors and soon we had a presence in every one of China’s
most important regional cities. We also started making phones that were
better adapted to the Chinese market and allowed the use of Chinese char-
acters.
   The Chinese leadership quickly understood that industrial production
alone wouldn’t guarantee a durable basis for the economy. They were pleased
when industrial jobs were created, but joint ventures in product develop-
ment between international companies and Chinese counterparts were seen
as better still. Companies that provided both jobs and opportunities for
product development could expect to increase their share of a market that
was getting tougher.
		
 Against All Odds                                                         333


  Chinese phone manufacturers were starting to compete strongly against
international companies, and the Chinese government wanted to support
them for its own nationalistic reasons. We had to change our strategy rap-
idly. We beefed up our sales network in the Chinese countryside, removed
some layers, and ensured that our sales commissions went to the people who
actually sold the phones. Motorola wasn’t really in the game, and our market
share rose.
  In 2004 Nokia’s total sales in China were around $3.9 billion. Nokia had
become the market leader in mobile phones, and we had also maintained
our lead as supplier of mobile phone networks to China. In 2005 our sales
rose to $4.6 billion. We employed nearly 5,000 people there. We had suc-
ceeded in the fastest-growing market area in the world. Nokia’s success last-
ed several years, but the tide turned in 2008 when Apple’s iPhone conquered
the Chinese market and the Android operating system was adopted for use
in Chinese mobile phones.
  What else did I learn from China? That the Chinese, and other Asians,
value long-term relationships with and commitment from their customers.
China also demands a tremendously competitive spirit if a company is to
thrive among ambitious local firms. You need outstanding products that the
emerging middle class is keen to buy. But the most important thing to re-
member is that China is different from other markets – it’s not an extension
of either Europe or the United States. Nokia, like other firms, must bear this
in mind if it’s to succeed in China in the future.
334                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                          CHAPTER 71


      Agonies of a Chief Executive



S     enior appointments can go wrong. One leadership guru reckons that
      30 percent do. For chief executives the failure rate may be even higher.
Many failures, perhaps most, are quietly buried. Changes of CEO may not
look like sackings, but sackings do happen in major global businesses. CEOs
leave to spend more time with their families, move on to new jobs, take up
new board positions, or even become chief executives of other companies.
    The time chief executives spend in their jobs has become ever shorter.
Organizations grow tired of their leaders after five or six years. Leaders need
renewal, fresh ideas, and new approaches. Rapid communication has made
their lives more difficult. A chief executive must continually fight in a hos-
tile environment. The head of a global company may have to travel to three
continents in the course of a single week. They may be richly remunerated
for this, but we each have only one life.
    I’ve been through all this. I’ve experienced stratospheric success, but I
also know what it’s like when a company plumbs the depths, letting down
its shareholders, its workers, and everyone else who believed the wonderful
fairy tale could go on forever. A few times I wanted to throw in the towel, but
those feelings never lasted long.
    There’s no way of knowing in advance who will make a good chief execu-
tive. There are many reasons for that. You don’t know what the job entails
until you start to do it. Many a board member has watched the CEO at work
and thought they could do the job as well, if not better. A good CEO makes
the job look easy, even effortless, just as a successful athlete does. In reality
it’s never easy, but some learn that awkward truth better and faster than oth-
ers; many never learn it at all.
		
 Against All Odds                                                           335


   An incoming CEO will be surprised by the issues that cross his or her
desk. About 70 percent is the sort of stuff they would never expect to see.
These aren’t big issues – on the contrary, they’re mostly small but horrid.
Ultimately they may evolve into major threats that put the company’s brand
and reputation at risk. Or the organization may seize up while it awaits deci-
sions that aren’t made soon enough.
   In highly competitive global markets delays in decision-making can be
disastrous. Key executives will draw their own conclusions about the chief
executive’s ability or lack thereof. A company’s leadership team can disinte-
grate very quickly, and no one can lead alone, at least not in a global com-
pany. And this is just one way to fail as CEO – there are at least dozens if not
hundreds of others.
   When Nokia overhauled its product development structures after the fail-
ures of 2004, I made it our goal to have the company on the way up again
by 2006. I expected the following year to be good as well. So the new chief
executive, my successor, would start from a strong position. They wouldn’t
spend time bemoaning the mistakes of the recent past or trying to put them
right. I created the best beginning I possibly could, passing on the baton
with honor.
   Everything went even better than I imagined it would. The N95, launched
in autumn 2006, would carry the company through 2007 and into 2008, per-
haps beyond. The N95 showed clearly that Nokia had the smartphone mar-
ket at its feet, until the iPhone changed everything by making the Internet fit
the pocket or palm. We’d been talking about that for many years.
   Nokia’s results in 2007 were its best ever, and by November its share price
had reached nearly $44. These exceptional results were due to the company’s
strength both in China and elsewhere. Only in the United States was our
market share declining. Overall, Nokia’s share of the mobile phone market
hovered around 40 percent. In retrospect it turns out that Nokia peaked
around this time.
   Perhaps this made the life of Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo, the new chief execu-
tive, a little too easy. He finished the 2006 budget and took over the hot seat
the following spring. Growth was strong in 2007, but the company’s fixed
costs also grew rapidly. It was too easy for the new CEO to assume Nokia
would remain in a strong position because the figures were all good and still
trending upwards. This was deceptive, though, because the foundations for
the glowing results of 2007 had been laid well in advance.
336                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                         CHAPTER 72


               The Game Changes



M      eanwhile, in another part of the forest, our competitive po-
       sition shifted radically when Steve Jobs launched the iPhone in the
United States in June 2007. By the end of the following year the iPhone was
available worldwide. Looking back it’s easy to accuse Nokia of complacency.
We knew how to make mobile phones, and some people at Nokia undoubt-
edly believed that Apple could never overtake our market share or even
make a mobile that worked properly. Teething troubles with the iPhone,
such as its malfunctioning antenna, tended to confirm that view. Nokia’s
long experience in manufacturing mobile phones enabled it to minimize
such problems.
  Back in 2007 I wanted to be confident that the new executive committee
wouldn’t be blinded by its own excellence. And I wanted to learn things
for myself. There was so much going on: technical advances, new trends
in design, and a rapid evolution in the way customers used their phones.
They were all happening at an exhausting rate, and all had an impact in the
contest for dominance in the global mobile phone market. I have no idea
how many models I must have tried out during my time as chief executive.
Now I wanted to come to grips with the turmoil the advent of the iPhone
was causing Nokia.
  As autumn approached I decided to undertake a little survey of Nokia’s
senior people. I chatted with a dozen of them, asking if they saw the iPhone
as a dangerous competitor. Of the dozen, two thought the iPhone posed no
danger, because our Symbian operating system was better than Apple’s iOS.
The other ten thought the iPhone would prove a serious competitor that we
		
 Against All Odds                                                         337


shouldn’t underestimate. Some of them expressed their views in terms not
fit for publication. The message was clear: most of Nokia’s key people were
alert enough to grasp that Apple really had thrown down the gauntlet in the
contest for the smartphone market.
   Books have already been written about the success of the iPhone and
doubtless there are more to come. Its touchscreen is a triumph and its over-
all design is unique, functional, and simple. The iPhone showed once and
for all that the most important thing isn’t the engineering, the materials, or
even a phone’s batteries, which iPhone users can’t change for themselves.
No, the most important things are the apps, the programs and services that
iPhone users can buy for their phones. These comprise the user experience
that makes one phone special and another ordinary. An entire ecosystem
had come into being, of a sort that Nokia had been unable to create itself.
Club Nokia had perhaps been a gesture in the right direction, but that was
as far as we had gone.
   If you bought an iPhone you were buying not just a phone but a passport
to an ever-growing and rapidly evolving world – the phone gave you entry
to a digital community. And the phone worked beautifully with other Apple
products. The iPhone offered something Nokia couldn’t. Even so, in retro-
spect it’s good to recall that the iPhone was far from an instant success; it
sold slowly when it was first released in 2007. By the spring of 2008, though,
every smart person knew it was going to be really something.
   We at Nokia saw what was happening. Then why didn’t we do something
about it? There are many answers to that question. At Nokia we used to say
that a new manager was stuck with their predecessor for the first eighteen
months. What this really meant was that the new manager was stuck with
the products their predecessor had launched. On the other hand, Nokia’s
success never depended on a single product, but always on a range of prod-
ucts.
   My own influence on Nokia’s product range continued into 2007, though
I had stepped down as chief executive the previous June. Things were still
going well back then because we made the best possible Symbian phone, the
N95. Everything seemed to be under control at Nokia, and we weren’t aware
of any threats.
   Nokia had chosen Symbian as the operating system for its smartphone
much earlier. Symbian too was in the throes of change. Nokia owned just 48
percent of Symbian shares, and the other owners hadn’t so far allowed us to
acquire a majority, so Nokia was to a certain degree a prisoner of Symbian’s
other shareholders. But their interest had dwindled, so Nokia finally suc-
338                  Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


ceeded in taking over the business in its entirety. Nokia decided to make
Symbian a free provider of source code; thus the Symbian Foundation came
into being. Nokia and the other owners moved their operating systems to
the new Symbian so that open source code would stimulate innovation in
software and services.
   The open Symbian began its work in spring 2009. It didn’t publish all its
software because various agreements prevented that. Even so, the release of
code in 2010 was the largest yet undertaken.
   In 2007 the board accepted the biggest deal in Finland’s economic his-
tory. Nokia bought the NAVTEQ Corporation, which was one of the world’s
largest cartographic companies. The deal was worth $7.7 billion in total, for
which we paid cash. The deal was announced in October. The sale price may
seem rather high, but it reflected a clear vision and Nokia’s strategic inter-
ests. Digital maps and their applications were bound to grow in importance
and would offer a new dimension in web services. Consumers wanted to
find facts, services, and each other with the help of their phones. Above all,
they wanted to reach their destinations. Nokia’s maps would make the lives
of its phone users easier.
		
 Against All Odds                                                         339




                         CHAPTER 73


           Difficulties in Germany



S    ymbian wasn’t Nokia’s only problem, though even on its own it
     would have given us enough to worry about. We had other issues too.
Once again Nokia needed to close a factory at Bochum in Germany.
   Bochum in 2007 awoke old memories. A good ten years earlier Nokia had
closed a television factory there. Now a German mobile phone factory no
longer contributed much to our global production. The board agreed that
the factory was no longer competitive. It was in the wrong place and needed
a level of investment we weren’t ready to provide, because we had just made
a major investment in Romania, in Transylvania to be exact. But we could
all see far enough ahead to know that the announcement was likely to play
badly in Germany. It would be easy to play politics with the idea that Ro-
manians were stealing German jobs, thanks to decisions made in Finland.
   Nokia’s board was of one mind about all this in the autumn of 2007. We
knew on the basis of our previous experiences that the closure of a factory
in Germany would provoke a sharp reaction. We knew Germany’s powerful
trade union movement would want to flex its muscles. Everything had to
be planned very well and very thoroughly. We had to take good care of our
political relationships so that the closure wouldn’t damage Nokia. One can’t
afford a single mistake if one intends to close a plant in Germany.
   We went through the plans for Bochum at the December board meeting.
We emphasized the need to manage relationships with the trade unions and
politicians very carefully. It would make sense to brief Chancellor Merkel
and the prime minister of Rhineland-Westphalia well in advance. A week
later I reminded Olli-Pekka of this, and told him I was ready to help. “That’s
340                    Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


good,” he replied. The board also discussed how the news should be made
public in the New Year. And that’s where matters rested.
   In January I asked Olli-Pekka what was happening. He told me the fac-
tory would close on the fifteenth of the month. When I asked how briefing
the senior Germans was going, he told me it had been decided to do things
differently.
   The board found this incomprehensible. We had decided at our previous
meeting how things should be done. After that meeting Olli-Pekka and our
director of corporate relations, Veli Sundbäck, had discussed how to take
matters forward. The company’s German legal advisers had told them there
was no point in preliminary discussions with the trade unions since they
would only try to string things out as long as possible. The lawyers’ view was
that a short sharp shock might be more painful, but it would be faster. An
isolated explosion was preferable to protracted negotiations, even if it did
produce a lot of hot air.
   Nokia had to make 2,300 employees redundant in Bochum. The closure of
the factory and the redundancies went according to plan, but the communi-
cations strategy failed utterly. The news took Chancellor Merkel completely
by surprise. On 18 January she criticized Nokia severely for its decision to
close “a viable factory.” Four days later 13,000 Germans mounted a demon-
stration against Nokia.
   Nokia made the redundancy payments in April. It also had to set up a
training institution for those workers who had failed to find new jobs. All
this cost around $280 million: significantly less, however, than the slower
and more traditional route of negotiation would have cost. A couple of
weeks later Olli-Pekka conceded that Nokia’s market share had fallen “tem-
porarily” from 40 percent to 35 percent. Reputation had its price.
   For example, the Financial Times noted in May that Nokia’s strategy for
communicating the decision to close the plant had succeeded in angering
the whole of Germany. Little mistakes led to bigger mistakes. Olli-Pekka
tried to apologize for them, but without much success. From the board’s
point of view it was disconcerting that the closure at Bochum had been
handled almost entirely contrary to Nokia’s culture and practice, so care-
fully nurtured over fifteen years. This left its mark. When Nokia reduced its
workforce in 2011–12, the board kept an exceptionally close watch.
   The local negotiations in Bochum concluded in July, while operations at
the factory ceased at the end of June. Nokia had seen things through, but
the affair left a lasting dent in its reputation, in its market share, and on Olli-
Pekka Kallasvuo’s reputation as chief executive.
		
 Against All Odds                                                            341


   At the end of May we had a difficult strategy meeting, where the board was
dissatisfied with the strategy presented by the leadership team. The board’s
view was that Nokia had no real answer to Apple, whose breakthrough in
the market for mobiles was now absolutely clear. A couple of months later
even Finns – whom we might have expected to stay loyal to Nokia – queued
through the night to buy iPhones.
   There seemed to be too many gaps and uncertainties in Nokia’s strategy.
It had far too few clear goals or suggestions for concrete activity, which the
board found unsettling. It was agreed that the draft strategy would be the
basis for further discussions over the summer and into the autumn.
   We had strengthened the board. Henning Kagermann, the former CEO of
the German software company SAP, joined us in spring 2007 and Risto Si-
ilasmaa, the founder of F-Security, a year later. They brought with them the
best understanding of software that Europe could offer. The board was also
keen for me to do a little more. We had agreed earlier that I would devote
one or two days a week to Nokia, but now the board wanted me to give “a bit
more time,” in the words of Marjorie Scardino, who was one of its members.
What I was not, though, was an “executive chairman.”
   Everything went well in Olli-Pekka’s first eighteen months. The board of-
ten quizzed the CEO on whether I was breathing down his neck or an ob-
stacle to making the right decisions. Olli-Pekka’s answer was clear: I knew
the company inside and out and our dialogue was always to the point. He
also said that things were going well.
   In autumn 2008 the global economy took a dramatic turn for the worse.
In September the investment bank Lehman Bros. went bankrupt and shares
sank on the world’s stock exchanges. The roots of the crisis lay in the U.S.
housing market. Subprime mortgages scattered like confetti and the loans
were then packaged as complex derivative products. In 2007–08 everything
turned sour and the financial sector suffered its worst crisis in recent history.
   Nokia’s vital statistics were still good in the autumn of 2008, though the
share price dipped like all the others.
   In December 2008 the crisis hit Nokia directly. At the turn of the year the
mobile phone group received a flood of order cancellations. Sales were ex-
tremely weak. The mobile phone market stalled but more or less recovered
by the end of the year. Nokia’s senior management focused on survival. The
company felt the pressure on costs and started looking for savings, by trim-
ming travel costs, for example. At the critical moment attention shifted from
the most important objectives, which were to knock Symbian into shape and
to bring successful products to market.
342                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa




                          CHAPTER 74


                 A Tough Decision



M       y original plan of spending between two and four years on the
        board before stepping down had to be put on ice when the board
asked me to stay longer. I agreed to my terms with Olli-Pekka. Our secretar-
ies fixed a time, and we ran through the issues. Olli-Pekka ran the company;
my job was to ensure that it followed the right path in accordance with the
board’s decisions. And I would always be ready to help.
  We wanted to give the board some breathing space until spring 2009. The
N97 was announced at the end of 2008 and launched in the United States the
following June and in other countries soon after. It had a touchscreen and
also a sliding keyboard. It used Symbian software and was Skype-enabled
so it could be used to make calls via the Internet. It was released three years
after the N95.
  The N97 didn’t trouble the iPhone. Its software capacity was inadequate,
and it suffered from other basic technical problems. Anssi Vanjoki later de-
scribed it as a let-down as a customer experience. This was a polite way of
saying the N97 was an utter failure just when Nokia most needed to succeed.
  Sadly the board’s impression in 2008 had been correct. The picture then
had not been clear, however, since the results were still good. The N95 – a
great success story – sold well, and this gave us a strong cash flow. We saw,
though, that the strategy wasn’t clear, and the results were dismal. In spring
2009 messages started to emerge from Nokia that the company was drift-
ing. Things had started to clog up, decision-making had slowed down, and
discussion was increasingly referred to committees. These messages came
from various directions and weren’t very loud, but they should have received
closer attention.
		
 Against All Odds                                                            343


   Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo had carried out a restructuring in 2007 and its re-
sults were now clear. Every chief executive creates an organization in their
own image. Olli-Pekka’s functional organization allowed for enough delega-
tion and set up numerous working groups, but ultimately decisions returned
to the chief executive’s desk. At least, that was the hope. In practice matters
tended to stay with the working groups, giving rise to internally insoluble
disputes. These issues were identified when the board discussed the restruc-
turing plans in 2007. After a long discussion the board decided to support
the chief executive and accepted his proposed changes.
   A change in chief executive is always a risk for a company. At Nokia the
bar for changing chief executive has always been set high. The board has al-
ways focused on strategy, not on operational questions. Careless or hurried
decisions have never been part of Nokia culture. So Olli-Pekka was given the
opportunity to show what he was capable of. He was an experienced corpo-
rate manager but inexperienced as the top person at a great global concern.
In that sense his appointment was a gamble. You can never predict a chief
executive’s capacity to develop. Olli-Pekka was a perfect fit for the job. He
brought to the game expertise gained over 25 years at Nokia and elsewhere.
No one could have questioned his genuine desire to do his job in the best
possible way.
   The company Olli-Pekka led faced not just internal challenges but a
bloody contest with Apple, iPhone, and Steve Jobs. Nokia’s chief executive
didn’t spend his days peacefully. Competitors often emerge from where
they’re least expected. So it was for Olli-Pekka.
   Olli-Pekka was the first to admit he wasn’t a software expert. That was
true, but then neither was I. Steve Jobs wasn’t just a software expert; he also
understood customers, design, and marketing. Bill Gates was a software ex-
pert, though even he was reputed to have pinched software designed by oth-
ers at the outset of his career.
   The chief executive doesn’t have to be an expert in software or any other
technical area. What they do need is a burning interest in understanding
the basic principles and the ability to find the right people for the right jobs.
Nokia was unable to find the people who could have transformed it into a
software company. It was stagnant and feeble on account of its reliance on
Symbian. The board believed that the company had enough software ex-
pertise, and senior management assured them there were no problems with
basic competences and that the problems with Symbian would be solved.
   The warning signals became serious in the summer and autumn of 2009. I
had experienced a number of summers when worries had started to mount
up. It felt bad – the body senses that trouble is in store before the mind or the
344                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


brain. So it was in 2009. I felt a sense of powerlessness and physical pain. For
at least a year ahead it would be a difficult time, perhaps the most difficult
Nokia had gone through.
   A crayfish party in August was the first occasion where a Nokia board
member asked if all was well with the company. He said out loud what I had
been thinking, that things didn’t seem to be going the way the board wanted
them to go. Toward the end of the year the board held its annual review of
its own operations and the role of the chair. Deputy Chair Marjorie Scardi-
no led the discussions, which focused on the way the company’s operations
were managed. Almost every board member asked whether the chief execu-
tive had gotten things right. These discussions set events in motion.
   At the January 2010 board meeting we held long discussions about the
company’s competitiveness. I was tasked with discussing the company’s
leadership in a broad sense with the members of the executive committee.
The committee was nearly unanimous on this, though one member – a Finn
– found the decision hasty and surprising.
   I held my discussions between February and April with Olli-Pekka’s
knowledge and consent. Each conversation lasted between half an hour and
ninety minutes. I spread the discussions over a long period because I didn’t
wish to give the impression that we were in a crisis demanding rapid resolu-
tion. I tried to find out where the pressure points lay and how they affected
the company’s effectiveness. I concluded each conversation with a question:
was Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo the right person to lead Nokia?
   These conversations weren’t easy. However, I knew everyone I was talking
to. They all chose their words carefully, and they all wanted to give serious
answers to the chairman’s questions. There were a dozen interviews in all:
most took place in meeting rooms at the head office and one during a visit
to London.
   About half of those I consulted supported Olli-Pekka without reservation,
but a similar proportion were so skeptical of his prospects as to stretch the
limits of polite speech. Olli-Pekka is a sympathetic individual and doesn’t
arouse antipathy, but the doubts about him were clear and strong enough to
act upon. These discussions with board members didn’t seal the chief execu-
tive’s fate on their own, but they provided important supporting material.
At the beginning of May the board was ready for its next decisive move.
Nokia would appoint a new chief executive as soon as possible. We set up a
working group – a search committee – to handle the matter. It consisted of
Marjorie Scardino, Per Karlsson, and me.
		
 Against All Odds                                                            345




                          CHAPTER 75


                      A New Leader



I  n mid-June Marjorie Scardino, Per Karlsson, and I met in London.
   The location was the Berkeley Hotel, where I usually stayed. We quickly
agreed on the next steps. Marjorie Scardino would get in touch with Spencer
Stuart, a firm specializing in the recruitment of senior executives for IT and
communications technology companies.
   The consultants quickly got to work and prepared a list that the three of
us went through together. This took less than a week, after which we chose
five candidates from the United States. There were also two internal candi-
dates: Anssi Vanjoki, who now headed the Mobile Solutions Unit, and Nik-
las Savander, who was in charge of the Services and Devices Unit. Both were
executive board members and had been with the company for a long time.
We decided to interview them at the same time as the external candidates.
   Finding Nokia’s new chief executive was my task, once the headhunter had
put together his own list. I had to start travelling straight away – there was
no time to waste. I left Helsinki on a private flight to San Francisco at the end
of June. I’d arranged to meet the five candidates over three days. Three of my
meetings were at the Four Seasons Hotel, over breakfast, lunch, and in a pri-
vate meeting room. After this I continued to Redmond and the heart of the
Microsoft empire. There aren’t many hotels in Redmond, so I had to meet
one candidate over breakfast in my suite so that no secrets would be spilled.
In the evening I once again boarded my plane and flew from the West Coast
to the East Coast. With the final candidate I shared supper in Southamp-
ton on Long Island, an area made famous in F. Scott Fitzgerald’s novel The
Great Gatsby. After this last meeting on the East Coast my task was almost
346                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


complete. I met the headhunter in the car on the way to the airport and then
boarded the plane and took off for Helsinki.
   I was happy with my three-day trip and the candidates I had met. Even so,
as I turned things over in my mind during the flight, I wasn’t sure we’d find
the right person for Nokia from that group. We had to be confident of our
choice. And the candidate we chose had to want to lead Nokia. These were
my thoughts before I nodded off to the sound of the aircraft’s peaceful hum.
   There were still two candidates to go, in short order. Both had the right
background, and both could have led Nokia, though in slightly different di-
rections. It was easy for me to put all these candidates in order in my mind.
My first choice was an American, the second-in-command of a well-known
technology company. He was about fifty and had spent a long time with the
same firm, rising through the ranks to his present powerful position.
   I met my favored candidate a second time and spoke to him a third. He
would certainly have been the right choice for Nokia and Nokia the right
choice for him. My candidate knew the world’s technology companies inside
out, and I liked his leadership style. His values seemed to fit Nokia well, too.
But after an extended period of reflection my candidate decided to with-
draw. The reasons were personal and had nothing to do with Nokia.
   One external candidate remained for the final round. This was the Cana-
dian Stephen Elop. He was head of Microsoft Office and a member of the
company’s executive team. Before that he had had a long career in American
companies. He had worked at Adobe and Juniper. He seemed to be a good
salesperson and a decisive manager. He also had experience and expertise in
software technology. These were the qualities Nokia needed. He also loved
ice hockey, which is important to Finns, but this played no part in his selec-
tion.
   I liked Stephen Elop’s Finnish-style directness when he spoke of his ex-
periences, of Microsoft, and of Nokia. There was nothing unnecessarily
slick about him. He was both enthusiastic and capable. He had also done
his homework exceptionally well. He knew the company he wanted to lead.
He had gotten to know the company well a year earlier when Nokia and
Microsoft announced their joint venture, in which he’d had a significant role.
   Nevertheless I put lots of questions to myself. Stephen Elop seemed a good
communicator, bursting with ideas, but could he delegate effectively? Was
he sufficiently “product-minded,” by which I meant someone capable of
achievements similar to those of Steve Jobs? Beneath his Canadian exterior,
was Stephen Elop really an American-style leader, with all the implications,
both positive and negative, that that entailed? Would he understand Nokia?
		
 Against All Odds                                                            347




Stephen Elop and me in 2010.


   Both the search committee and Nokia’s full board considered these ques-
tions. The answers were satisfactory and so we continued our discussions.
   The external candidate had thus been identified. There were still the two
internal candidates, whom I’d hurriedly interviewed in spring 2010. Niklas
Savander was ruled out following an interview, so that just two candidates
remained in play: Stephen Elop and Anssi Vanjoki.
   Anssi Vanjoki had had a long and distinguished career at Nokia. He had
believed in the Nokia brand when no one else had trusted it. Anssi aroused
strong feelings, for and against, on account of his self-assurance, irritability,
and slightly American style. If he had been chosen as Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo’s
successor some senior executives would have left the firm. At least, that’s
what they said. Even so, no one questioned Anssi’s achievements in sales
and marketing. He returned from his travels with sales concluded, even if
the customers weren’t always his most enthusiastic fans.
   Over the years Anssi Vanjoki had matured, as do we all. His hard edges
had softened, but we didn’t base our choice on personal qualities this time.
The business Anssi brought in didn’t seem a strong enough qualification to
give him the job. Within Nokia he had been in charge of the unit that should
have produced a rival to the iPhone. He had been responsible for the MeeGo
project, which had employed two thousand people. Google’s Android had
needed just four hundred to five hundred people. And the MeeGo project
348                   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa


hadn’t produced the desired results. (Nowadays the smartphone company
Jolla uses the same platform in its phones, but more efficiently so that it gets
results.) We asked Anssi where he hoped to take Nokia when he was at the
helm. His answer didn’t put him ahead.
   I explained our decision to Anssi, who was naturally surprised and disap-
pointed. In August I also told Olli-Pekka that we were about to appoint a
new chief executive. He was surprised that the process had been so rapid.
But it shouldn’t have come as a complete surprise to anyone, since my jour-
ney to the United States had been leaked to the Wall Street Journal, which
helpfully told its readers that Nokia was seeking a new, foreign CEO. This
story appeared on 22 July and its details were pretty accurate, so whoever
leaked it must have been one of the candidates. It was a damaging leak, but
even though it caused us to accelerate the process, it didn’t affect the result.
   When Nokia’s board approved the new chief executive in August, one
board member marveled at how quickly we’d done it. He thought we should
have given Olli-Pekka more time. Everyone else thought differently, that
there wasn’t time to fritter away. The decision was made at the last minute.
   At 8:30 a.m. Helsinki time on 10 September 2010 journalists and analysts
read the news that Stephen Elop had been selected to be Nokia’s chief execu-
tive. Later in the day we held a crowded press conference in the auditorium
where I had held so many similar events. I had announced my departure
as chief executive there five years earlier. Cameras snapped and I sat under
the hot spotlights as I thanked Olli-Pekka for his long career at Nokia. The
company was once again setting off in a new direction. Now it was Stephen
Elop’s turn. I didn’t know how things would go. I would, however, play my
own part as well as I could.
		
 Against All Odds                                                        349




                           EPILOGUE




N     okia’s success in the 1990s was no foregone conclusion. It was based
      on the courageous decision that the company’s future lay in mobile
phones and networks. Nokia was a company with its back to the wall: it was
hemorrhaging money, and its core business had crumbled. The world didn’t
owe Nokia a living, and if the company was to survive it had to make clear
decisions rapidly. The opportunity wouldn’t come again. If Nokia had been
in a better place, the company’s youthful leadership – The Five – couldn’t
have made such radical decisions. The company’s very existence was in
question, as well as its leadership’s credibility.
  We saw where our future lay, but it seemed to us that no one shared our
vision. Within Nokia there was a great deal of uncertainty. People were sus-
picious of our change of direction. Things weren’t helped by a consultants’
report that poured cold water on the prospects for both mobile phones and
markets. Indeed, the report took a gloomy view of the future in every area
where Nokia was active.
  Our choice turned out to have been the right one, and indeed the only
possible one. Our focus on phones and networks was the prime mover of
our success. But on its own it wouldn’t have been enough. We could suc-
ceed only on the terms set by customers and users. Nokia was known for its
engineers and its engineering ability, and we applied that experience to the
development of mobile phones. A phone had to look and feel good and fit
into an envelope. You should be able to buy one in any color you wanted.
Today these points are self-evident, but back then they were revolutionary
insights. In this our youth and lack of preconceptions helped. We were truly,
350                  Jorma Ollila Epilogue
                                  and Harri Saukkomaa


and at times passionately, fascinated with and enthusiastic about our prod-
ucts. Without that passion we wouldn’t have dared take such bold steps.
   Our vision was global. We decided not to restrict ourselves to the Nordic
region, as Finnish firms had traditionally done, but to make the whole of Eu-
rope our market. In time we extended into Asia, especially China, because
growth in developing markets would change the whole world.
   Our products derived from our vision. Nokia had something for every
consumer on the planet, wherever they lived or however much money they
had. We didn’t stubbornly try to push the same model on everyone; we
tried to adapt to local tastes and customers’ evolving wishes. And we often
succeeded. We understood that the birth of international mass-marketing
would help us. We were tightly bound to those technical protocols that we
believed to be the best, such as GSM technology. The same couldn’t be said
for our competitors, Motorola and Ericsson, let alone the Japanese or Euro-
pean conglomerates.
   We also succeeded in winning over the operating companies. Our product
range was broad and enticing. We had succeeded in making our products
economically and also in adapting our production to the operating compa-
nies’ wishes and changes in the market.
   When, at the start of the nineties, we realised that our vision would save
Nokia, we had to make a lot of decisions in a hurry. We had to knock our
plans, our logistics, and our production into shape so we could grow into a
globally effective company. We were nimble, happy to improvise, and nifty
in adapting our strategy, so we were able to pull the company back from
oblivion. Now we had to focus on our management systems, strategic plan-
ning, and building up the company’s resources. Tension between our “fast”
implementation and our “slow” processes was always at the heart of Nokia.
   In 1995–96 we received warning that our management structures were un-
fit for their purpose, when the whole company became impossible to steer.
After that Nokia designed the world’s most efficient machinery for logistics,
production, and employing sub-contractors. These weren’t areas where we
made mistakes in the 2000s; our structures never let us down again after
1996. We had learned our lessons.
   We at Nokia were an efficient, capable bunch. The hierarchy was fairly
flat and information flowed rapidly within the company, both officially and
informally. The five of us who led the company set examples to everyone in
it. We worked as if we were establishing a start-up – communication was
easy, we didn’t go in for politicking, the company always came first. This way
of working spread throughout the organization: to the governing board, the
		  Epilogue
 Against All Odds                                                         351


executive board, and the 200 most senior managers, and through them to
the company’s entire expanding workforce. We lived the Nokia story, which
was the story of a company that challenged old ways of thinking and doing
and grew to dominate a whole new market. It was a story of unexpected
triumph. Our work certainly didn’t lack meaning.
   Everyone at Nokia pushed themselves to the limit for the company. We
faced unfamiliar and difficult issues – we had to overcome the problems of
dealing with multiple time zones, for example, and we had to come to grips
with the cultures of our new markets. A lot of this was pioneering work.
People at Nokia were responsible for much more than they could ever have
imagined, even in their wildest dreams. Their achievements were staggering,
as much in terms of their personal growth as in the company’s expansion.
   Nokia’s furious growth in the 1990s greatly expanded the opportunities
open to its employees. This suited my own approach to leadership since I
liked to stir things up by regularly promoting people to new positions and
moving them to unknown corners of the earth. It made Nokia a workplace
where good employees didn’t get stuck in silos or their own cubicles, defend-
ing their little patch of territory. The collision between traditional and new
ways of thinking drew the company forward.
   That a small Finnish company in poor shape could succeed in a demand-
ing global market would have seemed impossible at the beginning of the
1990s. It seemed equally improbable that the overwhelmingly dominant
market leader could lose its position in just a few years. Why did Nokia get
into such terrible trouble from 2008 on?
   It would be simple and simplistic to say that Nokia was the prisoner of its
own success. Nevertheless, many background factors came together to make
Nokia’s pre-2007 success possible. The N95 smartphone, developed between
2004 and 2006, was a beauty that sold extremely well. The impressive cash
flow it produced created a deceptive sense of security, when we should have
been focusing on the future. Nokia became bloated in 2007–08 and its costs
mushroomed. The company should have examined its working practices
ruthlessly; instead we wrongly thought that Nokia’s old recipes would con-
tinue to do their job. But the world had moved on.
   Nokia had been forced into a contest that would be decided by the com-
petitiveness of the operating system, the users’ experience (which was based
on our software expertise), and the apps. Nokia’s software capability was in-
adequate, as we had recognised and tried to remedy – which made the posi-
tion all the more bitter. Our efforts hadn’t succeeded, however. We saw for
ourselves how even the best strategy is useless unless one can implement it.
352                   Jorma Ollila Epilogue
                                   and Harri Saukkomaa


We knew that in the future most mobile phones would be smartphones, but
our software and apps left us in an uncompetitive position.
   We understood the problem, but at some deep level we couldn’t accept
what was happening. Many big projects just carried on. We examined the
sales projections for the following quarter, when our eyes should have been
focused much further ahead. Earlier we had sometimes looked too far ahead
too soon. Now we were looking down the wrong end of the telescope.
   Symbian was on the right track. However, at least until spring 2008 it was
too remote from Nokia and especially from our internal debates on operat-
ing systems. This wasn’t by design; it was because Symbian’s other share-
holders weren’t ready for Nokia to become the majority shareholder. When
Symbian finally became part of the Nokia organization, it didn’t integrate
properly and there were overlaps.
   At the beginning of the 2000s I overhauled Nokia’s organization, working
on the matrix principle. This compelled the company to operate in a more
unified way. The direction was right, but it didn’t really fit with Nokia’s tra-
ditional culture. Direct reporting based on profit centers had been a good
model in the 1990s, well suited to the smaller Nokia of the time, so the ma-
trix organization met with resistance. Some of the managers didn’t under-
stand how to work within a matrix.
   The matrix also placed new requirements on the chief executive. Thou-
sands of employees switched units, line managers, and job descriptions. As
several members of The Five left around the time reorganization took place,
too many people wondered where the next Five would come from. But The
Five’s contribution had been unique, and nothing like them could emerge
again. They weren’t an organizational structure, but a team of five distinct
individuals. The group’s dispersal left a huge hole in the organization that
wasn’t possible to fill.
   In 2007 Nokia took a step back, toward organizing on functional lines. As
a consequence the company was unable to grasp the software problem cre-
atively and decisively. The company spent its time on firefighting, a purely
reactive activity, when it should have been looking for new worlds to con-
quer. Decision-making got bogged down in working groups and commit-
tees. Nokia slowed down like an old, worn-out car. And the leadership team
didn’t show the same unity, determination, and agility as before. The matrix
organisation needed more time to put down roots if it was to be the basis for
lasting change.
   Now Nokia faced three challenges. It had to adapt to a new competitive
situation, carry on with its restructuring, and deal with the impact of a glob-
		  Epilogue
 Against All Odds                                                        353


al recession – all at the same time. The absence of The Five certainly caused
problems. Previously it had made decisions without delay, but now the func-
tional organization with its endless and over-populated review meetings
made decision-making cumbersome. When sales volume grows globally,
making profits demands both innovation and discipline. At the same time
Apple showed how an effective matrix organisation could make a company
extremely competitive.
   The media offered a critical assessment of the governing board’s role in
Nokia’s difficulties. Some outsiders thought the board should have taken a
more hands-on approach. But in a company employing more than 100,000
people such a confusing mix of roles could hardly have made matters better.
   As a former chief executive I too must answer similar accusations. Many
people suspect that as chairman I was still pulling the strings from behind
the scenes. But it wasn’t like that. The governing board and the executive
board maintained a constant dialogue, but they were both clear on their own
roles and responsibilities.
   Against the din of the disconcerting and highly personalized public dis-
cussion in Finland I naturally examined my own role in the way Nokia had
developed. I’m sure that while I was chief executive I could have tried more
aggressively to boost the company’s software expertise. We recognised the
need, and did a lot, but if we had bought a company specializing in operat-
ing systems software it could have had a powerful practical and symbolic
impact. It might have made people at Nokia understand what modern soft-
ware is all about.
   During my time as chairman, from 2006 to 2012, my role was clear. The
board looked on as Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo, with his 25 years of experience in
the company, took over as chief executive. The board, which now had fresh,
high-level software expertise, collectively monitored and actively appraised
Kallasvuo’s work. It would certainly have been possible to change the chief
executive sooner, though it would have been painful at any time. The time-
table we followed had been thoroughly discussed and agreed upon.
   Nokia’s main competitors in the United States and Asia had long been
hunting for material for a counterattack that would knock the company off
its pedestal. Between 2007 and 2010 they succeeded at last. They identified
top-of-the-range mobile phones as our weak point. Central to the success
of both Apple and Google was the unique experience in computers and op-
erating systems to be found in Silicon Valley. This enabled computers to be
incorporated into smartphones, rather than phones into computers. They
ambushed us in the same way we had ambushed Motorola in the 1990s.
354                  Jorma Ollila Epilogue
                                  and Harri Saukkomaa


   The story of Nokia in the U.S. market went back much earlier, however.
We began to sell mobile phones in the United States at the beginning of the
1980s, and they started to take off after 1984 when we set up a joint venture
with the American firm Tandy. Together we set up a factory to manufacture
phones in Korea. They were sold through Nokia’s own distribution network
and also through Radio Shack, a chain of electronics shops owned by Tandy,
which many Americans will fondly remember. Our collaboration with Tan-
dy increased both our production capability and our understanding of the
U.S. market.
   The U.S. mobile phone market had traditionally been difficult for every
non-American company, so we savored Motorola’s defeat to the full. Motor-
ola had dominated the U.S. market, and Nokia’s share remained modest up
to 1998. During that time our market share was between 5 and 20 percent.
In the United States phones were chiefly sold through the nationwide opera-
tors, and they took a close interest in the features the phones had to offer.
So Nokia had to adapt to local conditions. In 1996 we began to collaborate
with AT&T Wireless, with rapid results: by 1998 we were the market leader,
and later our U.S. market share went over 40 percent. It was still more than
20 percent in 2006.
   We had long believed that the power of the U.S. operating companies to
dictate the market would last forever. This belief was proved wrong between
2007 and 2010.
   The operating companies had long tried to tell us that in the United States
there was no demand for smartphones costing more than about $300. Nokia
had tried hard to make what the customer wanted. Then Apple came along
and launched the iPhone with a price tag of more than $600. But Apple had
created something really new: a wonderful experience for the phone user
where the phone was the key to an entire ecosystem of services and applica-
tions.
   We also learned a lot about how the wider U.S. market worked. The sheer
size of the market demanded a degree of humility since it always required us
to adapt our thinking. This was true for technology, distribution, consumers’
preferences, and other things as well.
   Americans are patriotic when it comes to technology. They hold it to be
self-evident that their own products are the world’s best. They’re proud of
them, but they’re also ready to put up protectionist barriers based on techni-
cal differences from other countries’ products.
   Non-American companies have only rarely been successful in the United
States. U.S. products usually dominate the market, though they may be man-
		  Epilogue
 Against All Odds                                                           355


ufactured in Chinese factories. SAP, which fought effectively against Oracle,
is a rare exception. Siemens often comes in only third in its categories. Sony
Playstation is probably the best non-American consumer product.
   In this environment Nokia had to work hard against strong headwinds.
Although we did pretty well, there was usually an atmosphere of uncertainty
during our discussions with the operating companies. While Nokia seemed
to be highly regarded, it felt as if our customers were just waiting for the day
when U.S. substitutes for our products would be available.
   All in all the United States is an extremely competitive market where suc-
cess requires better marketing and distribution than anywhere else. It’s the
ultimate test for any global company. It’s a tough job, but if you don’t rise to
it the deepest essence of global markets will elude you.
   After I stepped down as chairman of Nokia in the spring of 2012 I began
to put the finishing touches to this book. It was nearly ready at the begin-
ning of September 2013, when it was announced that ownership of Nokia’s
mobile phone division would be transferred to our historic arch-enemy Mi-
crosoft. The main reaction in Finland was one of shock and disbelief. Strong
feelings came to the surface. But against the background of history the deci-
sion doesn’t seem so exceptional. Nokia had made significant disposals in
the past. The spinning off of the paper division in the 1980s, which I myself
had pushed forward, had been a personally painful decision. After all, Nokia
had had its origins in the forest industry, back in the 1800s.
   The mobile phone had a greater symbolic significance. Finns had formed
a strong emotional bond with their Nokia mobiles, although in the historical
context the brand had been built up in rather a short time, less than 25 years.
This shows the power of the Nokia story. To many outsiders mobiles and
Nokia are one and the same; it’s an issue of the company’s and even Finland’s
identity. Nokia’s board’s decision to sell was dramatic and courageous. Even
so, for me and for everyone else who had a long association with Nokia it
was sad to see more than 40 years worth of Finnish engineering expertise
sold abroad. But we should look ahead: can the company rebuild itself to
benefit from the expertise it retains?
   Other questions come to mind, since Nokia isn’t known for quitting.
Many feel disappointed and wonder why Nokia should throw in the towel
when there’s still so much to play for. Is this really a mature area? Nokia had
rejected takeover bids, even when the company was in a dire situation. For
example, when Siemens approached the board in 1992 with the intention of
buying our Cellular Systems Unit, we barely gave them the time of day. We
had a clear vision of the future and it was on that basis that we solved our
356                   Jorma Ollila Epilogue
                                   and Harri Saukkomaa


problems one at a time. Selling wasn’t on our agenda. The Cellular Systems
Unit had a place in our strategy for the next five years, and that worked out
as it should. It was the same story in the logistics crisis. Nokia had already
been condemned as a loser, but we put our structures straight, doubled our
investments and our work hours, and returned as victors.
   Soon after the deal Microsoft’s real plans became clear, and there was
nothing good for Finland about them. Microsoft wound down its Finnish
operations, leaving only a product development center, because it had de-
cided not to invest in phone production. The change in the company’s chief
executive had an impact on this.
   Though Nokia had been sidelined it still took on new business. The most
important move was the decision at the beginning of 2015 to buy Alcatel-
Lucent; the deal was completed in December 2015. This was the biggest ac-
quisition in Finland’s history: it enabled Nokia to reach the same level as
Ericsson and Huawei, which had previously dominated the global network
business between them.
   The profitability of Nokia’s network business also strengthened, overtak-
ing Ericsson’s in 2015.
   I believe that amalgamating Alcatel-Lucent and Nokia will consume a lot
of leadership time and organizational energy over the next couple of years.
But it offers the chance to become first in the field both by size and capabili-
ty. The opportunities for growth are modest, but the sector will be absolutely
central in building a networked infrastructure. Once more it will demand
brilliant technical ability, such as in developing the Internet of things.
   From humble origins in the forests of Finland, Nokia developed into a
great technology company that conquered global markets, changing the
world as it did so. This was a big thing for a small country. At its peak Nokia’s
share of Finland’s GDP reached nearly 4 percent, accounting for 10 percent
of exports and almost 30 percent of the value of shares traded on the Hel-
sinki Stock Exchange. Nokia employed 23,000 people in Finland, most of
whom were highly educated.
   Nokia’s greatest significance for Finland was not, however, economic,
but psychological. Nokia showed that a small country, and a small coun-
try’s businesses, could conquer the world and capture its customers’ hearts.
Nokia helped create networks and connections within Finnish industry that
could never have existed before. Nokia created a model for Finnish enter-
prises that embodied best practices, attracted the attention of the interna-
tional media, and promoted expertise in leadership. Its employees spread
these strengths to many other companies.
		  Epilogue
 Against All Odds                                                            357


   The new Finnish video games industry sprang from Nokia’s need to in-
clude games on its mobile phones. These new start-ups weren’t built on the
ruins of Nokia, as has been suggested, but took Nokia as their inspiration.
   Many ordinary Finns benefited as employees or subcontractors of Nokia,
or as its shareholders. The ensuing prosperity spread throughout Finland.
   Nokia may have sometimes been “too big” for Finland, in that it may have
taken too large a share of available resources. But a small country doesn’t
always have the means to develop a fully diversified economy.
   What next for Nokia? I’m an optimist. History gives a hint that after a
metamorphosis Nokia will probably find a new area into which it can grow.
This won’t happen on the basis of the ideas of one or two leaders, but through
a broad group of motivated Nokia engineers for whom good leadership will
act as a stimulus. I’ve had the chance to observe several such situations, and
every one of them has been fascinating. The key word is trust. Trust in peo-
ple and in letting them do what they want. In today’s increasingly individu-
alistic atmosphere a team spirit, expertise, and a humble approach still have
a crucial role to play. More easily said than done, perhaps, but I believe I will
yet see many such miracles at Nokia.
358   Jorma Ollila and Harri Saukkomaa
		
 