
It is the winter of Warren¡¯s ninth year. Outside in the yard, he and his little sister, Bertie, are playingin the snow. 
Warren is catchingsnowflakes. One at a time at first. Then he is scoopingthem up by handfuls. He starts to pack theminto a ball. As the snowball grows bigger, he places it on the ground. Slowly it begins to roll. He gives it a push, and it picks up more snow. He pushes the snowball across the lawn, pilingsnow on snow. Soon he reaches the edge of the yard. After a moment of hesitation, he heads off, rollingthe snowball through the neighborhood. 
And from there, Warren continues onward, castinghis eye on a whole world fullof snow. 

PARTONE TheBubble 

1 
TheLessFlatteringVersion 
Omaha . June 2003 
Warren Buffett rocks back in his chair, longlegs crossed at the knee behind his father Howard¡¯s plain wooden desk. His expensive Zegna suit jacket bunches around his shoulders like an untailored version bought off the rack. The jacket stays on allday, every day, no matter how casually the other fifteen employees at Berkshire Hathaway headquarters are dressed. His predictable white shirt sits low on the neck, its undersize collar bulgingaway fromhis tie, lookingleft over from his days as a youngbusinessman, as if he had forgotten to check his neck size for the last forty years. 
His hands lace behind his head through strands of whiteninghair. One particularly large and messy finger-combed chunk takes off over his skulllike a ski jump, loftingupward at the knollof his right ear. His shaggy right eyebrow wanders toward it above the tortoiseshell glasses. At various times this eyebrow gives him a skeptical, knowing, or beguilinglook. Right now he wears a subtle smile, which lends the wayward eyebrow a captivatingair. Nonetheless, his pale-blue eyes are focused and intent. 
He sits surrounded by icons and mementos of fifty years. In the hallways outside his office, Nebraska Cornhuskers football photographs, his paycheck froman appearance on a soap opera, the offer letter (never accepted) to buy a hedge fund called Long-Term CapitalManagement, and Coca-Cola memorabilia everywhere. On the coffee table inside the office, a classic Coca-Cola bottle. A baseball glove encased in Lucite. Over the sofa, a certificate that he completed Dale Carnegie¡¯s public-speakingcourse in January 1952. The Wells Fargo stagecoach, westbound atop a bookcase. A Pulitzer Prize, won in 1973 by the Sun Newspapers of Omaha, which his investment partnership owned. Scattered about the roomare books and newspapers. Photographs of his family and friends cover the credenza and a side table, and sit under the hutch beside his desk in place of a computer. A large portrait of his father hangs above Buffett¡¯s head on the wall behind his desk. It faces every visitor who enters the room. 
Although a late-springOmaha morningbeckons outside the windows, the brown wooden shutters are closed to block the view. The television beamingtoward his desk is tuned to CNBC. The sound is muted, but the crawlat the bottomof the screen feeds himnews all day long. Over the years, to his pleasure, the news has often been about him. 
Only a few people, however, actually know himwell. I have been acquainted with himfor six years, originally as a financial analyst coveringBerkshire Hathaway stock. Over time our relationship has turned friendly, and now I will get to know himbetter still. We are sittingin Warren¡¯s office because he is not going to write a book. The unruly eyebrows punctuate his words as he says repeatedly, ¡°You¡¯ll do a better job than I would, Alice. I¡¯m glad you¡¯re writingthis book, not me.¡± Why he would say that is somethingthat will eventually become clear. In the meantime, we start with the matter closest to his heart. 
¡°Where did it come from, Warren? Caringso much about makingmoney?¡± 
His eyes go distant for a few seconds, thoughts travelinginward: flip flip flip through the mentalfiles. Warren begins to tell his story: ¡°Balzac said that behind every great fortune lies a crime.1 That¡¯s not true at Berkshire.¡± 
He leaps out of his chair to bringhome the thought, crossingthe room in a couple of strides. Landingon a mustardy-gold brocade armchair, he leans forward, more like a teenager braggingabout his first romance than a seventy-two-year-old financier. How to interpret the story, who else to interview, what to write:The book is up to me. He talks at length about human nature and memory¡¯s frailty, then says, ¡°Whenever my version is different fromsomebody else¡¯s, Alice, use the less flatteringversion.¡± 
Amongthe many lessons, some of the best come simply from observinghim. Here is the first: Humility disarms. 
In the end, there won¡¯t be too many reasons to choose the less flatteringversion¡ªbut when I do, human nature, not memory¡¯s frailty, is usually why. One of those occasions happened at Sun Valley in 1999. 
2 
SunValley 
Idaho . July 1999 
Warren Buffett stepped out of his car and pulled his suitcase fromthe trunk. He walked through the chain-link gate onto the airport¡¯s tarmac, where a gleamingwhite GulfstreamIVjet¡ªthe size of a regional commercialairliner and the largest private aircraft in the world in 1999¡ªwaited for him and his family. One of the pilots grabbed the suitcase from him to stow in the cargo hold. Every new pilot who flew with Buffett was shocked to see himcarryinghis own luggage from a car he drove himself. Now, as he climbed the boardingstairs, he said hello to the flight attendant¡ªsomebody new¡ªand headed to a seat next to a window, which he would not glance out of at any time duringthe flight. His mood was buoyant; he had been anticipatingthis trip for weeks. 
His son Peter and daughter-in-law Jennifer, his daughter Susan and her boyfriend, and two of his grandchildren all settled into their own caf¨¦ au lait leather club chairs set around the forty-five-foot-long cabin. They swiveled their seats away fromthe curved wallpanels to give themselves more space as the flight attendant brought drinks fromthe galley, which was stocked with the family¡¯s favorite snacks and beverages. A pile of magazines lay nearby on the sofa: Vanity Fair, the New Yorker, Fortune, Yachting, the Robb Report, the Atlantic Monthly, the Economist, Vogue, Yoga Journal. She brought Buffett an armload of newspapers instead, alongwith a basket of potato chips and a Cherry Coke that matched his red Nebraska sweater. He complimented her, chatted for a few minutes to ease her nervousness at flyingfor the first time with her boss, and told her that she could let the copilot know that they were ready to take off. Then he buried his head in a newspaper as the plane rolled down the runway and ascended to forty thousand feet. For the next two hours, six people hummed around him, watchingvideos, talking, and makingphone calls, while the flight attendant set out linens and bud vases filled with orchids on the bird¡¯s-eye maple diningtables before returningto the galley to prepare lunch. Buffett never moved. He sat reading, hidden behind his newspapers, as if he were alone in his study at home. 
They were flyingin a $30 million airborne palace called a ¡°fractional¡± jet. As many as eight owners shared it, but it served as part of a fleet, so allthe owners could fly at once if they wished. The pilots in the cockpit, the crew that maintained it, the schedulers who got it to the gate on six hours¡¯ notice, and the flight attendant who served their lunch all worked for NetJets, which belonged to Warren Buffett¡¯s company, Berkshire Hathaway. 
Sometime later, the G-IVcrossed the Snake River Plain and approached the Sawtooth Mountains, a vast Cretaceous upheaval of dark and ancient granite mounds bakingin the summer sun. It sailed through the bright clear air into the Wood River Valley, descendingto eight thousand feet, where it started to buck on the mountain wave of turbulence thrown into the sky by the brown foothills beneath. Buffett read on, unperturbed, as the plane rocked and his family jerked about in their seats. Brush dotted higher altitudes of a second ridge of hills and rows of pines began their march up the ridges between ravines on the leeward side. 
The family grinned with anticipation. As the aircraft descended through the narrowingslot between the rising mountain peaks ahead, the midday sun cast the plane¡¯s lengtheningshadow over the old miningtown of Hailey, Idaho. 
A few seconds later, the wheels touched down on the Friedman Memorial Airport runway. By the time the Buffetts had bounded down the stairs onto the tarmac, squintingin the July sunshine, two SUVs had driven through the gate and pulled up alongside the jet, driven by men and women fromHertz. They allwore the company¡¯s gold-and-black shirts. Instead of Hertz, however, the logo said ¡°Allen & Co.¡± 
The grandchildren bounced on their heels as the pilots unloaded the luggage, tennis rackets, and Buffett¡¯s red-and-white Coca-Cola golf baginto the SUVs. Then he and the others shook hands with the pilots, said good-bye to the flight attendant, and climbed into the SUVs. BypassingSun Valley Aviation¡ªa pocket-size trailer at the runway¡¯s southern end¡ªthey swungthrough the chain-link gate onto the road that led to the peaks beyond. About two minutes had elapsed since the plane¡¯s wheels first touched the runway. 
Right on schedule, eight minutes later, another jet followed theirs, headed to its own runway parkingspot. 
Throughout the golden afternoon, jet after jet cruised into Idaho fromthe south and east or swungaround the peaks from the west and descended into Hailey: workhorse Cessna Citations; glamorous, close-quartered Learjets; speedy Hawkers; luxurious Falcons; but mostly the awe-inspiringG-IVs. As the afternoon waned, dozens of huge, gleamingwhite aircraft lined the runway like a shop window fullof tycoons¡¯ toys. 
The Buffetts followed the trail blazed by earlier SUVs a few miles onward from the airport to the tiny town of Ketchum on the edge of the Sawtooth National Forest, near the turnoff to the Elkhorn Pass. A few miles later, they rounded Dollar Mountain, where a green oasis appeared, nestled amongthe brown slopes. Here amid the lacy pines and shimmeringaspens lay Sun Valley, the mountains¡¯ most fabled resort, where Ernest Hemingway began writing For Whom the Bell Tolls, where Olympic skiers and skaters had longmade their second home. 
The tide of families they were joiningthis Tuesday afternoon allhad some connection to Allen & Co., a boutique investment bank that specialized in the media and communications industries. Allen & Co. had put together some of the biggest mergers in Hollywood, and for more than a decade had been hostingan annual series of discussions and seminars mingled with outdoor recreation at Sun Valley for its clients and friends. Herbert Allen, the firm¡¯s CEO, invited only people he liked, or those with whomhe was at least willingto do business. 
Thus the conference was always filled with faces both famous and rich: Hollywood producers and stars like Candice Bergen, TomHanks, Ron Howard, and Sydney Pollack; entertainment moguls like Barry Diller, Rupert Murdoch, Robert Iger, and Michael Eisner; socially pedigreed journalists like TomBrokaw, Diane Sawyer, and Charlie Rose; and technology titans like BillGates, Steve Jobs, and Andy Grove. A pack of reporters lay in wait for themevery year outside the Sun Valley Lodge. 
The reporters had traveled a day earlier to the Newark, New Jersey, airport or some similar embarkation point to board a commercial flight to Salt Lake City, then raced to Concourse E¡¯s bullpen to sit amid a crush of people waitingfor flights to places like Casper, Wyoming, and Sioux City, Iowa, until it was time to cram themselves into a prop plane for the one-hour bronco ride to Sun Valley. On arrivaltheir plane was directed to the opposite end of the airport next to the tennis-court-size terminal, where they witnessed a crew of tanned youngAllen & Co. employees dressed in pastel ¡°SV99¡± polo shirts and white shorts welcomingthe handfulof Allen & Co. guests who were arrivingearly on commercialflights. These were instantly recognizable amongthe other passengers:men in Western boots and Paul Stuart shirts with jeans, women wearinggoatskin-suede jackets and marble-size turquoise beads. The Allen staff had memorized the newcomers¡¯ faces fromphotographs supplied in advance. They hugged people they had gotten to know in years past as if they were old friends, whisked away allthe guests¡¯ bags, and led their charges off to the SUVs lined up steps away in the parkinglot. 
The reporters went to the rental-car desk, then drove to the Lodge, by now acutely conscious of their lowly 
status. For the next few days, many areas of Sun Valley would be marked as ¡°private,¡± blocked from prying eyes by closed doors, omnipresent security, hangingflower baskets, and large potted plants. The reporters would lurk around the fringes, excluded fromthe interestingthings goingon inside, noses pressed against the 
bushes.1 Ever since Disney¡¯s MichaelEisner and CapitalCities/ABC¡¯s Tom Murphy had dreamed up a deal to merge their companies at Sun Valley ¡¯95 (the way the conference was often referred to¡ªas if it had engulfed the entire resort, which, in a way, it had), the press coverage had grown until it took on the artificially giddy atmosphere of a business version of Cannes. The mergers that splintered off fromSun Valley, however, were only occasional calves froman iceberg. Sun Valley was about more than making deals, though the deals garnered most of the press. Every year the rumors sizzled that this company or that was workingon a dealat the mysterious conclave in the Idaho mountains. Thus, as the SUVs rolled one by one into the porte cochere, the reporters peered through the front windows to see who was inside. When someone newsworthy arrived, they chased their prey into the lodge, brandishingcameras and microphones. 
The press quickly recognized Warren Buffett as he stepped out of his SUV. ¡°The DNA of the conference had him built into it,¡± said his friend Don Keough, chairman of Allen & Co.2 Most of the press people liked Buffett, who went out of his way not to be disliked by anyone. He also intrigued them. His public image was that of a simple man, and he seemed genuine. Yet he lived a complicated life. He owned five homes but occupied only two of them. Somehow he had wound up having, in effect, two wives. He spoke in homely 
aphorisms with a kindly twinkle in his eye and had a notably loyalgroup of friends, yet alongthe way he had earned a reputation as a tough, even icy dealmaker. He seemed to shun publicity yet managed to attract more of it than almost any other businessman on earth.3 He jetted around the country in a G-IV, often attended 
celebrity events, and had many famous friends, yet said that he preferred Omaha, hamburgers, and thrift. He spoke of his success as beingbased on a few simple investingideas and tap-dancingto work with enthusiasm every day, but if that was so, why had nobody else been able to replicate it? 
Buffett, as always, gave the photographers a willingwave and a grandfatherly smile as he walked by. They captured himon film, then began peeringat the next car. 
The Buffetts drove around to their French-country-style condominium, one of the coveted Wildflower group next to the pooland tennis courts, where Herbert Allen housed his VIPs. Inside, the usualloot awaited them: a pile of Allen & Co. SV99 logo jackets, baseball caps, zip fleeces, polo shirts¡ªevery year a different color¡ªand a zippered notebook. Despite his fortune of more than $30 billion¡ªenough to buy a thousand of those G-IVs parked out at the airport¡ªBuffett liked few things more than gettinga free golf shirt from a friend. He took the time to look carefully through this year¡¯s swag. Of even more interest to him, however, was the personal note that Herbert Allen sent to each guest¡ªand the perfectly organized conference notebook that explained what Sun Valley had in store for him this year. 
Timed to the second, organized to the hilt, crisp as Herbert Allen¡¯s French cuffs, Buffett¡¯s schedule was laid out hour by hour, day by day. The notebook spelled out the conference speakers and topics¡ªuntilnow a closely guarded secret¡ªand the luncheons and dinners that he would attend. Unlike the other guests, Buffett knew much of this in advance, but he stillwanted to see what the notebook had to say. 
Herbert Allen, the so-called ¡°Lord of Sun Valley¡± and the conference¡¯s quiet choreographer, set the tone of casual luxury that pervaded the event. People always cited himfor high principles, brilliance, good advice, and generosity. ¡°You¡¯d like to die with the respect of somebody like Herbert Allen,¡± a guest gushed. Afraid of beingdisinvited to the conference, those who voiced any criticismrarely went beyond vague hints that Herbert was ¡°unusual,¡± restless, impatient, and possessed of an oversize personality. Standingin the shadow of his tall, wiry frame, one had to strain to keep up with the words that crackled forth like machine-gun fire. He barked questions, then cut off respondents mid-sentence, lest they waste a second of his time. He specialized in sayingthe unsayable. ¡°Ultimately WallStreet willbe eliminated,¡± he once told a reporter, 
although he ran a WallStreet bank. He referred to his competitors as ¡°hot-dogvendors.¡±4 
Allen kept his firm small, and his bankers staked their own money on their deals. This unconventional approach made the firma partner rather than a mere servant to its clients, who were the elite of Hollywood and the media world. Thus, when he played host, his guests felt privileged, rather than like captives pitched by salesmen at every turn. Allen & Co. arranged a detailed social agenda every year built around each guest¡¯s personalnetwork of relationships¡ªwhich the firm understood¡ªand the new people that Allen¡¯s majordomos felt each should meet. Unspoken hierarchies dictated the distances of the guests¡¯ condominiums from the Inn (where meetings were held), which meals the guests were invited to attend, and with whomthey would be seated. 
Buffett¡¯s friend TomMurphy referred to this kind of event as ¡°elephant-bumping.¡± ¡°Anytime a bunch of big shots get together,¡± says Buffett, ¡°you can get people to come, because it reassures themif they¡¯re at an elephant-bumpingthat they¡¯re an elephant too.¡±5 
Sun Valley was always very reassuring, because unlike most elephant bumps, one could not buy one¡¯s way in. The result was a sort of faux democracy of the elite. Part of the thrillof comingwas to see who was not invited, and, more thrillingstill, who was disinvited. Yet within their stratum, people did develop genuine relationships. Allen & Co. fostered conviviality through lavish entertainment, beginningon the first evening, when the guests donned Western gear, climbed into old-fashioned horse-drawn wagons, and followed cowboys up a windingtrailpast a natural stone spire onto Trail Creek Cabin meadow. There, Herbert Allen or one of his two sons greeted the guests as the sun began to set. Cowboys entertained the children with rope tricks near a large white tent bedecked with urns of scarlet petunias and blue sage, while the Sun Valley old guard reunited and welcomed new guests as they stood side by side in line, plate in hand, for a buffet of steaks and salmon. The Buffetts usually ended the eveningsittingwith friends around the bonfire beneath the star-dappled western sky. 
The frolickingcontinued on Wednesday afternoon with an optional and very mild white-water paddle down the Salmon River. On this trip relationships blossomed, for Allen & Co. orchestrated who sat where on the bus to the embarkation point as well as on the rafts. The river guides steered through the mountain valley in silence, lest they interrupt conversations and disturb buddingalliances. Spotters hired fromthe local population and ambulances lined the route in case someone tumbled into the freezingwater. The guests were handed warm towels as soon as they put down their paddles and stepped out of the rafts, then served plates of barbecue. 
Those not raftingcould be found fly-fishing, horseback riding, shootingtrap and skeet, mountain biking, playingbridge, learningto knit, studyingnature photography, playingFrisbee with the ubiquitous canine conference guests, ice-skatingon the outdoor rink, playingtennis on perfect clay courts, loungingat the pool, or golfingon immaculate greens, where they rode in carts stuffed full of Allen & Co. sunscreen, snacks, and 
bugspray.6 All the entertainment flowed quietly, seamlessly, whatever was needed appearingunasked, supplied by a seemingly inexhaustible staff of almost-invisible yet ever-present Allenites in SV99 polo shirts. 
It was the babysitters, however, a hundred-some good-looking, mostly blond, deeply tanned teenagers in these same polo shirts and matchingAllen & Co. backpacks, who were Herbert Allen¡¯s secret weapon. As the parents and grandparents played, the sitters saw to it that each Joshua and Brittany was accompanied by his or her own playmate for whatever activity they chose¡ªa tennis clinic, soccer, bicycling, kickball, a wagon ride, a horse show, ice-skating, relay races, rafting, fishing, an art project, or pizza and ice cream. Each babysitter was personally selected to ensure that every child always had such a wonderfultime that they would begto come back year after year¡ªwhile at the same time delightingtheir parents with occasional glimpses of the very, very attractive youngperson who was allowingthemto spend days of guilt-free time with other adults. 
Buffett had always been one of the most appreciative of Allen¡¯s beneficiaries. He loved Sun Valley as a family vacation, for left to his own devices at a mountain resort with his grandchildren, he would have been at a complete loss for what to do. He had no interest in outdoor activities other than golf. He never went skeet shootingor mountain biking, thought of water as ¡°a prison of sorts,¡± and would rather go around handcuffed than ride on a raft. Instead, he slipped comfortably into the center of the elephant herd. He played a little golf and bridge, includinga standinggolf game with Jack Valenti, president of the Motion Picture Association of America, for a dollar bet, and a bridge game with Meredith Brokaw, and otherwise spent his time socializingwith people like Playboy CEO Christie Hefner and computer hardware CEO Michael Dell. 
Often, however, he disappeared for longperiods into his condo overlookingthe golf course, where he read and watched business news in the livingroomseated next to an enormous stone fireplace.7 He barely noticed the view of pine-covered Baldy, the mountain outside his window, or the bank of blossoms like a Persian 
palace rug: pastel lupines and sapphire delphiniums toweringover poppies and Indian paintbrush, crisp blue salvia and veronica nestled amongthe stonecrop and hens-and-chicks. ¡°The scenery is there, I guess,¡± he said. He came for the warmatmosphere Herbert Allen had created.8 He liked beingwith his closest friends: 
Kay Graham and her son Don; Bill and Melinda Gates; Mickie and Don Keough; Barry Diller and Diane von Furstenberg; Andy Grove and his wife, Eva. 
But above all, for Buffett, Sun Valley was about reunitingwith his whole family duringone of the rare times most of the family spent together. ¡°He likes us all beingin the same house,¡± says his daughter, Susie Buffett Jr. She lived in Omaha; her younger brother, Howie, and his wife, Devon¡ªmissingthis year¡ªlived in Decatur, Illinois; while their younger sibling, Peter, and his wife, Jennifer, lived in Milwaukee. 
Buffett¡¯s wife of forty-seven years, Susan, who lived apart from him, had flown in to meet themfromher home in San Francisco. And Astrid Menks, his companion for more than twenty years, remained at their home in Omaha. 
On Friday night, Warren donned a Hawaiian shirt and escorted his wife to the traditional PoolParty on the tennis courts next to their condo. Most of the guests knew and liked Susie. Always the star of the PoolParty, she sangold-fashioned standards by the light of tiki torches in front of the illuminated Olympic pool. 
This year, as the cocktails and camaraderie flowed, the babble of a barely comprehensible new language¡ªB2B, B2C, banner ads, bandwidth, broadband¡ªcompeted with the sounds of AlOehrle¡¯s band. Allweek longa vague sense of unease had drifted through the lunches and dinners and cocktails like a silent fogamid the handshakes, kisses, and hugs. A new group of recently minted technology executives, filled with 
an unusual swagger, introduced themselves to people who had never heard of thema year before.9 Some displayed a hubris that was at odds with Sun Valley¡¯s usualatmosphere, where a determined informality reigned and Herbert Allen enforced a sort of unwritten rule against pomposity, on penalty of banishment. 
The cloud of arrogance hungheaviest over the presentations that were the conference¡¯s centerpiece. Heads of companies, high government officials, and other people of note gave talks unlike those they delivered anywhere else, because hardly a word of what was said was ever whispered beyond the flower boxes hanging by the doors of the Sun Valley Inn. Reporters were banned, and the celebrity journalists and the media barons who owned the television networks and newspapers sat in the audience but honored a code of silence. Thus freed to performonly for their peers, the speakers said important and often true things that could never be articulated in front of the press because they were too blunt, too nuanced, too alarming, too easily satirized, or too likely to be misinterpreted. The workaday journalists lurked outside, hopingfor crumbs that were rarely thrown. 
This year the new moguls of the Internet had been strutting, showingoff their soaringexpectations, trumpetingtheir latest mergers and lookingto raise cash from the money managers sittingin the audience. The money people, who stewarded other people¡¯s pensions and savings, together commanded so much 
wealth that it could hardly be comprehended: more than a trillion dollars.10 With a trillion dollars in 1999, 
you could pay the income tax of every single individual in the United States. You could give a brand-new Bentley automobile to every household in more than nine states.11 You could buy every single piece of real estate in Chicago, New York City, and Los Angeles¡ªcombined. Some of the companies making presentations needed that money, and they wanted this audience to give it to them. 
Early in the week, TomBrokaw¡¯s panel, called ¡°The Internet and Our Lives,¡± had drum-majored a procession of presentations about how the Internet would reshape the communications business. Priceline¡¯s Jay Walker took the audience through a dizzyingvision of the Internet that compared the information super-highway to the advent of the railroad in 1869. One after another, executives laid out the glitteringprospects for their companies, fillingthe room with the intoxicatingvapor of a future unlimited by storage space and geography, so slick and visionary that while some were convinced that a whole new world was unfolding, others were reminded of snake-oil salesmen. The folks who ran technology companies saw themselves as Promethean geniuses bringingfire to lesser mortals. Other businesses that grubbed in the ashes to make the dull necessities of life¡ªauto parts, lawn furniture¡ªwere now of interest mostly for how much technology they could buy. Some Internet stocks traded at infinite multiples of their nonexistent earnings, while ¡°real companies¡± that made realthings had declined in value. As technology stocks overtook the ¡°old economy,¡± 
the Dow Jones IndustrialAverage*1 had burst through the once-distant 10,000-point barrier only four months before, doublingin less than three and a half years. 
Many of the recently enriched congregated between speeches at a cordoned-off diningterrace by the Duck Pond, where a pair of captive swans paddled around a pool. There, any guest¡ªbut not a reporter¡ªcould edge through the masses of people in khaki pants and cashmere cable sweaters to ask a question of Bill Gates or Andy Grove. Meanwhile, the journalists chased after the Internet moguls as they moved between the Inn and their condos, amplifyingthe atmosphere of inflated self-importance that permeated Sun Valley this year. 
Some of the new Internet czars spent Friday afternoon lobbyingHerbert Allen to get them into celebrity photographer Annie Leibovitz¡¯s Saturday afternoon shoot of the Media All-Star Team for Vanity Fair. They felt they had been invited to Sun Valley because they were the people of the moment, and they had trouble believingthat Leibovitz had made her own choices about who to photograph. Why, for example, would she include Buffett?His role in media had come mostly secondhand¡ªthrough board memberships, a large network of personalinfluence, and a history of media investments large and small. Besides, he was old media. They found it hard to believe that his face in a photograph stillsold magazines. 
These would-be all-stars felt slighted because they knew perfectly well that the balance in media had shifted toward the Internet. That was so even though Herbert Allen himself thought the ¡°new paradigm¡± for valuing technology and media stocks¡ªbased on clicks and eyeballs and projections of far-off growth rather than a company¡¯s ability to earn cold hard cash¡ªwas bunk. ¡°New paradigm,¡± he sniffed. ¡°It¡¯s like new sex. There 
just isn¡¯t any such thing.¡±12 
*** 
The next morning, Buffett, emblemof the old paradigm, rose early, for he would be the closingspeaker of the 
year. Invariably, he turned down requests to speak at conferences sponsored by other companies, but when Herbert Allen asked himto speak at Sun Valley, he always said yes.13 The Saturday morningclosingtalk was the keynote event of the conference, so instead of headingstraight to the golf course or grabbinga fishing rod, almost everyone went to the breakfast buffet at the Sun Valley Inn, then settled into a seat. Today Buffett would be talkingabout the stock market. 
In private, he had been critical of the gunslinging, promoter-driven market that had sent technology stocks gallopingtoward delirious heights all year. The stock of his company, Berkshire Hathaway, languished in their dust, and his rigid rule of not buyingtechnology stocks seemed outmoded. But the criticism had no influence on how he invested, and to date, the only statement he had made in public was that he never made market predictions. So his decision to get up at the podium in Sun Valley and do just that was unprecedented. 
Perhaps it was the times. Buffett had a firmconviction and an overwhelmingurge to preach.14 
He had spent weeks preparingfor this speech. He understood that the market was not just people trading stocks as though they were chips in a casino. The chips represented businesses. Buffett thought about the total value of the chips. What were they worth? Next he reviewed history, pullingfroman exhaustive mental file. This was not the first time that world-changingnew technologies had come alongand shaken up the stock market. Business history was replete with new technologies¡ªrailroads, telegraph, telephone, automobiles, airplanes, television: all revolutionary ways to connect things faster¡ªbut how many had made investors rich? He was about to explain. 
After the breakfast buffet, Clarke Keough walked to the podium. Buffett had known the Keough family for many years; they had been neighbors back in Omaha. It was through Clarke¡¯s father, Don, that Buffett had made the connections that led himto Sun Valley. Don Keough, now chairman of Allen & Co. and former president of Coca-Cola, had met Herbert Allen when he bought Columbia Pictures from Allen & Co. for Coca-Cola in 1982. Keough and his boss, Coca-Cola¡¯s CEO, Roberto Goizueta, had been so impressed by Herbert Allen¡¯s unsalesmanlike approach to sellingthat they had convinced himto join their board. 
Keough, a Sioux City cattleman¡¯s son and former altar boy, had now technically retired fromCoca-Cola but he still lived and breathed the Real Thing, so powerful he was sometimes called the company¡¯s shadow chief executive.15 
When the Keoughs were his neighbors in Omaha in the 1950s, Warren had asked Don how he was goingto pay for his kids¡¯ college and suggested that he invest $10,000 in Buffett¡¯s partnership. But Don was putting six kids through parochial school on $200 a week as a Butter-Nut coffee salesman. ¡°We didn¡¯t have the money,¡± his son Clarke now told the audience. ¡°This is part of my family¡¯s past that we willnever forget.¡± 
Buffett joined Clarke at the podium, wearinghis favorite Nebraska red sweater over a plaid shirt. He finished the story.16 
¡°The Keoughs were wonderful neighbors,¡± he said. ¡°It¡¯s true that occasionally Don would mention that, unlike me, he had a job, but the relationship was terrific. One time my wife, Susie, went over and did the proverbial Midwestern bit of asking to borrow a cup of sugar, and Don¡¯s wife, Mickie, gave her a whole sack. When I heard about that, I decided to go over to the Keoughs¡¯ that night myself. I said to Don, ¡®Why don¡¯t you give me twenty-five thousand dollars for the partnership to invest?¡¯ And the Keough family stiffened a little bit at that point, and I was rejected. 
¡°I came back sometime later and asked for the ten thousand dollars Clarke referred to and got a similar result. But I wasn¡¯t proud. So I returned at a later time and asked for five thousand dollars. And at that point, I got rejected again. 
¡°So one night, in the summer of 1962, I started heading over to the Keough house. I don¡¯t know whether I would have dropped it to twenty-five hundred dollars or not, but by the time I got to the Keough household, the whole place was dark, silent. There wasn¡¯t a thing to see. But I knew what was going on. I knew that Don and Mickie were hiding upstairs, so I didn¡¯t leave. 
¡°I rang that doorbell. I knocked. Nothing happened. But Don and Mickie were upstairs, and it was pitch-black. 
¡°Too dark to read, and too early to go to sleep. And I remember that day as if it were yesterday. That was June twenty-first, 1962. 
¡°Clarke, when were you born?¡± 
¡°March twenty-first, 1963.¡± 
¡°It¡¯s little things like that that history turns on. So you should be glad they didn¡¯t give me the ten thousand dollars.¡± 
Havingcharmed the audience with this little piece of give and take, Buffett turned to the matter at hand. 
¡°Now, I¡¯m going to attempt to multitask today. Herb told me to include a few slides. ¡®Show you¡¯re with it,¡¯ he said. When Herb says something, it¡¯s practically an order in the Buffett household.¡± Speedingpast exactly what comprised ¡°the Buffett household¡±¡ªfor Buffett thought of his household as beinglike any other family¡¯s¡ªhe launched into a joke about Allen. The secretary to the President of the U.S. rushed into the Oval Office, apologizingfor accidentally schedulingtwo meetings at once. The President had to choose between seeingthe Pope and seeingHerbert Allen. Buffett paused for effect. ¡°¡®Send in the Pope,¡¯ said the President. ¡®At least I only have to kiss his ring.¡¯ 
¡°To all you fellow ring-kissers, I would like to talk today about the stock market,¡± he said. ¡°I will be talking about pricing stocks, but I will not be talking about predicting their course of action next month or next year. Valuing is not the same as predicting. 
¡°In the short run, the market is a voting machine. In the long run, it¡¯s a weighing machine. 
¡°Weight counts eventually. But votes count in the short term. And it¡¯s a very undemocratic way of voting. Unfortunately, they have no literacy tests in terms of voting qualifications, as you¡¯ve all learned.¡± 
Buffett clicked a button, which illuminated a PowerPoint slide on a huge screen to his right.17 BillGates, sittingin the audience, caught his breath for a second, untilthe notoriously fumble-fingered Buffett managed to get the first slide up. 18 
DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE 
December 31, 1964 874.12 
December 31, 1981 875.00 
He walked over to the screen and started explaining. 
¡°During these seventeen years, the size of the economy grew fivefold. The sales of the Fortune five hundred companies grew more than fivefold.*2 Yet, during these seventeen years, the stock market went exactly nowhere.¡± 
He backed up a step or two. ¡°What you¡¯re doing when you invest is deferring consumption and laying money out now to get more money back at a later time. And there are really only two questions. One is how much you¡¯re going to get back, and the other is when. 
¡°Now, Aesop was not much of a finance major, because he said something like, ¡®A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.¡¯ But he doesn¡¯t say when.¡± Interest rates¡ªthe cost of borrowing¡ªBuffett explained, are the price of ¡°when.¡± They are to finance as gravity is to physics. As interest rates vary, the value of all financial assets¡ªhouses, stocks, bonds¡ªchanges, as if the price of birds had fluctuated. ¡°And that¡¯s why sometimes a bird in the hand is better than two birds in the bush and sometimes two in the bush are better than one in the hand.¡± 
In his flat, breathy twang, the words comingso fast that they sometimes ran over one another, Buffett related Aesop to the great bullmarket of the 1990s, which he described as baloney. Profits had grown much less than in that previous period, but birds in the bush were expensive because interest rates were low. Fewer people wanted cash¡ªthe bird in the hand¡ªat such low rates. So investors were payingunheard-of prices for those birds in the bush. Casually, Buffett referred to this as the ¡°greed factor.¡± 
The audience, fullof technology gurus who were changingthe world while gettingrich off the great bull market, sat silent. They were perched atop portfolios that were jam-packed with stocks tradingat extravagant valuations. They felt terrific about that. It was a new paradigm, this dawningof the Internet age. Their attitude was that Buffett had no right to callthemgreedy. Warren¡ªwho¡¯d hoarded his money for years and given very little away, who was so cheap his license plate said ¡°Thrifty,¡± who spent most of his time thinking about how to make money, who had blown the technology boom and missed the boat¡ªwas spittingin their champagne. 
Buffett continued. There were only three ways the stock market could keep risingat ten percent or more a year. One was if interest rates felland remained below historic levels. The second was if the share of the economy that went to investors, as opposed to employees and government and other things, rose above its 
already historically high level.19 Or, he said, the economy could start growingfaster than normal.20 He called it ¡°wishful thinking¡± to use optimistic assumptions like these. 
Some people, he said, were not thinkingthat the whole market would flourish. They just believed they could pick the winners fromthe rest. Swinginghis arms like an orchestra conductor, he succeeded in puttingup another slide while explainingthat, although innovation might lift the world out of poverty, people who invest in innovation historically have not been glad afterward. 
¡°This is half of a page which comes from a list seventy pages long of all the auto companies in the United States.¡± He waved the complete list in the air. ¡°There were two thousand auto companies: the most important invention, probably, of the first half of the twentieth century. It had an enormous impact on people¡¯s lives. If you had seen at the time of the first cars how this country would develop in connection with autos, you would have said, ¡®This is the place I must be.¡¯ But of the two thousand companies, as of a 
21 
few years ago, only three car companies survived. And, at one time or another, all three were selling for less than book value, which is the amount of money that had been put into the companies and left there. So autos had an enormous impact on America, but in the opposite direction on investors.¡± 
He put down the list to shove his hand in his pocket. ¡°Now, sometimes it¡¯s much easier to figure out the losers. There was, I think, one obvious decision back then. And of course, the thing you should have been doing was shorting horses.¡±*3 Click. A slide about horses popped up. 
U.S. HORSE POPULATION 
1900¡ª17 million 1998¡ª5 million 
¡°Frankly, I¡¯m kind of disappointed that the Buffett family was not shorting horses throughout this entire period. There are always losers.¡± 
Members of the audience chuckled, albeit faintly. Their companies might be losingmoney, but in their hearts beat a conviction that they were winners, supernovas blazingat the cusp of a momentous shift in the heavens. Undoubtedly their names would grace the pages of history books someday. 
Click. Another slide appeared. 
¡°Now the other great invention of the first half of the century was the airplane. In this period from 1919 to 1939, there were about two hundred companies. Imagine if you could have seen the future of the airline industry back there at Kitty Hawk. You would have seen a world undreamed of. But assume you had the insight, and you saw all of these people wishing to fly and to visit their relatives or run away from their relatives or whatever you do in an airplane, and you decided this was the place to be. 
¡°As of a couple of years ago, there had been zero money made from the aggregate of all stock investments in the airline industry in history. 
¡°So I submit to you: I really like to think that if I had been down there at Kitty Hawk, I would have been farsighted enough and public-spirited enough to have shot Orville down. I owed it to future capitalists.¡± 
Another light chuckle. Some were gettingtired of these musty old examples. But out of respect, they let Buffett get on with it. 
Now he was talkingabout their businesses. ¡°It¡¯s wonderful to promote new industries, because they are very promotable. It¡¯s very hard to promote investment in a mundane product. It¡¯s much easier to promote an esoteric product, even particularly one with losses, because there¡¯s no quantitative guideline.¡± This was goringthe audience directly, where it hurt. ¡°But people will keep coming back to invest, you know. It reminds me a little of that story of the oil prospector who died and went to heaven. And St. Peter said, ¡®Well, I checked you out, and you meet all of the qualifications. But there¡¯s one problem.¡¯ He said, ¡®We have some tough zoning laws up here, and we keep all of the oil prospectors over in that pen. And as you can see, it is absolutely chock-full. There is no room for you.¡¯ 
¡°And the prospector said, ¡®Do you mind if I just say four words?¡¯ 
¡°St. Peter said, ¡®No harm in that.¡¯ 
¡°So the prospector cupped his hands and yells out, ¡®Oil discovered in hell!¡¯ 
¡°And of course, the lock comes off the cage and all of the oil prospectors start heading right straight down. 
¡°St. Peter said, ¡®That¡¯s a pretty slick trick. So,¡¯ he says, ¡®go on in, make yourself at home. All the room in the world.¡¯ 
¡°The prospector paused for a minute, then said, ¡®No, I think I¡¯ll go along with the rest of the boys. There 
23 
might be some truth to that rumor after all.¡¯ 
¡°Well, that¡¯s the way people feel with stocks. It¡¯s very easy to believe that there¡¯s some truth to that rumor after all.¡± 
This got a mild laugh for a half second, which choked off as soon as the audience caught on to Buffett¡¯s point, which was that, like the prospectors, they might be mindless enough to follow rumors and drillfor oilin hell. 
He closed by returningto the proverbialbird in the bush. There was no new paradigm, he said. Ultimately, the value of the stock market could only reflect the output of the economy. 
He put up a slide to illustrate how, for several years, the market¡¯s valuation had outstripped the economy¡¯s growth by an enormous degree. This meant, Buffett said, that the next seventeen years might not look much better than that longstretch from1964 to 1981 when the Dow had gone exactly nowhere¡ªthat is, unless the market plummeted. ¡°If I had to pick the most probable return over that period,¡± he said, ¡°it would probably 
be six percent.¡±24 Yet a recent PaineWebber-Gallup pollhad shown that investors expected stocks to return thirteen to twenty-two percent.25 
He walked over to the screen. Wagglinghis bushy eyebrows, he gestured at the cartoon of a naked man and woman, taken froma legendary book on the stock market, Where Are the Customers¡¯ Yachts?26 ¡°The man said to the woman, ¡®There are certain things that cannot be adequately explained to a virgin either by words or pictures.¡¯¡± The audience took his point, which was that people who bought Internet stocks were about to get screwed. They sat in stony silence. Nobody laughed. Nobody chuckled or snickered or guffawed. 
Seemingnot to notice, Buffett moved back to the podium and told the audience about the goody baghe had brought for themfromBerkshire Hathaway. ¡°I just bought a company that sells fractional jets, NetJets,¡± he said. ¡°I thought about giving each of you a quarter share of a Gulfstream IV. But when I went to the airport, I realized that¡¯d be a step down for most of you.¡± At that, they laughed. So, he continued, he was givingeach of thema jeweler¡¯s loupe instead, which he said they should use to look at one another¡¯s wives¡¯ rings¡ªthe third wives¡¯ especially. 
That hit its mark. The audience laughed and applauded. Then they stopped. A resentfulundercurrent was washingthrough the room. Sermonizingon the stock market¡¯s excesses at Sun Valley in 1999 was like 
preachingchastity in a house of ill repute. The speech might rivet the audience to its chairs, but that didn¡¯t mean that they would go forth and abstain. 
Yet some thought they were hearingsomethingimportant. ¡°This is great; it¡¯s the basic tutorialon the stock market, all in one lesson,¡± thought Gates.27 The money managers, many of whom were huntingfor cheaper stocks, found it comfortingand even cathartic. 
Buffett waved a book in the air. ¡°This book was the intellectual underpinning of the 1929 stock-market mania. Edgar Lawrence Smith¡¯s Common Stocks as Long Term Investments proved that stocks always yielded more than bonds. Smith identified five reasons, but the most novel of these was the fact that companies retained some of their earnings, which they could reinvest at the same rate of return. That was the plowback¡ªa novel idea in 1924! But as my mentor, Ben Graham, always used to say, ¡®You can get in way more trouble with a good idea than a bad idea,¡¯ because you forget that the good idea has limits. Lord Keynes, in his preface to this book, said, ¡®There is a danger of expecting the results of the future to be 
28 
predicted from the past.¡¯¡± 
He had worked his way back around to the same subject:that one couldn¡¯t extrapolate from the past few years of acceleratingstock prices. ¡°Now, is there anyone I haven¡¯t insulted?¡±29 He paused. The question was rhetorical; nobody raised a hand. 
¡°Thank you,¡± he said, and ended. 
¡°Praise by name, criticize by category¡± was Buffett¡¯s rule. The speech was meant to be provocative, not off-putting¡ªfor he cared a great dealwhat they thought of him. He had named no culprits, and he assumed they would get over his jokes. His argument was so powerful, almost unassailable, that he thought even those who didn¡¯t like its message must acknowledge its force. And whatever unease the audience felt was not expressed aloud. He answered questions until the session ended. People began to stand, awardinghiman ovation. No matter how they saw it¡ªa masterful exposition on how to think about investingor the last roar of an old lion¡ªthe speech was by any standard a tour de force. 
Buffett had stayed on top for forty-four years in a business where five years of good performance was a meaningful accomplishment. Still, as the record lengthened, the question always loomed: When would he falter? Would he declare an end to his reign, or would some seismic shift dethrone him?Now, it seemed to some, the time had come. It may have taken an invention as significant as the personal computer, coupled with a technology as pervasive as the Internet, to topple him, but he¡¯d apparently overlooked information that was freely available and rejected the reality of the approachingmillennium. As they muttered a polite ¡°wonderfulspeech, Warren,¡± the younglions prowled, restive. And so, even in the ladies¡¯ roomat the break, 
sarcastic remarks were heard fromthe Silicon Valley wives.30 
It was not just that Buffett was wrong, as some felt, but that even if he were eventually proved right¡ªas others suspected he would be¡ªhis dour prediction of the investingfuture contrasted so sharply with Buffett¡¯s own legendary past. For in his early glory days, stocks were cheap, and Buffett had scooped them up in handfuls, almost alone in noticingthe golden apples lyinguntouched on the path. As the years passed, barriers grew up that made it harder to invest, to get an edge, to figure out what others didn¡¯t know. So who was Buffett to preach at them, now that it was their turn?Who was he to say that they shouldn¡¯t make money while they could off this wonderful market? 
Throughout the rest of the lazy afternoon, Herbert Allen¡¯s guests played one last game of tennis or golf or headed to the Duck Pond Lawn for a leisurely chat. Buffett spent his afternoon with old friends, who congratulated himon his triumph of a speech. He believed he had done a convincingjob of swayingthe audience. He had not given a speech full of such commandingevidence simply to go on the record. 
Buffett, who wanted to be liked, had registered the standingovation, not the mutterings. But the less flatteringversion was how many were not convinced. They believed that Buffett was rationalizinghaving missed the technology boom, and they were startled to see himmake such specific predictions, prophecies 
that surely would turn out to be wrong. Beyond his earshot, the rumblingwent on: ¡°Good ol¡¯ Warren. He missed the boat. How could he miss the tech boat? He¡¯s a friend of Bill Gates.¡±31 
A few miles away at the River Run Lodge later that evening, with the guests at the closingdinner again arranged accordingto some invisible plan, Herbert Allen finally spoke, thankingvarious people and reflecting on the week. Then Susie Buffett took the stage beside the windows that overlooked the pebbly BigWood River and once again sangthe old standards. Later the guests returned to the Sun Valley Lodge terrace, where Olympic skaters axeled and arabesqued in the Saturday night ice show. 
By the time fireworks exploded across the sky at evening¡¯s end, Sun Valley ¡¯99 had been declared another glorious five-day extravaganza. Yet what most people would remember was not the raftingor the skaters; it was Buffett¡¯s talk about the stock market¡ªthe first forecast he had made in exactly thirty years. 
3 
CreaturesofHabit 
Pasadena . July 1999 
Buffett¡¯s partner, Charles T. Munger, was nowhere to be seen at Sun Valley. The Allen & Co. organizers 
had never invited him. Which was fine with Munger, for Sun Valley was the kind of event he would almost pay not to attend. Its rituals required pleasingtoo many people.1 Buffett was the one who enjoyed pleasing people. Even as he took his jabs at the audience, he made sure to remain personally well liked. Whereas Munger wanted only respect, and didn¡¯t care who thought he was a son of a bitch. 
Yet the two, in many people¡¯s minds, were almost interchangeable. Buffett himself referred to themas ¡°Siamese twins, practically.¡± They walked with the same lurching, awkward gait. They wore the same sort of gray suits draped stiffly over their frames, the inflexible bodies of men who have spent decades reading books and newspapers rather than playingsports or workingoutdoors. They arranged their grayinghair in the same comb-over, they wore similar Clark Kentish glasses, and the same intensity flickered through their eyes. 
They thought alike and had the same fascination with business as a puzzle worth spendinga lifetime to solve. Both regarded rationality and honesty as the highest virtues. Quickened pulses and self-delusion, in their view, were the major causes of mistakes. They liked to ponder the reasons for failure as a way of deducing the rules of success. ¡°I had longlooked for insight by inversion, in the intense manner counseled by the great algebraist Carl Jacobi,¡± Munger said. ¡°¡®Invert, always invert.¡¯¡± He illustrated this with the story of a wise 
peasant who said, ¡°Tell me where I¡¯mgoingto die so I won¡¯t go there.¡±2 But while Munger meant this figuratively, Buffett took it more literally. He lacked Munger¡¯s subtle sense of fatalism, particularly when it came to the subject of his own mortality. 
Both men, however, were infected by the urge to preach. Munger described himself as ¡°didactic.¡± He labored over occasionalspeeches on the art of successful living, which struck people as so insightfulthat they were hoarded and passed from hand to hand until, finally, the Internet made themaccessible to all. He grew so enthused deliveringthese speeches that, on a few occasions, he became ¡°self-intoxicated,¡± as Buffett put it, and had to be dragged from the stage. In private, Munger tended to lecture either himself or his audience, makingconversations with himlike sittingin the back of a runaway stagecoach. 
But while he considered himself an amateur scientist and architect and did not hesitate to expound on Einstein, Darwin, rational habits of thinking, and the ideal distance between houses in a Santa Barbara subdivision, Munger was nonetheless wary of venturingvery far from what he had spent some time to learn. 
He dreaded fallingprey to what a Harvard Law Schoolclassmate of his had called ¡°the Shoe Button Complex.¡± 
¡°His father commuted daily with the same group of men,¡± Munger said. ¡°One of themhad managed to corner the market in shoe buttons¡ªa really smallmarket, but he had it all. He pontificated on every subject, all subjects imaginable. Corneringthe market on shoe buttons made himan expert on everything. Warren and I 
have always sensed it would be a bigmistake to behave that way.¡±3 
Buffett was in no danger of sufferingfromthe Shoe Button Complex. He feared appearingobnoxious or, worse, sanctimonious. He believed in what he called the Circle of Competence, drew a line around himself, and stayed within the three subjects on which he would be recognized as absolutely expert: money, business, and his own life. 
Yet, like Munger, he had his own formof self-intoxication. While Munger chose his speeches selectively but had trouble windingthemup, Buffett could usually conclude a lecture, but found it hard not to start one. 
He gave speeches; he wrote articles; he wrote editorials; he gathered people at parties and gave little lessons; he testified in lawsuits; he appeared in television documentaries and did television interviews and took journalists alongwith himon trips; he went around to colleges and taught classes; he got college students to come and visit him; he gave lessons at the openings of furniture stores, the inauguration of insurance telemarketingcenters, and dinners for would-be customers of NetJets; he gave locker-roomtalks to football players; he spoke at lunches with Congressmen; he educated newspaper folk in editorial board meetings; he gave lessons to his own board of directors; and, above all, he put on the teacher¡¯s robes in his letters to and meetings with his shareholders. Berkshire Hathaway was his ¡°Sistine Chapel¡±¡ªnot just a work of art, but an illustrated text of his beliefs, which was why Munger referred to it as Buffett¡¯s ¡°didactic enterprise.¡± 
The two men had been each other¡¯s best audience ever since they first met through mutual friends over lunch in 1959. After they talked their hosts into exhaustion, they wound up alone at the table, jabberingto each other. Since then, they had carried on an uninterrupted conversation for decades. Eventually, they could read each other¡¯s minds, stopped talking, and carried on by telepathy. But by then their other audiences had expanded to include their friends, business partners, shareholders¡ªindeed, the whole world. People reeled out of Buffett¡¯s office or away from Munger¡¯s speeches, figuratively smackingtheir foreheads and saying, ¡°My God!¡± at some insight one of themhad about a seemingly intractable problem, which now, in hindsight, seemed obvious. No matter how much either talked, demand for their words only increased. Like most things in their lives, they found this role easy and comfortable, engraved in their beings by longhabit. 
But, accused of beinga creature of habit, Buffett responded with a wounded look. ¡°I¡¯mnot a creature of habit,¡± he said. ¡°Now, Charlie¡ªCharlie is a creature of habit.¡± 
*** 
Munger rose in the morningand set his quarter-inch-thick, old-fashioned cataract glasses on the bridge of his 
nose. He climbed into his car at precisely the same time every day, carefully placed his father¡¯s briefcase ¡ªwhich he now used¡ªon the seat next to him, and drove from Pasadena to downtown Los Angeles.4 He changed lanes on his left side by countingthe cars in his rearview mirror, then watchingthempass in the 
front to sense when there would be a gap. 5 (For years he drove with a can of gasoline in his trunk in case he forgot to stop for gas, but was finally persuaded to give up this particular habit.) Once downtown, he often met someone for breakfast at the sandy-brick art deco California Club, one of the city¡¯s venerable institutions, where he strode automatically to the first table in the diningroomafter grabbinga clutch of newspapers from the console table by the third-floor elevator. He tore through the papers like gift wrap on Christmas morning, untilthey lay around himin a heap. 
¡°Good morning, Mr. Munger.¡± The members of the L.A. business establishment genuflected as they passed by on their way to lesser tables, pleased if he recognized them and chatted for a moment or two. 
Munger regarded themthrough his right eye. His left had been destroyed in a failed cataract operation.6 Now, while he spoke, his left eyelid hungat half-mast as his head swiveled back and forth across the room, taking in the scene. The rotatinghalf gaze gave him an aspect of eternal vigilance and permanent disdain. 
After finishinghis blueberries, Munger repaired to the modest, cluttered office he rented fromMunger, Tolles & Olson, the law firmhe had founded in 1962 and retired fromjust three years later. Tucked away on an upper floor of the Wells Fargo Center, his domain was watched over by his longtime secretary, the Teutonic Dorothe Obert. There, surrounded by science and history books, biographies of Benjamin Franklin, an enormous portrait of aphorist and lexicographer Samuel Johnson, plans and models of his latest real estate deal, and a hydrocephalic bust of Franklin next to the windows, he felt at home. Munger admired Franklin for espousingProtestant bourgeois values while livingas he damn well pleased. He frequently cited Franklin, and spent his days studyinghis works and those of other ¡°eminent dead,¡± as he put it, like Cicero and Maimonides. He also administered Wesco Financial, a subsidiary of Berkshire; the Daily Journal Corporation, a legal publishingcompany that Wesco owned; and worked on a real estate transaction here and there. Would-be chatterers¡ªexcept for family, close friends, or business associates¡ªmet with obscure ironic witticisms and discouragement from Dorothe. 
Munger spent much of his time workingon four causes. When he chose, he could pitch in with an almost stunninggenerosity. However, lackinga soft spot for the people of what he called ¡°Dregsville,¡± his charity took the formof a Darwinian quest to boost the brightest. Good Samaritan Hospital, the Harvard-Westlake School, the Huntington Library, and the Stanford Law Schoolwere the beneficiaries. These organizations knew that Munger¡¯s money and effort would be accompanied by much lecturingand insistence that everyone do things Charlie¡¯s way. He would gladly pay for dormitories at Stanford Law School, as longas Stanford made each room exactly so many feet wide, with a window exactly here and the bedroomso many feet from the kitchen, and provided that the university locate the parkinggarage where he insisted. He embodied old-fashioned noblesse oblige, with all sorts of irritatingstrings attached to the money for the recipients¡¯ own good, because he knew best. 
Even with all this overseeingof others¡¯ activities, Munger often left for the day in time to play a little golf with his cronies at the Los Angeles Country Club. Then he joined his wife, Nancy, for dinner, sometimes at the Pasadena house he¡¯d designed himself or, more likely, with a longtime group of close-knit friends, once again either at the California Club or the L.A. Country Club. He concluded his day by buryinghis nose in a book. He vacationed regularly with his eight children and stepchildren and assorted grandchildren, usually at his cabin on Minnesota¡¯s Star Island, where, like his father, he was an avid fisherman. He hosted dozens of people on his enormous catamaran, the Channel Cat (described as a ¡°floatingrestaurant¡± by one friend, and used mainly to entertain). In short, despite his idiosyncrasies, Munger was a straightforward family man who liked his friends, his clubs, and his charities. 
*** 
Buffett liked his friends and his clubs, but had little to do with charities. His life was even simpler than Munger¡¯s, despite a personality that was far more complex. He spent the vast majority of his time in Omaha, but his schedule revolved around a series of board meetings and trips to visit friends, orchestrated with an unhurried regularity, like the phases of the moon. On the days he was in town, he drove 1.5 miles fromthe house he¡¯d inhabited for four decades to the office at Kiewit Plaza that he¡¯d occupied for almost as long, where he sat down behind his father¡¯s desk by eight-thirty a.m. There, he turned on the television to CNBC with the sound muted before pickingup his pile of newspapers, keepinghalf an eye on the screen while plowingthrough a pile of publications on his desk: American Banker, Editor & Publisher, Broadcasting, Beverage Digest, Furniture Today, A.M. Best¡¯s Property-Casualty Review, the New Yorker, Columbia Journalism Review, the New York Observer, and newsletters from writers he admired on the stock and bond market. 
After that he digested the monthly, weekly, and daily reports faxed, mailed, and e-mailed by the businesses 
that Berkshire owned, a list that grew longer year by year, tellinghimhow many auto policies GEICO had sold last week and how many claims it had paid; how many pounds of See¡¯s Candies had sold yesterday; how many prison-guard uniforms had been ordered fromFechheimers; how many jet time-shares NetJets was sellingin Europe and the United States; and allthe rest¡ªawnings, battery chargers, kilowatt hours, air compressors, engagement rings, leased trucks, encyclopedias, pilot training, home furnishings, cardiopulmonary equipment, pigstalls, boat loans, realestate listings, ice cream sundaes, winches and windlasses, cubic feet of gas, sump pumps, vacuum cleaners, newspaper advertising, eggcounters, knives, furniture rentals, nurses¡¯ shoes, electromechanicalcomponents. All the numbers on their costs and sales 
poured into his office, and he knew many of themfrom memory. 7 
In his spare time, he pored over reports from the hundreds of companies he hadn¡¯t bought yet. Partly out of interest, and partly just in case. 
If some dignitary made the pilgrimage to Omaha to meet him, he got in his steel-blue Lincoln Town Car and drove the 1.5 miles through downtown and out to the airport to pick himor her up personally. People were startled and charmed by the unaffected gesture, although he soon scraped their nerves raw by barely noticing stop signs, traffic lights, or other cars, weavingaround the road while talkinganimatedly. He rationalized his 
distractedness by sayingthat he drove so slowly that, if he had an accident, the damage would be light.8 
He always gave a tour of his office, showingoff his totems, the memorabilia that told the story of his business life. Then he sat, leaningforward in a chair, hands clasped and eyebrows raised sympathetically as he listened to the visitor¡¯s questions and requests. To each of them Buffett offered off-the-cuff wit, quick decisions on business proposals, and warm advice. As they left, he might surprise a famous politician or the CEO of some huge company by droppingin for lunch at McDonald¡¯s before ferryinghim back to the airport. 
In between the reading, the research, and the occasional meetings, the phone rangallday long. First-time callers punchingin Buffett¡¯s number were shocked to hear a hearty ¡°Hello!¡± and often stumbled in confusion when they realized that he answered his own phone. His secretary, the amiable Debbie Bosanek, trotted in and out of his office with messages from the overflow calls. On his credenza, another phone rangfromtime to time. He took these calls instantly, for they were from his trader. ¡°Yello¡­mmmhmm¡­yep¡­how much¡­mmmhmm¡­go ahead,¡± he would say, and hangup. Then he turned back to the other calls, or to his readingor CNBC, before leavingpromptly at five-thirty p.m. for home. 
The woman waitingfor himthere was not his wife. He was perfectly open about Astrid Menks, with whom he had lived in an unusual triangular arrangement since 1978. Susie Buffett approved of, and in fact had arranged the relationship; yet he and Susie both made a great point of sayinghow very married they were, their routine as a couple as scheduled and orchestrated as everythingelse in Buffett¡¯s life. Allthe while, he 
offered no more explanation in public than ¡°If you knew everybody well, you¡¯d understand it quite well.¡±9 While this was true in its way, it did not help the curious, since almost nobody knew both Susie and Astrid well, or, for that matter, Buffett himself. He kept these relationships separate, as he kept many of his relationships separate. By allappearances, however, Astrid and Susie were friends. 
Most nights, Buffett ate dinner¡ªsomethinglike a hamburger or pork chop¡ªat home with Astrid. After a couple of hours he turned his attention to his nightly bridge game on the Internet, to which he devoted about twelve hours a week. While he tapped away, glued to the screen with the background noise of the TV, Astrid mostly left himto his game, except when occasionally he said, ¡°Astrid, get me a Coke!¡± Afterward, he usually talked to Sharon Osberg, his bridge partner and a close confidante, for a while on the phone as Astrid puttered around the house untilten, when Buffett had his nightly conference callwith Ajit Jain, who ran his reinsurance business. Meanwhile, Astrid went to the market and picked up the early edition of the next day¡¯s newspaper. While he read it, she went to bed. And that, it seemed, was the simple, ordinary life of a megabillionaire. 
4 
Warren,What¡¯sWrong? 
Omaha and Atlanta . August¨CDecember 1999 
Nearly all of Buffett¡¯s $30 billion plus¡ªninety-nine percent¡ªwas invested in the stock of Berkshire Hathaway. He had spoken at Sun Valley about how the market¡¯s weighingmachine was more important than its votingmachine. But it was the votingmachine¡¯s opinion of his stock price that set the altitude from which he preached. People paid attention to himbecause he was rich. So when he predicted that the market could 
disappoint investors for seventeen years, 1 he was standingon the edge of a cliff, and he knew it. If he was wrong, not only would he be the laughingstock of Sun Valley; in the record books of the world¡¯s wealthiest men, his personal rank might drop. And Buffett paid close attention to that rank. 
Through the late 1990s, BRK (Berkshire Hathaway¡¯s stock symbol) had boosted his profile by outpacingthe market, until it peaked at $80,900 per share in June 1998. That a single share of Berkshire stock cost enough to buy a smallcondo was unique amongAmerican businesses. To Buffett, the stock price represented an uncomplicated measure of his success. It had grown in an ascendingline since the day he first bought BRK for $7.50 a share. Even though the market had rocked through the late 1990s, until1999 an investor who bought BRK and held on to it would have been better off. 

But now, Buffett found himself standingon the sinkingplatform of an unloved stock, watchingthe ¡°T&T¡±(tech and telecommunications) stocks ascend. By August 1999, BRK had slumped to $65,000. How much should someone pay for a large, established business that returned $400 million to themin profits every year?How much for a small, new business that was losingmoney? 
. 
Toys ¡°R¡± Us was earning$400 million a year and had sales of $11 billion. 

. 
eToys was losing$123 million a year and had sales of $100 million. 


The market¡¯s votingmachine said that eToys was worth $4.9 billion, and Toys ¡°R¡± Us was worth about a billion less than that. The presumption was that eToys was goingto crush Toys ¡°R¡± Us through the Internet.3 
The one cloud of doubt that hungover the market concerned the calendar. Experts were predictingthat disaster might strike at midnight, December 31, 1999, because the world¡¯s computers were not programmed to handle dates beginningwith a ¡°2.¡± Fearingpanic, the FederalReserve began to increase the supply of money rapidly to prevent cash shortages in case allthe country¡¯s ATMs froze at once. Thus turbocharged, shortly after Sun Valley the market had spiraled upward like a Fourth of July firecracker. If you had invested a dollar in January in the NASDAQ, an index full of technology stocks, your bet was now worth a buck twenty-five. The same bet in BRK was worth only eighty cents. By December, the Dow Jones Industrial Average closed the year up twenty-five percent. The NASDAQ blasted through the 4,000-point level, up an incredible eighty-six percent. BRK fell to $56,100. In just a few months BRK¡¯s lead for the past five years had been tsunamied. 
For more than a year, financialpundits had made sport of Buffett, a has-been, an emblemof the past. Now, on the eve of the millennium, Barron¡¯s, a weekly must-read on Wall Street, put Buffett on its cover with the headline ¡°Warren, What¡¯s Wrong?¡± The accompanyingarticle said Berkshire had ¡°stumbled¡± badly. He was runninga Pamplona of negative press like nothinghe had ever experienced. ¡°I know it¡¯s goingto change,¡± he 
repeated over and over, ¡°I just don¡¯t know when.¡±4 His shrillingnerves were urginghimto fight back. Instead, he did nothing. He did not respond. 
Near the end of 1999, even many longtime ¡°value investors¡± who followed Buffett¡¯s style had either shuttered their businesses or given in and bought technology stocks. Buffett did not. What he called his Inner Scorecard¡ªa toughness about financialdecisions that had infused him for as longas anyone could remember¡ªkept himfromwavering. 
¡°I feel like I¡¯m on my back, and there¡¯s the Sistine Chapel, and I¡¯m painting away. I like it when people say, ¡®Gee, that¡¯s a pretty good-looking painting.¡¯ But it¡¯s my painting, and when somebody says, ¡®Why don¡¯t you use more red instead of blue?¡¯ Good-bye. It¡¯s my painting. And I don¡¯t care what they sell it for. The 
5
painting itself will never be finished. That¡¯s one of the great things about it. 
¡°The big question about how people behave is whether they¡¯ve got an Inner Scorecard or an Outer Scorecard. It helps if you can be satisfied with an Inner Scorecard. I always pose it this way. I say: ¡®Lookit. Would you rather be the world¡¯s greatest lover, but have everyone think you¡¯re the world¡¯s worst lover? Or would you rather be the world¡¯s worst lover but have everyone think you¡¯re the world¡¯s greatest lover?¡¯ Now, that¡¯s an interesting question. 
¡°Here¡¯s another one. If the world couldn¡¯t see your results, would you rather be thought of as the world¡¯s greatest investor but in reality have the world¡¯s worst record? Or be thought of as the world¡¯s worst investor when you were actually the best? 
¡°In teaching your kids, I think the lesson they¡¯re learning at a very, very early age is what their parents put the emphasis on. If all the emphasis is on what the world¡¯s going to think about you, forgetting about how you really behave, you¡¯ll wind up with an Outer Scorecard. Now my dad: He was a hundred percent Inner Scorecard guy. 
¡°He was really a maverick. But he wasn¡¯t a maverick for the sake of being a maverick. He just didn¡¯t care what other people thought. My dad taught me how life should be lived. I¡¯ve never seen anybody quite like him.¡± 
PARTTWO 
TheInnerScorecard 

5 
TheUrgetoPreach 
Nebraska . 1869¨C1928 
John Buffett, the first known Buffett in the New World, was a serge weaver believed to be of French Huguenot descent. He fled to America in the seventeenth century to escape religious persecution and settled in Huntington, LongIsland as a farmer. 
Little else is known of the earliest Buffetts in the United States, except that they were farmers.1 It is clear, 
however, that Warren Buffett¡¯s urge to preach is part of a family legacy. An early example was one of John Buffett¡¯s sons, 2 remembered for sailingnorth across the LongIsland Sound to a coastalsettlement in Connecticut, where he climbed a hill and commenced to preach religion to the heathens. But it is doubtful that the outcasts, scofflaws, and unbelievers of Greenwich repented on hearinghis words, since history records that lightningpromptly struck himdown. 
Severalgenerations later, Zebulon Buffett, a farmer in Dix Hills, LongIsland, left his trace on the family tree as the first recorded exemplar of another Buffett trait¡ªtreatingone¡¯s own relatives with extreme tightfistedness¡ªwhen his grandson, Sidney Homan Buffett, quit his job workingon Zebulon¡¯s farmin disgust over the insultingly low pay. 
A gangly teenager, Sidney went west to Omaha, Nebraska, to join his maternalgrandfather George Homan in 
his livery-stable business.3 The year was 1867; Omaha a settlement consistingmainly of a collection of wooden shacks. Since its days as a trail-outfittingcenter for westbound prospectors duringthe Gold Rush, Omaha supplied the staples to pioneers¡ªgambling, women, and booze.4 But with the end of the Civil War, it 
was about to be transformed. A grand transcontinental railroad would link the coasts of the newly reunited states for the first time, and AbrahamLincoln himself decreed that Omaha would be the railroad¡¯s headquarters. The comingof the Union Pacific filled the town with a bustlingcommercialspirit, as well as a 
sense of destiny. Nonetheless, the place retained its reputation as the Sodomof a pious state,5 and a well-known ¡°rogue¡¯s rookery.¡± 
After workingat the livery stable, Sidney left to open the first grocery store in a town with no paved streets. 
In this respectable but modest business, he sold fruit, vegetables, and game until eleven every night: prairie chickens for a quarter, jackrabbits for a dime.6 His grandfather Zebulon feared for Sidney¡¯s prospects and pelted himwith letters containingadvice, allrules that¡ªwith one significant exception¡ªhis descendents still heed. 
¡°Try to be punctual in all your dealings. You will find it difficult to get alongwith some men, deal as little as possible with such¡­. Save your credit, for that is better than money¡­. If you go on in business, be content with moderate gains. Don¡¯t be too hasty to get too rich¡­. I want you to live so as to be fit to live and fit to 
die.¡± 7 
Content with moderate gains in an upward-scrambling, freewheelingplace, Sidney gradually built the store into a success. 8 He married Evelyn Ketchum and they had six children, severalof whom died young. Two sons, Ernest and Frank, were amongthe survivors.9 
It has been said, ¡°No man was ever better named than Ernest Buffett.¡±10 Born in 1877, he ended his formal 
schoolingin the eighth grade, and joined his father behind the counter duringthe Panic of 1893. Far more eccentric than his businesslike brother, Frank Buffett became a large, stove-bellied man, the heathen among the Puritans of the family, who even enjoyed the occasional drink. 
One day, a stunningyoungwoman appeared at the store lookingfor a job. Her name was Henrietta Duvall, and she had traveled to Omaha to escape an unfriendly stepmother.11 Frank and Ernest were both immediately smitten, but it was the more handsome Ernest who won Henrietta as his wife in 1898. Ernest and Henrietta¡¯s first child, Clarence, was born within a year of their marriage, followed by three more sons and a daughter. Shortly after the quarrel, Ernest went into a partnership with his father, Sidney; eventually he left to set up another grocery store. Frank remained single for most of his life, and for the next twenty-five years, as longas Henrietta lived, he and Ernest apparently never spoke. 
Ernest set about becominga pillar of the town. At his new store, the ¡°hours were long, pay low, opinions cast 
in iron, and foolishness zero.¡±12 Always dressed in a dapper suit, he scowled fromhis desk on the mezzanine to stop his employees fromidling, and penned letters demandingthat suppliers ¡°kindly speed up the celery.¡±13 He charmed his lady customers, but never hesitated to judge and carried a little black notebook to 
write down the names of people who irritated him¡ªDemocrats, and people who didn¡¯t pay their grocery bills.14 Ernest was sure that the world needed his opinion and traveled to conferences around the country to bemoan the sorry state of the nation with like-minded businessmen.15 ¡°Self-doubt was not his strong suit. He 
always spoke in exclamation points and expected you to acknowledge that he knew best,¡± says Buffett. 
In a letter to his son and daughter-in-law advisingthem to always have some ready cash, he described the Buffetts as bourgeois incarnate: 
¡°I might mention that there has never been a Buffett who ever left a very large estate, but there has never been one that did not leave something. They never spent allthey made, but always saved part of what they made, and it has all worked out pretty well.¡±16 
¡°Spend less than you make¡± could, in fact, have been the Buffett family motto, if accompanied by its corollary, ¡°Don¡¯t go into debt.¡± 
Henrietta, also of French Huguenot extraction, was as thrifty, iron-willed, and teetotalingas her husband. A devout Campbellite,*4 she too felt the callto preach. While Ernest was at the store, she would harness the horses to the family¡¯s fringed surrey and gather her children to drive out into the countryside, where she knocked on farmhouse doors to hand out tracts. Her temperament did nothingto lighten the Buffett family tendencies. In fact, by some accounts, Henrietta was the preachingest of all the preachingBuffetts who had ever lived. 
The Buffetts were tradespeople, not members of the merchant or professional class, but as pioneer settlers of Omaha, they were exceedingly conscious of their place. Henrietta¡¯s hope was that her four sons and daughter would become the first in the family to graduate from college. To pay for their schooling, she pared her household budget¡ªmore than was strictly necessary, it is said, even by Buffett standards. Allthe boys toiled at the family store when they were young. Then Clarence began a career in the oil business, with a graduate 
degree in geology.17 George, her second, got a PhD in chemistry and wound up on the East Coast. Her three youngest, Howard, Fred, and Alice, all graduated from the University of Nebraska. Fred took up duties at the family store, and Alice became a home-economics teacher. 
Howard, the third son and Warren¡¯s father, was born in 1903. He had unhappy memories of feelinglike an outsider duringhis years at Central High School in the early 1920s. Omaha was run by a handfulof families who owned the stockyards, banks, department stores, and had inherited fortunes from the breweries now closed under Prohibition. ¡°My clothes were pretty much hand-me-downs from my two older brothers,¡± he said, ¡°and I was a paperboy and the son of a grocery man. So the high school fraternities didn¡¯t look my way, and I was just one of the boys fromwhat approximated outside of the tracks.¡± He felt these snubs keenly; 
they marked himwith a deep revulsion toward rank and privilege acquired by birth.18 
At the University of Nebraska, Howard majored in journalism and worked at the college newspaper, the Daily Nebraskan, where he was able to combine the outsider¡¯s love of reportingon the activities of the powerful with the family fascination with politics. It would not be longbefore he met Leila Stahl, a girlwhose background mingled the same interest in newspapers with self-consciousness about socialclass. 
Leila¡¯s father, John Stahl, a sweet little dumplingof a man of good German-American descent, had traveled 
CumingCounty, Nebraska, in a horse and buggy with a buffalo robe on his lap as superintendent of schools.19 The family history says he adored his wife, Stella, who gave him three daughters¡ªEdith, Leila, and Bernice¡ªand one son, Marion. Of English descent, Stella was unhappy livingin West Point, Nebraska, a town of German-American hausfraus, where she never felt at ease. It is said that she consoled herself by playingthe pipe organ. In 1909, Stella suffered a mental breakdown. This must have seemed an ominous recurrence of family history, for her mother, Susan Barber, who was described as ¡°maniacal,¡± had been an inmate of the Nebraska State Insane Asylum, where she died in 1899. After an incident in which, according to family lore, Stella went after Edie with the fireplace poker, John Stahlgave up his travelingjob to care for their children. Increasingly, Stella retreated to her darkened room, where she sat twistingher hair, apparently depressed. This isolation was punctuated by occasionalepisodes of cruelbehavior toward her husband and 
the girls.20 Stahl, realizingthat he could not leave the children alone with their mother, bought a newspaper, the Cuming County Democrat, so he could make a livingworkingfromhome. Fromthe time Leila was five, she and her sisters essentially ran the household and helped their father put out the paper. She learned to spell by settingtype. ¡°When I was in the fourth grade,¡± she recounted, ¡°we had to come home fromschool and set type before we could go out and play.¡± By age eleven she could run a jackhammer of a Linotype press, and every Friday she missed schoolbecause of the headaches she suffered after havingto get out the paper on Thursday night. Livingabove the business in a house infested by mice, the family pinned alltheir hopes for the future on Marion, the brilliant brother who was studyingto be a lawyer. 
DuringWorld War I the Stahls¡¯ difficulties grew. When the Cuming County Democrat came out against Germany in a German-American town, half their subscribers dropped the paper and switched to the West Point Republican¡ª a financialcatastrophe. John Stahlhimself was an ardent supporter of the Democratic political giant WilliamJennings Bryan. At the turn of the century, Bryan had been one of the most important politicians of his era, nearly becomingPresident of the United States. In his heyday, he stood for a kind of ¡°populism¡± that he set forth in his most famous speech: 
¡°There are two ideas of government. There are those who believe that if you just legislate to make the well-to-do prosperous, that their prosperity will leak through on those below. The Democratic idea has been that if you legislate to make the masses prosperous their prosperity will find its way up and through every 
class that rests upon it.¡±21 
The Stahls viewed themselves as part of the masses, the class that the rest rested upon. Their ability to bear that load was not increasing. By 1918, Leila¡¯s sixteen-year-old sister Bernice¡ªconsidered the dullard of the sisters, with a tested IQ of 139¡ªhad apparently begun to give up on life. She was convinced she would end up mentally illlike her grandmother and mother, and die like her grandmother in the Nebraska State Insane 
Asylum.22 Duringthis time, Leila¡¯s educational schedule suggests a chaotic home life. She delayed goingto 
college for two years to help her father. After a single semester at the University of Nebraska in Lincoln, she returned home for another year to help out again.23 Energetic and considered the brightest of the girls, Leila later portrayed this episode in a different light, describingher family as perfect and sayingthat she stayed out of college three years to earn her tuition. 
When she arrived at Lincoln in 1923, she had one clear and acknowledged ambition, which was to find a husband. She headed straight to the college newspaper and asked for a job.24 A small-boned girlwith a soft brown bob who bustled like the robin of spring, Leila wore a charmingsmile that softened the expression in her arrowhead-sharp eyes. Howard Buffett, who had started at the Daily Nebraskan as a sportswriter before risingto editor, hired her straightaway. 
Good-lookingin a dark-haired, professorish way, Howard was one of only thirteen in the entire student body 
who had been ¡°tackled¡± for the Innocents, a society of outstandingmen on campus modeled after the 
honorary societies of Harvard and Yale. Named for the thirteen Popes Innocent of Rome, the Innocents declared themselves champions against evil. They also sponsored the prom and Homecoming.25 Presented with such a bigman on campus, Leila grabbed himinstantly. 
¡°Well, I don¡¯t know whether she worked very much on the Daily Nebraskan,¡± Howard said later, ¡°but she sure worked on me. I¡¯ve never regretted it¡ªdon¡¯t make any mistake about it¡ªit¡¯s the best dealI ever made.¡±26 But Leila was a good student with a head for mathematics, so when she announced plans to drop out of college and marry, her calculus professor reportedly slammed down the textbook in dismay.27 
Howard, who was about to graduate, went to his father to discuss his choice of career. He had no real interest in money but, at Ernest¡¯s insistence, gave up the high-minded, low-payingbusiness of journalism and the possibility of law school in favor of sellinginsurance.28 
The newlyweds moved into a tiny white four-roombungalow in Omaha, which Ernest filled with groceries as their weddinggift. Leila furnished it top to bottom for $366¡ªitems bought, she noted, at ¡°sort of wholesale prices.¡±29 From that day forward she channeled her energy, ambition, and talent for math¡ªwhich by all accounts exceeded her husband¡¯s¡ªinto boostingHoward¡¯s career. 30 
In early 1928, the Buffetts¡¯ first child, Doris Eleanor, was born.31 Later that year, Leila¡¯s sister Bernice suffered a mental breakdown and quit her teachingjob. But Leila seemed free of the moody listlessness that oppressed her mother and sister. A whirlwind of energy, she could talk nonstop for hours (although she litanied the same stories). Howard called her the ¡°Cyclone.¡± 
As the Buffetts settled into the life of a youngmarried couple, Leila got Howard to join her own First Christian Church, and noted proudly in her ¡°day book¡± when he was made a deacon.32 Stillavidly interested in politics, Howard began to show signs of the family urge to preach. But when he and Ernest turned the dinner table into a forumfor endless discussions of the subject, Howard¡¯s brother Fred was so bored that he would lie down on the floor and go to sleep. 
Leila had converted to her new husband¡¯s politics, however, and was now an enthusiastic Republican. The 
Buffetts applauded Calvin Coolidge, the man who proclaimed ¡°The chief business of the American people is business,¡±33 and shared his belief in smallgovernment with minimalregulation. Coolidge had lowered taxes and granted citizenship to American Indians, but mostly he shut up and stayed out of the way. In 1928, his Vice President, Herbert Hoover, was elected as his successor, vowingto continue pro-business policies. The stock market had prospered under Coolidge, and the Buffetts felt Hoover was the man to keep it going. 
*** 
¡°When I was a kid,¡± Warren would later say, ¡°I got all kinds of good things. I had the advantage of a home where people talked about interesting things, and I had intelligent parents and I went to decent schools. I don¡¯t think I could have been raised with a better pair of parents. That was enormously important. I didn¡¯t get money from my parents, and I really didn¡¯t want it. But I was born at the right time and place. I won the ¡®Ovarian Lottery.¡¯¡± 
Buffett always credited most of his success to luck. When it came to his recollections of his family, however, he was creatingsome of his own reality. Few would agree he couldn¡¯t have been raised with a better set of parents. When he talked about how important it is for parents to have an Inner Scorecard when raisingtheir kids, he always used his father¡¯s Inner Scorecard as an example. He never mentioned his mother. 
6 
TheBathtubSteeplechase 
Omaha . 1930s 
In the 1920s, the champagne bubbles of a frothy stock market led ordinary people to invest for the first 
time.1 By 1927, Howard Buffett decided to join them and got a job as a stockbroker with the Union State Bank. 
The celebration ended two years later. On ¡°Black Tuesday,¡± October 29, 1929, the market dropped $14 billion in a single day.2 Wealth worth four times the budget of the United States government evaporated in a few hours.3 The market¡¯s losses in 1929 cost $30 billion, close to what the country had spent fightingWorld War I.4 
Amid the bankruptcies and suicides that followed, people began to hoard money, and nobody wanted stocks. 
¡°It was four months before my dad made his next sale. His first commission was five bucks. My mother used to go out with him at night on the streetcar, waiting outside when he would call on somebody, just so he wouldn¡¯t feel so depressed when he came home.¡± 
Ten months after the crash, on August 30, 1930, the Buffetts¡¯ second child, Warren Edward, was born, five weeks before his due date. 
An anxious Howard went to see his father, hopingto be hired on at the family grocery store. Allthe Buffetts, even those with other jobs, put in a stint at the store every week, but only his brother Fred worked there full-time, and that for meager pay. Now, Ernest told Howard that he had no money to pay another son. 5 
In one sense, Howard felt relief. He¡¯d ¡°escaped¡± from workingat the store and never wanted to go back.6 But he worried that his family would starve. ¡°Don¡¯t worry about food, Howard,¡± Ernest told him. ¡°I¡¯lljust let your bill run.¡± 
¡°That was my grandfather,¡± Warren says. ¡°¡®I¡¯ll just let the bill run.¡¯¡± It wasn¡¯t that Ernest didn¡¯t love his family, ¡°you just wished he showed it a little more often.¡± 
¡°I guess you¡¯d better go back on home to West Point,¡± Howard told his wife. ¡°At least you¡¯ll have three meals a day.¡± But Leila stayed. She walked to Robert¡¯s Dairy to pay the bill rather than pay a streetcar fare. She started skippingher church circle because she couldn¡¯t afford the twenty-nine cents for her turn at 
bringingcoffee.7 Rather than run up a tab at the family store, she sometimes went without to make sure Howard was fed.8 
One Saturday, two weeks before Warren¡¯s first birthday, people stood on line downtown, drippingwith sweat in the hundred-degree heat, waitingto reclaimtheir cash from the shaky custody of the local banks. They shuffled forward from early morninguntilten p.m. and counted and recounted the people ahead in line, 
silently repeatinga financial rosary:Please, God, let there be money left when it¡¯s my turn.9 
Not every prayer was heard. Four state banks closed their doors that month, leavingtheir depositors unpaid. One of them was Howard Buffett¡¯s employer, the Union State Bank.10 Warren repeats the family legend: 
¡°On August 15, 1931, he went down to the bank. It was two days after his birthday, and the bank was closed. 
11 
He had no job, and his money was in the bank. He had two little kids to feed. He didn¡¯t know what to do. There was not another job to find.¡± 
But within two weeks Howard and two partners, Carl Falk and George Sklenicka, filed the papers to start a stockbrokerage firm, Buffett, Sklenicka & Co.12 It was a maverick decision¡ªto open a stockbroking business at a time when no one wanted to buy stocks. 
Three weeks later, England went off the ¡°gold standard.¡±*5 This meant that, to avoid bankruptcy, the country ¡ªwhich was deep in debt¡ªwould simply print more money to pay off its loans. This is a neat trick that only a government can pulloff. It was as if the country with the most widely trusted and accepted currency of the age announced: ¡°We are goingto write bad checks, and you can take them or else.¡± The announcement instantly exploded trust in formerly gilt-edged institutions. Allover the world, financial markets plunged. 
The already sputteringUnited States economy coughed, then stalled, then plummeted into free fall. A rush of 
banks was sucked into its trailingvacuumand collapsed. In city after city, depositors fought their way to the teller¡¯s window and were turned away. 13 But in the middle of this maelstrom, Howard¡¯s business was succeeding. His clients at first were mostly family friends. He sold themsafe securities like utility stocks and municipalbonds. In the firm¡¯s first month of operation, as financial panic spread around the world, he 
produced $400 of commissions and the firmwas profitable.14 Through the ensuingmonths, even as people¡¯s savings evaporated and faith in banks disappeared, Howard stuck to the same kind of conservative investments that had gotten him started, steadily addingcustomers and growinghis business.15 
The family¡¯s fortunes had turned around. Then, shortly before Warren¡¯s second birthday, twenty-month-old Charles Lindbergh Jr. was kidnapped and murdered in March 1932. The snatchingof the ¡°Lone Eagle¡¯s¡± baby was ¡°the biggest story since the Resurrection,¡± accordingto pundit H. L. Mencken. The country flew into a kidnappingparanoia in which parents conveyed their terror of abduction to their children, the Buffetts 
beingno exception.16 Around then, Howard suffered some kind of attack serious enough for Leila to callan ambulance. The Mayo Clinic eventually diagnosed himwith a heart condition.17 From that time on, he lived with restrictions: He wasn¡¯t supposed to lift things, run, swim. Leila, whose life now revolved entirely around Howard, the Prince Charmingwho had rescued her from the miserable fate of runninga Linotype press, must have been terrified at the thought of anythinghappeningto him. 
Warren was already a cautious child, who had kept his knees bent and stayed close to the ground when he learned to walk. Now, when his mother took himto her church circle meetings, he was content to sit placidly at her feet. She diverted himwith an improvised toy¡ªa toothbrush. Warren gazed quietly at the toothbrush 
for two hours at a stretch.18 What could he have been thinkingas he stared at its columns and rows of bristles? 
That November, with the country in crisis, Franklin Delano Roosevelt was elected President. Howard was 
certain this man of privilege who knew nothingof the common people would pollute the country¡¯s currency and drive it to ruination.19 He stuck a bigsack of sugar in the attic to prepare for the worst. By this time, Howard looked like a boyish Clark Kent in a business suit, nearsighted behind his wire-rimmed glasses, with recedingdark hair, an earnest smile, and a genialmanner. But he turned thunderous when it came to politics, reviewingthe news of the day at top volume over dinner. Doris and Warren probably had no idea what Howard meant as he ranted about the horrors that would befall the country now that a Democrat occupied the White House. But terms like ¡°socialism¡± started to embed themselves in the children¡¯s minds. After dinner, they watched their awe-inspiringfather retire to his red leather armchair in the livingroomnext to the radio and disappear for hours behind his nightly newspaper and magazines. 
Politics, money, and philosophy were acceptable topics for dinner-table discussion at the Buffett house, but feelings were not.20 Even in an era of undemonstrative parents, Howard and Leila were notable for their lack of warmth. Nobody in the Buffett household said ¡°I love you,¡± and nobody tucked the children into bed with a kiss. 
But to everyone outside the family, Leila appeared the perfect mother and wife. People called her peppy, 
upbeat, motherly, sweet, even ¡°a gusher.¡±21 In repeatingher history, as she was fond of doing, she painted out the awkward bits, describingherself as a fortunate person brought up by wonderfulChristian parents. Her favorite stories told of her and Howard¡¯s sacrifices¡ªthe three years of school she had missed to earn her college money, the four months Howard had gone without makinga sale when he first started his business, walkingto the dairy to save streetcar fare. Leila referred often to bouts of ¡°neuralgia¡± (sometimes mistaken 
for migraines), which she attributed to the childhood years spent alongside the poundingLinotype.22 Nevertheless, she acted as though she must do everythingand drove herself hard¡ªbridge teas and steak fries, birthdays and anniversaries, callingon neighbors and cookingfor church suppers. She paid more visits, baked more cookies, and wrote more notes than anyone. When pregnant, she once cooked dinner by herself 
for the family while tryingto quell her morningsickness by smellinga bar of soap. 23 Above all her attitude was: anythingfor Howard. ¡°She crucified herself,¡± said her sister-in-law Katie Buffett.24 
But Leila¡¯s attitude of duty and sacrifice had another, darker, side: blame and shame. After Howard left on the streetcar for work in the morning, Doris and Warren would be playingor gettingdressed and suddenly Leila might explode at them. Somethingin the tone of her voice might give a clue that the fuse was lit, but most of the time there was no warning. 
¡°It was always something that we did or said, and there would be this flash, and then it didn¡¯t subside. All your past sins would be brought up. It was just endless. And my mother attributed it sometimes to having neuralgia, but she never showed that outwardly.¡± 
When in a rage, Leila would verbally lash the children over and over again, always the same: their lives were easy compared to her sacrifices; that they were worthless, ungrateful, and selfish; and should feel ashamed. She would pick at every real and imagined flaw; she nearly always aimed the tirade at Doris, and carried on sayingthe same things for at least an hour, sometimes as longas two. She never stopped until both children ¡°just folded,¡± says Warren, weepinghelplessly. ¡°She was not content untilshe reduced you to tears,¡± says Doris. Warren was forced to watch her explosions, unable to protect his sister and desperate to avoid being targeted himself. While it was apparent that her attacks were deliberate and she had some degree of control over them, it isn¡¯t at all clear how she perceived her behavior as a parent. But no matter what she thought she was doing, by the time Warren was three years old and their sister Roberta, known as Bertie, was born, ¡°it couldn¡¯t be put back together,¡± he says, for himor for Doris. The damage to their souls was done. 
The children never asked for help fromtheir father, even though they knew that he was aware of Leila¡¯s eruptions. Howard might say to them, ¡°Mom¡¯s on the warpath,¡± a tipoff that a rage was coming, but he didn¡¯t intervene. Usually, however, Leila¡¯s explosions took place out of Howard¡¯s earshot, and they were never aimed at him. In a sense, therefore, he was the children¡¯s protector. Even though he did not save them, Howard still meant security, because when he was around, they were safe. 
*** 
Outside the tidy white bungalow on Barker Avenue, Nebraska was slidinginto lawlessness. Bootlegging flourished in Omaha until Warren was three years old.25 Out in the countryside, farmers faced with foreclosure on mortgages backed by nearly worthless farmland rose up in civil disobedience.26 Five thousand 
farmers marched on the state capitol in Lincoln untilpanicked lawmakers hastily passed a mortgage moratoriumbill.27 
As the cold winds scoured the parched western sand hills in November of 1933, they kicked up vast swirls of topsoil in toweringblack clouds that swept eastward as far as New York City at a clipper speed of sixty miles per hour. The gale shattered plate-glass windows and blasted cars off the road in its wake. The New York 
Times compared it to the volcanic eruption of Krakatoa. The dust-storm years had begun.28 
In the middle of the worst drought of the twentieth century, Midwesterners took refuge in their homes as grit 
sandblasted the paint and pitted the glass on their automobiles. Leila swept red dust off the porch every morning. On Warren¡¯s fourth birthday, a cloud of ruddy dust buried the Buffetts¡¯ front porch and the wind blew the paper plates and napkins off the party table.29 
Alongwith the dust came years of extraordinary heat. In summertime 1934 the thermometer in Omaha hit 
118 degrees. After searchingfor days, a Nebraska farmer found his cow down a crack in a remote stubble field, trapped when the parched earth split apart.30 Plainsmen told talltales about someone who fainted dead away when hit in the face by a drop of water and had to be revived with three buckets of sand. People slept in their backyards, camped on the grounds of CentralHigh School, and on the grassy lawn of Omaha¡¯s Joslyn Art Museum, so as not to roast in the ovens of their own homes. Warren tried in vain to sleep covered in bedsheets soaked with water, but nothingcould coolthe baked air that steamed up to his second-story room. 
With the record drought and heat of 1934,31 millions of grasshoppers arrived to devour the parched corn and wheat down to stubble.32 Leila¡¯s father, John Stahl, suffered a stroke that year, and while visitinghis 
grandfather in West Point, Warren could hear the background drone of the ravenous hoppers. At their worst, they consumed fence posts, the laundry on the clothesline, and finally one another, gummingup tractor engines and cloudingthe air, thick enough to obscure a car. 33 
In truth, the early 1930s brought many other things to fear than fear itself.34 The economy worsened. 
Imitators of the era¡¯s most notorious gangsters¡ªAl Capone, John Dillinger, and Baby Face Nelson¡ªroamed the Midwest, pillagingthe already vulnerable banks.35 Parents worried about the dust-bowldrifters and gypsies who passed through town. Occasional ¡°mad dog¡± rabies scares quarantined children at home. The public swimmingpools closed in the dogdays of summer out of fear of ¡°infantile paralysis¡±¡ªpolio¡ªand parents warned their children constantly that if their lips touched the public water fountain, it could put them 
in an iron lung.36 
Yet Nebraskans were trained frombirth to respond to calamity with teeth-gritted optimism. Those years of dust and drought simply formed the backdrop to Midwestern life. The children grew up accustomed to outlandish weather in a state plagued with tornadoes and winds strongenough to blow a train fromits 
tracks.37 
The three little Buffetts went to school, played with friends, and ran around with a dozen kids in hundred-degree weather at neighborhood potluck picnics, their fathers in suits and their mothers in dresses and stockings. 
Many of their neighbors may have suffered, their standard of livingin decline, but Howard, son of a grocery man, had elevated his family into the more comfortable half of the middle class. ¡°We made steady progress even in those tough times,¡± he was to recall, ¡°in an extremely modest sort of way.¡± He was beingmodest about the family¡¯s modesty. While fifty men stood in line for a $17-a-week job drivingthe orange Buffett & Son grocery trucks, Howard¡¯s persistence in knockingon doors had made his stockbrokingbusiness, now 
called Buffett & Co., a success. 38 Omaha was briefly under martial law duringviolent streetcar strikes and riotingin 1935, but Howard bought a brand-new Buick. He became active in local Republican politics. At age seven Doris, who had always worshipped her father, contemplated his future biography and wrote in the front 
of one of her notebooks, Howard Buffett, A Statesman.39 A year later, stillin the shadow of the Great Depression, Howard built the family a much larger two-story red-brick Tudor-revivalhouse in Dundee, a suburb of Omaha.40 
As the family prepared to move, Leila got word that her brother, Marion, now a successful lawyer in New York, had been stricken with incurable cancer at age thirty-seven. ¡°My uncle Marion was the pride and joy of my mother¡¯s family,¡± says Buffett, as well as their principal hope to carry on the family name, unsullied by 
insanity.41 His death that November, childless, devastated his family. The next piece of bad news arrived when Leila¡¯s father, John Stahl, suffered another stroke that year, this one debilitating. Her sister Bernice, who cared for himat home, seemed increasingly sunk in depression. Her other sister, Edie, a schoolteacher, the prettiest and most adventurous of the girls, had vowed to stay single untileither her thirties or until 
Bernice wed, but Leila, sharp and aware, refused to be trapped by her family¡¯s woes. She was goingto make it, no matter what; she was goingto create a normal life with a normalfamily.42 She planned the move and bought new furniture. In a major step up in the world, Leila could afford to hire a part-time housekeeper, EthelCrump. 
Now a more experienced mother of a more prosperous family, Leila formed a much healthier relationship with her youngest child, Bertie, as the intervals between her rages lessened. Bertie knew her mother had a temper but says she always felt loved. Warren and Doris never did. And Leila¡¯s obvious affection for Bertie 
did not help their sense of worthlessness.43 
In November 1936, Roosevelt was reelected to a second term. Howard¡¯s only consolation was that FDR would be out in another four years. While he read his conservative journals each night, the children listened to the radio, played games, or sanghymns as Leila accompanied themon the family¡¯s latest acquisition¡ªa pipe organ like the one her own mother had played. 
While the Buffetts¡¯ new house and occasionalluxuries like the organ reflected their upward progress, Leila always bought her children thrifty, practical, forgettable gifts, clothingbought on sale that couldn¡¯t be returned, and necessities¡ªnothingthat answered a child¡¯s fantasies. Warren had a little single-oval HO-gauge train set and coveted a more elaborate version, the kind he saw at the Brandeis department store downtown, which had multiple engines twistingand turningpast flashinglights and signals, risingover snow-covered hills and droppinginto tunnels, racingpast tiny villages and disappearinginto pine forests. But the closest he came to owningit was buyingthe catalogthat depicted it. 
¡°If you were a little kid with one little oval track, looking at this thing, it was completely unbelievable. You¡¯d gladly pay a dime for the model-train catalog and just sit there and fantasize.¡± 
An introverted child, Warren could lose himself for hours in a model-train catalog. Sometimes, however, as a preschooler, he ¡°hid,¡± as he put it, at his friend Jack Frost¡¯s house, developinga babyish ¡°crush¡± on Jack¡¯s kindhearted mother, Hazel. As time passed, his habit grew of spendingmuch time at neighbors¡¯ and relatives¡¯ 
houses.44 His favorite relative was his father¡¯s sister Alice, a tall woman who had remained unmarried, lived at home with her father, and taught home economics. SurroundingWarren with warmth, she showed interest in everythinghe did and was thoughtfulabout how to motivate him. 
By the time Warren entered kindergarten,45 his hobbies and interests revolved around numbers. Around age six, he became fascinated by the precision of measuringtime in seconds, and desperately wanted a stopwatch. Alice knew better than to offer such an important gift with no strings. ¡°She was nuts about me,¡± Buffett says, ¡°but she still would attach a condition or two. I had to eat asparagus or something like that. That was what motivated me. But I got a stopwatch in the end.¡± 
Warren would pick up his stopwatch and summon his sisters to join himin the bathroomthey shared to watch the new game he had invented.46 He filled the bathtub with water and picked up his marbles. Each had a name. He lined themup on the flat edge at the back of the tub. Then he clicked the stopwatch just as he swept the marbles into the water. They raced down the porcelain slope, clickingand rattling, jumpingas they hit the waterline. The marbles chased each other toward the stopper. When the first one hit, Warren punched the stopwatch and declared the winner. His sisters watched himrace the marbles over and over, tryingto improve their times. The marbles never tired, the stopwatch never erred, and¡ªunlike his audience¡ªWarren never seemed bored by the repetition. 
Warren thought about numbers all the time and everywhere, even in church. He liked the sermons, he was bored by the rest of the service; he passed the time by calculatingthe life span of hymn composers from their birth and death dates in the hymnals. In his mind, the religious should reap some reward for their faith. He assumed that hymn composers would live longer than average. Livinglonger than average seemed to him an important goal. But piety, he found, did nothingto improve longevity. Lackingany personalsense of grace, he began to feelskeptical about religion. 
The bathtub steeplechase and the information he had collected about the hymn composers had taught him somethingelse, however, somethingvaluable. He was learningto calculate odds. Warren looked around him. There were opportunities to calculate odds everywhere. The key was to collect information, as much information as you could find. 
7 
ArmisticeDay 
Omaha . 1936¨C1939 
When Warren started first grade at Rosehill Schoolin 1936,1 he took to it right away. For one thing, it liberated himfromspendingpart of the day at home with his mother. Schoolopened up a whole new world for him, and right away he made two friends, Bob Russell and Stu Erickson. He and Bob, whomhe called ¡°Russ,¡± began walkingto school together, and on some days, he went over to the Russells¡¯ house after school. On other days, Stu, whose family lived in a modest frame house, went to the Buffetts¡¯ new brick home in the Happy Hollow country club neighborhood. Warren had somethingto do almost every day after school untilhis father returned from work. He had always gotten alongwith other children; now they kept him safe. 
He and Russ would sit on the Russells¡¯ porch for hours, watchingthe traffic on Military Avenue. Scribblingin notebooks, they filled column after column with the license-plate numbers of passingcars. Their families found this hobby strange but attributed it to the boys¡¯ love of numbers. They knew Warren liked to calculate the frequency of letters and numbers on license plates. And he and Russ never explained their real reason. The street in front of the Russells¡¯ house was the only route out of a cul-de-sac neighborhood where the Douglas County Bank was located. Warren had convinced Russ that if someday that bank were robbed, the cops could nab the robbers usinglicense-plate numbers. And only he and Russ would own the evidence that the cops would need to solve the crime. 
Warren liked anythingthat involved collecting, counting, and memorizingnumbers. He was already a keen stamp and coin collector. He counted how often letters recurred in the newspaper and in the Bible. He loved to read and spent many hours with books he checked out of the Benson Library. 
But it was the crime-fightingand the theatricalpotential of the license plates¡ªwhich his family and the Russells never knew about¡ªthat brought out other aspects of his temperament. He loved to play cop, and he liked almost anythingthat brought himattention, includingdressingup and playingat different roles. When Warren was a preschooler, Howard had returned frombusiness trips to New York City with costumes for him and Doris, and he became an Indian chief, a cowboy, or a policeman. Once he started school, he began comingup with dramatic ideas of his own. 
Warren¡¯s favorite games, however, were competitive, even if he was only competingwith himself. He progressed from the bathtub steeplechase to a yoyo, then to bolo, sendingthe bolo ball on its rubber string flyingaway fromhis wooden paddle a thousand times. On Saturday afternoons at the Benson Theater, in between movies¡ªthree films for a nickel, plus a serial¡ªhe stood on the stage with other kids, competingto see who could keep the ball goinglongest. In the end everyone else stepped down, exhausted, leavinghim alone onstage, stillsmackingthe ball. 
He even played out his competitiveness in his special, teasing, warmrelationship with Bertie. He called her ¡°chubby¡± because it made her mad and tricked her into singingat the dinner table, which was against the family rules. He played games with her constantly but never let her win, even though she was three years younger. But he had a tender side too. Once when Bertie stuffed her treasured Dy-Dee dollin a wastebasket 
in a fit of anger at her mother, Warren rescued it and returned it to her in the sunroom. ¡°I found this in the wastebasket,¡± he said. ¡°You wouldn¡¯t want this in the wastebasket, would you?¡±2 Even as a child, Bertie recognized that her brother knew how to be tactful. 
Bertie, on the other hand, was the self-confident, adventurous one, which Doris and Warren thought might explain why Leila rarely tore into her. Bertie had her own theory, seeingherself as someone who was able to keep up appearances in the way that their mother valued. 
What mattered most to Leila was the esteem of others; she had what Warren would later come to call an Outer Scorecard. She was always worryingabout what the neighbors would think, naggingher daughters to create the right appearance. ¡°I was so careful to do the right things. I didn¡¯t want it to happen to me,¡± Bertie says of Leila¡¯s tirades. 
Doris was the rebellious one. Early on, she displayed a refined sense of taste and a high threshold for excitement, which put her at odds with the Buffetts¡¯ sedate routines and cheeseparingways. The exotic, the stylish, and the novel attracted her, while her mother sheathed herself in a cloak of humility and preferred a self-conscious austerity to any kind of display. Thus Doris¡¯s very beingseemed an affront to her mother, and the two clashed constantly. Leila¡¯s occasionalrages were no less fierce than before. Doris had become a pretty child. And ¡°the prettier she got,¡± says Buffett, ¡°the worse it was.¡± 
Warren showed early signs of a knack with people, but was also the competitive, precocious child, 
intellectually aggressive yet physically retiring. When his parents got himboxinggloves at age eight, he took one lesson and never put themon again.3 He tried skating, but his ankles wobbled.4 He didn¡¯t join in the street games with the other boys, even though he loved sports and was well-coordinated. The only exception to his aversion to hand-to-hand combat was Ping-Pong. When the Buffetts got a Ping-Pongtable, he slammed away at it night and day against anyone who would take himon¡ªhis parents¡¯ friends, kids from school¡ªuntilhe became a menace with the paddle. On the single occasion anyone remembers that called for fists, however, little Bertie went out and took care of things for him. He cried easily if anyone was mean to him; he worked hard to be liked and to get alongwell with others. Yet despite Warren¡¯s cheerful demeanor, somethingabout him struck his friends as lonely. 
The Buffetts took a photograph of the three children at Christmas in 1937. Bertie seems happy. Doris looks wretched. Warren, clutchinghis favorite possession, a nickel-plated money changer, a gift fromhis aunt Alice, looks far less happy than called for by the occasion. 
Leila¡¯s determination that they appear to be the perfect Norman Rockwellfamily hardened when Warren was eight and new calamities befellthe Stahls. Her mother, Stella, had deteriorated, and the family admitted her to the Norfolk State Hospital, formerly the Nebraska State Insane Asylum, where Leila¡¯s grandmother 
had died.5 Her sister Edie spent three months in the hospital and nearly died of peritonitis after sufferinga ruptured appendix. Afterward, she made up her mind to go ahead and get married, and wed a man of questionable background who made her laugh. This did not improve Leila¡¯s dimview of her sister, who had always seemed to her more interested in adventure than duty. 
Meanwhile, Howard had been elected to the school board, a new role that became a point of pride in the 
family.6 Amid this mixture of Buffett progress and Stahl backsliding, Warren spent most of his time away from home, out of his mother¡¯s way. He paid calls around the neighborhood, made friends with other people¡¯s parents, and listened to political talk at their houses.7 As he roamed, he began collectingbottle caps. 
He went to fillingstations allover town, scoopingbottle caps out of the wells beneath the ice chests where they had fallen after customers popped their sodas open. Down in the Buffetts¡¯ basement, the piles of bottle caps grew: Pepsi, root beer, Coca-Cola, ginger ale. He became obsessed with collectingbottle caps. All this free information was lyingaround untouched¡ªand no one wanted it! He found it amazing. After dinner, he spread his collection of bottle caps on newspapers allover the living-roomfloor, sortingand counting, sorting 
and counting.8 The numbers told himwhich soft drinks were most popular. But he also enjoyed sortingand countingas a way of relaxing. When he wasn¡¯t workingon his bottle caps, he liked sortingand countinghis coin collection and his collection of stamps. 
School for the most part bored him. In Miss Thickstun¡¯s fourth-grade class with Bob Russelland his other friend Stu Erickson, to pass the time, he played math games and counted in his head. He liked geography, however, and found spellingexciting, especially the ¡°spell-downs,¡± in which six students fromthe first grade competed with six fromthe second. Whoever won advanced and competed with the third graders, and so on. Theoretically, a first grader could win six times and eventually beat a sixth grader. ¡°I wanted to pass Doris on the spell-downs, and Bertie wanted to pass me.¡± Alas, all three Buffetts were very smart kids, and neither happened. ¡°Still, there was nothing like that for capturing our attention.¡± 
Warren enjoyed spell-downs, but nothingmotivated him like blackboard arithmetic. Fromthe second grade on, students raced to the board, two at a time. First they competed at sums against the clock, then subtraction, finally multiplication and division, tallyingtheir numbers down the board. Warren, Stu, and Russ were the brightest in the class. At first they scored about the same, but over time Warren pulled ahead a little. 
And then, with practice, a little more. 9 
Finally one day Miss Thickstun asked Warren and Stu to stay after school. Warren¡¯s heart pounded in his chest. ¡°We wondered what the hellwe had done,¡± Stu says. Instead of a scolding, Miss Thickstun told Warren and Stu to move their books fromthe 4A section on one side of the roomto the 4B section on the 
other.10 They were skippinghalf a grade. Bob Russell was left behind, even though Mr. Russell got upset and complained. 
Warren stayed friends with both, but kept his relationships with themseparate:As before, although each was a friend of his, they were never really friends with each other. 
Warren¡¯s fondness for minutiae continued to develop. His parents and their friends¡ªwho called him ¡°Warreny¡±¡ªgot a kick out of his party trick of namingstate capitals. By fifth grade he had immersed himself in the 1939 World Almanac, which quickly became his favorite book. He memorized the population of every city. He got a contest goingwith Stu over who could name the most world cities with populations over a 
million.11 
One evening, however, Warren was distracted fromhis Almanac and his bottle caps by a terrible pain in his belly. The doctor made a house call, then went home to bed. But he couldn¡¯t get the house call out of his mind, so he returned and sent Warren to the hospital. Later that night, Warren underwent surgery for a ruptured appendix. 
The doctor had almost been too late. Warren lay gravely illin the Catholic-run hospitalfor severalweeks. But cared for by the nursingsisters, he soon found the hospital was a comfortinghaven. As he began to recover, other pleasures came his way. The World Almanac was brought for him to study. His teacher made 
all the girls in his class write himget-well letters.12 His aunt Edie, who understood her nephew well, brought him a toy fingerprintingkit. He knew exactly what to do with it. He coaxed each of the sisters into stopping by his room. He inked all of their fingers, got a set of prints, and filed this collection away carefully upon returninghome. His family found this behavior entertaining. Who would want a set of nuns¡¯ fingerprints?But Warren theorized that one of the sisters might eventually commit a crime. And if that happened, then only he, 
Warren Buffett, would own the clues to the culprit¡¯s identity.13 
Not longafter his hospitalization, on an exceptionally cold and windy day in May 1939, his parents told him to get dressed. Then his grandfather appeared. Clad in a dignified single-breasted suit, a handkerchief tucked neatly in his breast pocket, Ernest Peabody Buffett looked the picture of respectability, like the president of the Rotary that he was. 
Ernest had a way with children, despite his stern air, and he liked to entertain his grandchildren. Bertie worshipped him. ¡°We¡¯re goingto Chicago today, Warren,¡± he announced. They boarded a train and went to see the Cubs play the Brooklyn Dodgers in what turned out to be a marathon baseball game that went scoreless for ten extra innings, tied nine to nine, and was finally called on account of darkness. It had lasted for four hours and forty-one minutes.14 After this excitingintroduction to major-league baseball, Warren was thrilled when Ernest bought hima twenty-five-cent book about the 1938 baseballseason. Warren memorized it. ¡°That was the most precious book to me,¡± he says. ¡°I knew every player¡¯s history from every team and could have told you clearly every word in that book. I knew it in my sleep.¡± 
His aunt Alice introduced himto another new interest when she gave hima book about bridge¡ªprobably 
Culbertson¡¯s Contract Bridge Complete: The New Gold Book of Bidding and Play.15 Contract bridge¡ªa social, psychologicalgame in which figuringout the problemis as important as solvingit¡ªwas sweepingthe country at the time, and Warren found it suited himmore than chess.16 
Yet another of his many interests was music. For several years, he had been learningto play the cornet; amonghis heroes were the trumpet players Bunny Berigan and Harry James. Although music practice meant spendingtime at home with his mother, tryingto please someone who could never be pleased, he persisted, and there came a time, after many painfulhours of practice peppered with Leila¡¯s criticism, that he was rewarded by beingchosen to participate in his school¡¯s Armistice Day ceremony. 
Each year on November 11, the anniversary of the treaty that ended World War I, the entire Rosehill student body went down to the gymfor a ceremony honoringthe war¡¯s dead heroes. In what had become a school tradition, trumpet players stationed at doors on either side of the gymwould alternate playing ¡°Taps,¡± one blowingthe first dum da dum notes, and the other echoing dum da DUM, and so on. 
That year, Warren¡¯s cornet skills had advanced enough for him to be given the part of the echo. He woke up the morningof the event, exhilarated at the prospect of performingin front of the entire school. When the big moment came, he was ready. 
As Warren stood in the doorway with his cornet, the first trumpet player sounded, Dum da DUM. 
But on the second dum, he hit a wrongnote. 
¡°My whole life flashed before my eyes, because I didn¡¯t know what to do with the echo. They hadn¡¯t prepared me for this. Paralyzed¡ªmy big moment.¡± 
Should he copy the other trumpet player¡¯s mistake or embarrass himby contradictingwhat he¡¯d played? Warren was undone. The scene scalded itself permanently into his memory¡ªexcept for what he did next. Years later, which course he followed¡ªassuminghe played any note at all¡ªhad become a blank. 
He had learned a lesson:It might seemeasier to go through life as the echo¡ªbut only until the other guy plays a wrongnote. 
8 AThousandWays 
Omaha . 1939¨C1942 
The first few cents Warren Buffett ever earned came from sellingpacks of chewinggum. And fromthe day he started selling¡ªat six years of age¡ªhe showed an unyieldingattitude toward his customers that revealed much about his later style. 
¡°I had this little green tray, which had five different areas in it. I¡¯m pretty sure my aunt Edie gave me that. 
It had containers for five different brands of gum, Juicy Fruit, Spearmint, Doublemint, and so on. I would buy packs of gum from my grandfather and go around door to door in the neighborhood selling this stuff. I 
1
used to do that in the evening, largely. 
¡°I remember a woman named Virginia Macoubrie saying, ¡®I¡¯ll take one stick of Juicy Fruit.¡¯ I said, ¡®We don¡¯t break up packs of gum¡¯¡ªI mean, I¡¯ve got my principles. I still, to this day, remember Mrs. Macoubrie saying she wanted one stick. No, they were sold only in five-stick packs. They were a nickel, and she wanted to spend a penny with me.¡± 
Makinga sale was tempting, but not temptingenough to change his mind. If he sold one stick to Virginia Macoubrie, he would have four sticks left to sellto somebody else, not worth the work or the risk. From each whole pack, he made two cents profit. He could hold those pennies, weighty and solid, in his palm. They became the first few snowflakes in a snowballof money to come. 
What Warren was willingto break up were red cartons of Coca-Cola, which he sold door to door on summer nights. He carried on sellingthemduringfamily vacations, approachingsunbathers around the shores of Lake Okoboji in Iowa. Soda pop was more profitable than chewinggum: He netted a nickel for every six bottles, and stuffed these coins proudly into the ball-park-style nickel-plated money changer on his belt. He also wore it when he went door to door sellingcopies of the Saturday Evening Post and Liberty magazines. 
The money changer made himfeel professional. It emblemized the part of sellingthat Warren most enjoyed: collecting. Although he now collected bottle caps, coins, and stamps, mainly, he collected cash. He kept his coins at home in a drawer, sometimes addingto the $20 his father had given himwhen he turned six, all recorded in a little maroon passbook¡ªhis first bank account. 
By the time he was nine or ten, he and Stu Erickson were sellingused golf balls at Elmwood Park golf course ¡ªuntilsomebody reported themand they got kicked out by the cops. When the police talked to Warren¡¯s parents, however, Howard and Leila weren¡¯t concerned. They just considered their son ambitious. As the Buffetts¡¯ only¡ªand precocious¡ªson, Warren had a sort of ¡°halo,¡± accordingto his sisters, and got away 
with a hell of a lot.2 
At age ten, he got a job sellingpeanuts and popcorn at the University of Omaha football games. He walked through the stands yelling, ¡°Peanuts, popcorn, five cents, a nickel, half dime, fifth of a quarter, get your peanuts and popcorn here!¡± The 1940 presidentialelection campaign was under way, and he had collected dozens of different Willkie¨CMcNary buttons, which he wore on his shirt. His favorite read: ¡°Washington Wouldn¡¯t, Cleveland Couldn¡¯t, Roosevelt Shouldn¡¯t,¡± which referred to FDR¡¯s outrageous¡ªto the Buffetts ¡ªdecision to run for a third term. While the U.S. had no constitutional termlimit, the country had¡ªso 
far¡ªrebuffed the idea of an ¡°imperial President.¡±3 Howard felt that FDR was a despot who had grandstanded his way to popularity. The idea of four more years of FDR nearly choked him. 
Though he found Wendell Willkie too liberal for his personal tastes, Howard felt, Anyone to get rid of Roosevelt. Warren, who followed alongwith his father¡¯s politicalviews, enjoyed showingoff his Willkie¨C McNary buttons at the stadium. Then his manager called himinto the office and said, ¡°Take those off. You¡¯ll get a reaction from the Roosevelt people.¡± 
Warren put the buttons in his apron, where some of the dimes and nickels got wedged inside the backs of the pins. When he reported in after the game, his manager told himto dump out the contents of the pocket, pins and all. Then he swept themoff the counter and took them away. ¡°That was my introduction to Business 101,¡± Buffett says. ¡°I was pretty sad.¡± And when Roosevelt won an unprecedented third term, the Buffetts were sadder still. 
But while politics was Howard¡¯s main interest and money a sideline, for his son, those interests were reversed. Warren hungaround his father¡¯s office at the grand old Omaha National Bank buildingevery chance he got, reading ¡°The Trader¡± column in Barron¡¯s and the books on his father¡¯s bookshelf. He planted himself in the customers¡¯ roomof Harris Upham& Co. At this regional stockbrokingfirm, down two flights of stairs from Howard¡¯s office, he found it the height of glamour to be allowed to ¡°mark the board,¡± chalking stock prices on a slow Depression-era Saturday morning. The market still traded for a two-hour session on weekends. Root-bound men with nothingbetter to do filled the semi-circle of chairs in the customers¡¯ room, 
listlessly watchingnumbers crawlby on the Trans-Lux, an electronic display of prices of major stocks.4 Occasionally somebody would jump up and rip a handfulof tape off the lazily clickingticker machine. Warren arrived with his paternal great-uncle Frank Buffett¡ªthe family misanthrope who had been brokenhearted over losingHenrietta, now longdead, to his brother Ernest¡ªand his maternal great-uncle 
John Barber.5 Each man was enslaved by his long-standinghabit of thinkingin only one direction. 
¡°Uncle Frank was a total bear on the world, and Uncle John was a total bull. I would sit between the two of them, and they¡¯d sort of vie for my attention and try to sell me that they were right. They didn¡¯t like each other, so they wouldn¡¯t talk to each other, but they would talk to me in between. My great-uncle Frank thought everything in the world was going to go broke. 
¡°And when somebody¡¯d go up there to the counter behind the chairs and say, ¡®I want to buy a hundred shares of U.S. Steel at twenty-three,¡¯ my uncle Frank would always boom out and say, ¡®U.S. STEEL? IT¡¯S GOING TO ZERO!¡¯¡± That was not good for business. ¡°They couldn¡¯t throw him out, but they hated him around this place. It was not an office designed for short-sellers.¡± 
Snugbetween his two great-uncles, Warren stared at the numbers, which were fuzzy. His trouble readingthe Trans-Lux led to his family¡¯s discovery that he was nearsighted. After beingfitted for glasses, Warren noticed that the numbers seemed to change accordingto some immutable law of their own. Although his great-uncles were both eager to sway himto their respective¡ªand extreme¡ªpoints of view, Warren noticed that their opinions appeared to have no connection whatsoever to the numbers passingoverhead on the Trans-Lux. He was determined to figure out the pattern, but as yet did not know how. 
¡°My uncle Frank and my uncle John would vie for who would take me to lunch, because that was sort of beating the other guy. With my uncle Frank, we¡¯d go down to the old Paxton Hotel, where we could buy day-old food for a quarter.¡± 
Warren, who enjoyed spendingtime with adults, relished beingvied over by his uncles. Actually, he enjoyed beingvied over by anyone. He craved attention fromhis other relatives and his parents¡¯ friends, but especially fromhis father. 
Howard gave each of his children an East Coast trip at age ten, an important event in their lives. Warren knew exactly what he wanted to do: ¡°I told my dad I wanted to see three things. I wanted to see the Scott Stamp and Coin Company. I wanted to see the Lionel Train Company. I wanted to see the New York Stock Exchange. Scott Stamp and Coin was at Forty-seventh Street, Lionel was down around Twenty-seventh, and the Stock Exchange was all the way downtown.¡± 
WallStreet in 1940 had begun to revive fromthe crash, yet remained a chastened place. The men of Wall Street were like a band of hardy mercenaries fightingon after most of their comrades had been felled in war. The way they made a livingseemed vaguely disreputable with memories of the 1929 Crash so fresh in people¡¯s minds. Yet even though they did not bragabout it outside the bunker walls, some of these mercenaries were doingvery wellindeed. Howard Buffett took his son down to lower Manhattan and dropped in on the top man at one of the largest brokerage firms. Little Warren Buffett was gettinga peek inside the bunker¡¯s gold-plated doors. 
¡°That¡¯s when I met Sidney Weinberg, who was the most famous man on Wall Street. My dad had never met him. He had this little tiny firm out here in Omaha. But Mr. Weinberg let us in, maybe because a little kid was along or something. We talked for about thirty minutes.¡± 
As the senior partner of the investment bank Goldman Sachs, Weinberghad spent a decade painstakingly repairingthe firm¡¯s reputation after its disgrace for misleadinginvestors with a notorious pyramid scheme in the market crash of 1929.6 Warren knew nothingabout that, nor that Weinberggrew up an immigrant¡¯s child 
and had started as a porter¡¯s assistant at Goldman, emptyingcuspidors and brushingthe partners¡¯ silk hats.7 But he certainly understood that he was in the presence of a bigshot once he found himself in Sidney Weinberg¡¯s walnut-paneled office, its walls hungwith original letters, documents, and portraits of Abraham Lincoln. And what Weinbergdid at the end of their visit made a huge impression on him. ¡°As I went out, he put his arm around me and he said, ¡®What stock do you like, Warren?¡¯ 
¡°He¡¯d forgotten it all the next day, but I remembered it forever.¡± 
Buffett would never forget that Weinberg, a bigshot on WallStreet, had paid such attention to himand seemed to care about his opinion.8 
From Goldman Sachs, Howard took Warren over to Broad Street and through a set of enormous Corinthian columns into the New York Stock Exchange. Here, in the temple of money, men in brightly colored jackets shouted and scribbled standingaround wrought-iron tradingposts while clerks darted back and forth, strewingthe floor with paper scraps. Yet it was a scene from the Stock Exchange diningroomthat captured Warren¡¯s imagination. 
¡°We had lunch at the Exchange with a fellow named At Mol, a Dutchman, a member of the Stock Exchange and a very impressive-looking man. After lunch, a guy came along with a tray that had all these different kinds of tobacco leaves on it. He made up a cigar for Mr. Mol, who picked out the leaves that he wanted. And I thought, This is it. It doesn¡¯t get any better than this. A custom-made cigar.¡± 
A custom-made cigar. The visions that cigar evoked in Warren¡¯s mathematicalmind! He had exactly zero interest in smoking a cigar. But workingbackward, he saw what hiringa man for such a frivolous purpose implied. To justify the expense must mean that, even while most of the country was stillmired in the Depression, the cigar man¡¯s employer was makinga great deal of money. He grasped it right away. The Stock Exchange must pour forth streams of money: rivers, fountains, cascades, torrents of money, enough to hire a man for the pure frippery of rollingcigars¡ªhandmade, custom-made cigars¡ªfor the Stock Exchange members¡¯ own particular pleasure. 
That day, as he beheld the cigar man, a vision of his future was planted. 
He kept that vision when he went back to Omaha, old enough now to organize his quest and pursue it allthe more systematically. Even as he followed the pastimes of an ordinary boy, playingbasketball and Ping-Pong and collectingcoins and stamps; even as his family mourned his small, sweet grandfather, John Stahl, who died that year at age seventy-three¡ªthe first loss in his life¡ªhe worked with a passion for the future he saw ahead of him, right there in sight. He wanted money. 
¡°It could make me independent. Then I could do what I wanted to do with my life. And the biggest thing I wanted to do was work for myself. I didn¡¯t want other people directing me. The idea of doing what I wanted to do every day was important to me.¡± 
A tool that would help himsoon fell into his hands. One day, down at the Benson Library, a book beckoned from the shelves. Its shiny silver cover gleamed like a heap of coins, hintingat the value of its contents. Captivated by the title, he opened it and was immediately hooked. One Thousand Ways to Make $1,000, it was called. A million dollars, in other words! 
Inside the cover, in a photograph, a tiny man gazed up at an enormous pile of coins. 
¡°Opportunity Knocks,¡± read the first page of the text. ¡°Never in the history of the United States has the time been so favorable for a man with small capitalto start his own business as it is today.¡± 
What a message! ¡°We have allheard a great deal about the opportunities of bygone years¡­. Why, the opportunities of yesterday are as nothingcompared with the opportunities that await the courageous, resourcefulman of today! There are fortunes to be made that willmake those of Astor and Rockefeller seem picayune.¡± These words rose like sweet visions of heaven to Warren Buffett¡¯s eyes. He turned the pages faster. 
¡°But,¡± the book cautioned, ¡°you cannot possibly succeed until you start. The way to begin makingmoney is to begin¡­. Hundreds of thousands of people in this country who would like to make a lot of money are not makingit because they are waitingfor this, that, or the other to happen.¡± Begin it! the book admonished, and explained how. Crammed with practicalbusiness advice and ideas for makingmoney, One Thousand Ways to Make $1,000 started with ¡°the story of money¡± and was written in a straightforward, friendly style, like someone sittingon the front stoop talkingto a friend. Some of its ideas were limited¡ªgoat-dairyingand runningdollhospitals¡ªbut many were more practical. The idea that captivated Warren was pennyweight scales. If he had a weighingmachine, he would weigh himself fifty times a day. He was sure that other people would pay money to do that too. 
¡°The weighing machine was easy to understand. I¡¯d buy a weighing machine and use the profits to buy more weighing machines. Pretty soon I¡¯d have twenty weighing machines, and everybody would weigh themselves 
9
fifty times a day. I thought¡ªthat¡¯s where the money is. The compounding of it¡ªwhat could be better than that?¡± 
This concept¡ªcompounding¡ªstruck himas critically important. The book said he could make a thousand dollars. If he started with a thousand dollars and grew it ten percent a year: 
In five years, $1,000 became more than $1,600. In ten years, it became almost $2,600. In twenty-five years, it became more than $10,800. 
The way that numbers exploded as they grew at a constant rate over time was how a small sumcould turn into a fortune. He could picture the numbers compoundingas vividly as the way a snowballgrew when he rolled it across the lawn. Warren began to think about time in a different way. Compoundingmarried the present to the future. If a dollar today was goingto be worth ten some years fromnow, then in his mind the two were the same. 
Sittingon the stoop at his friend Stu Erickson¡¯s, Warren announced that he would be a millionaire by the time he reached age thirty-five.10 That was an audacious, almost silly-soundingstatement for a child to make in the depressed world of 1941. But his calculations¡ªand the book¡ªsaid it was possible. He had twenty-five years, and he needed more money. Still, he was sure he could do it. The more money he collected early on, the longer the money could compound, and the better his chances of achievinghis goal. 
*** 
A year later, he brought forth the kernelof his reality. To his family¡¯s amusement and surprise, by the spring of 1942, his hoard totaled $120. 
Enlistinghis sister Doris as a partner, he bought three shares of a stock for each of them, costinghim $114.75 for his three shares of Cities Service Preferred.11 
¡°I didn¡¯t understand that stock very well when I bought it,¡± he says; he knew only that it was a favorite stock that Howard had sold to his customers for years. 12 
The market hit a low that June, and Cities Service Preferred plunged from$38.25 to $27 a share. Doris, he says, ¡°reminded¡± himevery day on the way to school that her stock was goingdown. Warren says he felt terribly responsible. So when the stock finally recovered, he sold at $40, nettinga $5 profit for the two of them. ¡°That¡¯s when I knew that he knew what he was doing,¡± Doris recalls. But Cities Service quickly soared to $202 a share. Warren learned three lessons and would call this episode one of the most important of his life. One lesson was not to overly fixate on what he had paid for a stock. The second was not to rush unthinkingly to grab a small profit. He learned these two lessons by broodingover the $492 he would have made had he been more patient. It had taken five years of work, since he was six years old, to save the $120 to buy this stock. Based on how much he currently made from sellinggolf balls or peddlingpopcorn and peanuts at the ballpark, he realized that it could take years to earn back the profit he had ¡°lost.¡± He would never, never, never forget this mistake. 
And there was a third lesson, which was about investingother people¡¯s money. If he made a mistake, it might get somebody upset at him. So he didn¡¯t want to have responsibility for anyone else¡¯s money unless he was sure he could succeed. 
9 
InkyFingers 
Omaha and Washington, D.C. . 1941¨C1944 
One December Sunday afternoon when Warren was eleven, the Buffetts were drivingback froma visit to West Point after church. As they listened to the radio in the car, the announcer broke in to say that the Japanese had struck Pearl Harbor. Nobody explained exactly what had happened or how many were killed or injured, but fromthe commotion Warren quickly realized that the world was goingto change. 
His father¡¯s already reactionary political views quickly turned even more extreme. Howard and his friends considered Roosevelt a warmonger who lusted after dictatorship and was tryingto achieve it by luring America into yet another European war. They felt that Europe, a continent unable to settle its own petty bickerings before these turned into mortaldisputes, must be allowed to burn in its own tinderbox. 
Untilnow, Roosevelt¡¯s blandishments had not worked. Neither ¡°international cooperation¡±¡ªthe wickedly deceitful Lend-Lease program, which Howard considered ¡°Operation Rat Hole,¡± 1 an outright gift of war supplies to England, neither a loan nor a lease¡ªnor givingspeeches alongside that portly, popular 
Englishman Winston Churchill, had drawn America into the war. Roosevelt had told the country¡ªlying through his teeth, they agreed¡ª¡°To you mothers and fathers, I give you one more assurance¡­. Your boys are not goingto be sent into any foreign wars.¡±2 Howard now came to believe that in a desperate gamble, 
Roosevelt and his army¡¯s chief of staff, General George C. Marshall, had decided that ¡°the only way to get us into the European war was to get the Japanese to attack us,¡± says Warren, ¡°and not tip off the people at Pearl Harbor.¡± This belief was common amongconservatives at the time, although Howard, as in most things, was strikingly firmin his convictions. 
The followingspring, the Nebraska Republican Party tapped Howard with the awkward job of findinga candidate to run for Congress against a popular incumbent, Charles F. McLaughlin. At the last minute, accordingto family lore, Howard entered his own name on the ballot, unable to find another sacrificiallamb willingto run against a heavily favored Democrat. 
He found himself thrust into the role of campaigner. The Buffetts plastered simple flyers saying ¡°Buffett for Congress¡± on telephone poles. They went to county fairs, where Howard and Leila handed out cards amid the livestock displays and entries in the best pickle competition. ¡°He was the most unlikely candidate. He hated to speak in public. My mother was a good campaigner, but my dad was introverted.¡± Leila, a talker, instinctively knew how to work a crowd and enjoyed approachingpeople. The kids circulated, saying, ¡°Would you vote for my daddy?¡± Afterward they got to ride on the Ferris wheel. 
¡°Then we made this little fifteen-minute radio program. My mother played the organ; my father introduced us: ¡®There¡¯s Doris, age fourteen. And there¡¯s Warren, age eleven.¡¯ And my line was ¡®Just a second, Pop, I¡¯m 
reading the sports section.¡¯ Then, the three of us sang ¡®America the Beautiful¡¯ while my mother played this little organ.¡± 
It was no stemwinder, but ¡°With that fifteen-minute radio program, everybody started volunteering. Still, the other guy had been in for four terms.¡± 
Even with the help of volunteers, Howard struggled against the political handicaps of his pessimismand his literal honesty. Thus, the Buffett political platform bulged with dire warnings and bristled at the mindless social conformity observable everywhere in the 1940s Midwest. Howard demanded that voters ¡°buy one-way tickets out of Washington for allof the screwballs, stuffed shirts, stool pigeons, sleepwalkers, and society snobs.¡± 
This fire-breathingrhetoric belied a sweetness in him, a subtle wit, and a certain innocence. For years, Howard had carried in his pocket a handwritten piece of paper, softened and worn to the texture of linen, which said, ¡°I amGod¡¯s child. I amin His Hands. As for my body¡ªit was never meant to be permanent. As 
for my soul¡ªit is immortal. Why, then, should I be afraid of anything?¡±3 
Unfortunately for his only son, when it came to the streets of Omaha, Howard meant this almost literally. 
When campaigning, he would roust Warren, now twelve years old, out of bed longbefore dawn, to head down to the stockyards in South Omaha. Alongwith the railroads, these were Omaha¡¯s main business, 
employingalmost twenty thousand people, mostly immigrants. More than eight million animals a year 4 lumbered into a metropolis of meat and rolled out as billions of pounds of packaged goods.5 South Omaha once was a separate city, a short distance fromdowntown geographically but culturally a continent away. For decades it had served as the brewingground for most of the city¡¯s ethnic and racialunrest. 
Warren planted his sneakers at one end of the block, hands clenched and eyes fixed anxiously on his father. Howard limped from a childhood bout with polio, and the family worried about his heart condition. Warren¡¯s stomach churned as he watched his father down the street, approachinghuge, cleaver-faced men in overalls on their way into the packinghouses for the five-thirty a.m. shift. 
Many of them did not speak English at home. The least well off, the blacks and new immigrants, lived crammed into a buffer zone of boardinghouses and shanties next to the yards. Those with greater savvy and more means had worked their way out into the ethnic parishes nearby, livingin neat smallhouses with steeply pitched roofs that rolled up and down South Omaha¡¯s hills: Czechs in Little Bohemia, Serbs and Croats in Goose Hollow, the Poles in G Town (the former Greek Town); the Greeks were longgone, their homes destroyed in a 1909 anti-immigrant riot. 
The people whomHoward approached ranged fromthe top rank of workers, the specialized butchers from the killinggangwho worked on the highest floor of the slaughterhouse, to those on the lower floors, in the boneyard, the lard department, and the fertilizingdepartment. A handfulof women trimmed pork, twisted wieners, painted and labeled cans, plucked chickens, and sorted eggs. Management especially prized black 
women, who could be counted on to filloffal roomjobs, and for less pay than whites.6 They cleaned the ¡°pluck¡±¡ªintestines, bladder, hearts, glands, and other organs¡ªtheir hands immersed in water and waste, sorting, salting, and packingintestines for casings in a hell of heat and ankle-deep bloody water. They panted 
shallowly with open mouths to keep airborne particles of excrement out of the deeper parts of their lungs.7 Even the newest and lowliest immigrant or black man would not set foot in the offal room. That was strictly black women¡¯s work. 
Men and women, black and white, these people were Democrats in every fiber of their being. The rest of Nebraska might be turningagainst the New Deal, the President¡¯s cure for the Great Depression, but Franklin Delano Roosevelt was stilla hero in this part of town. Yet the leaflets that Howard Buffett politely pressed into their callused hands shrieked that FDR was the greatest danger to democracy that America had ever known. If given a moment to speak, he would calmly explain why, as their Congressman, he would always vote to enact laws that the stockyard workers would oppose. 
Howard was a zealot, but he was neither stupid nor crazy. Even though he placed his trust in God¡¯s hands, he had a backup plan. Warren had not come for an education, nor to tag-team his father in a fight. His job was to run like hell for the cops if the stockyard workers started beatingup his father. 
Under the circumstances, a reasonable person might ask what Howard was doingthere at all. His efforts might not be repaid by a single vote. But apparently he felt an obligation to appear before every potential voter in his district, however little of himthey cared to see. 
Warren always managed to return home intact; he never had to run for the cops. That may have been just luck or it may have been Howard¡¯s demeanor, which conveyed his basic decency. Still, the Buffetts had no reason to believe the voters saw that, nor that if they did, it would overcome his underdogstatus. On election day, November 3, 1942, Doris, convinced that her father had lost, went downtown and bought herself a new pin to wear to school the next day so she would have somethingto look forward to. ¡°My dad wrote out his concession statement. We all went to bed at eight-thirty or nine o¡¯clock, because we never stayed up late. And he woke up the next morning to find out he¡¯d won.¡± 
Howard¡¯s deep suspicion of foreign adventures was more than a quirk of his own Quaker-like personality. It reflected a reservoir of conservative isolationism, which had once run deep and wide through the Midwest. Although that stream was dryingup, PearlHarbor had revived it for a little while. Despite Roosevelt¡¯s overwhelmingpopularity, labor¡¯s support for his foreign policies had wavered temporarily in Omaha, just longenough to get Howard elected against an opponent who had been, perhaps, overconfident. 
*** 
The followingJanuary, the Buffetts rented out their house in Dundee and boarded a train to Virginia. Ernest handed thema hamper of beautifully packaged food alongwith instructions not to stray into any other cars, lest they pick up dread diseases fromtravelingservicemen. 
They arrived at Washington¡¯s Union Station to find a provincialcity grown packed and chaotic. Great crowds of people filled the town, most of themworkingat vast new wartime government agencies. The military had commandeered every building, office, chair, and pencilwithin reach in the effort to get itself organized in the newly finished Pentagon, the world¡¯s largest office building, which was outgrown by the time it was 
completed. By now, flimsy temporary office buildings lined every inch of the Mall.8 
Hordes of new arrivals had doubled the population. A ragged army of black men and women streamed across the 14th Street Bridge from Virginia, fleeingthe tobacco farms, cotton fields, and textile mills of the poverty-stricken South, lured by the prospect of any job at allin the busiest city in the world. Followingin the dust of the respectable, impoverished, and naive came pickpockets, prostitutes, grifters, and drifters, turning Washington into the nation¡¯s crime capital. 
Rickety nineteenth-century wooden trolleys packed with government workers crept their way along 
impassable streets. At any of the trolley stops, local residents might be picketingagainst Capital Transit, which had refused to hire blacks.9 Still, the logjamof segregation was slowly startingto break. At Little Palace cafeteria on the black side of town, Howard University students were staginga series of ¡°lunch counter sit-ins,¡± challengingthe restaurant¡¯s policy of refusingthemservice by simply occupyingallavailable 
tables and refusingto leave, effectively shuttingthe place down.10 
The Buffetts had friends, the Reichels11¡ªacquaintances of Howard¡¯s fromhis stockbrokingdays¡ªwho told them, don¡¯t live in Washington, it¡¯s terrible. They knew of an enormous house in Virginia that someone in the Marines had just vacated. It sat on a hillabove the Rappahannock River, next door to Chatham, headquarters of the Union Army in the battle of Fredericksburg. The house had ten fireplaces, formalgardens, cutting gardens, and a greenhouse. Although its grandeur was far above the Buffetts¡¯ style, and it was located almost an hour from the city, they leased it temporarily. Howard rented a tiny apartment in the District of Columbia and commuted on the weekends. His time filled quickly as the Nebraska delegation assigned him to the financial committees, and he started fittingin and learningthe rules and procedures and unwritten customs of servingas a Congressman. 
Leila soon began ridinginto Washington to look for a permanent place to live. She had been unusually irritable since their arrival and often spoke longingly of Omaha. The timingof the move had turned out to be inauspicious. Her sister Bernice had just insinuated that she would commit suicide, sayingthat she would not be responsible for what happened unless the family committed her to the Norfolk State Hospital, where their mother, Stella, was also housed. Edie, now in charge of her sister¡¯s care, consulted with a doctor. They thought that Bernice wanted to live with her mother and was conceivably usingmelodramatic means to get her way. Nevertheless, they clearly had to take the suicide threat seriously, and the family sent her off to Norfolk. 
The details of the Stahl family¡¯s problems were rarely discussed in front of the children. Each adapted to Washington in his or her own way. Beautiful fifteen-year-old Doris felt like Dorothy, who had just left black-and-white Kansas and stepped into the Technicolor land of Oz. Her life was transformed. She became the 
belle of Fredericksburgand fellin love with the town.12 Leila began to treat her daughter as a socialclimber who had pretensions above her station, and still launched the occasionaltirade against her. But by now, Doris¡¯s spirit resisted her mother¡¯s constraints, and she had begun to fight for her own identity. 
Meanwhile, Warren, twelve years old, spent the first six weeks in an eighth-grade class that was ¡°way behind¡± where he had been academically in Omaha. Naturally, his first instinct was to get a job, workingat a bakery where he ¡°did damned near nothing. I wasn¡¯t baking and I wasn¡¯t selling.¡± At home, furious and miserable at beinguprooted, he wanted to be sent back to Omaha and reported a mysterious ¡°allergy¡± that disturbed his sleep. He claimed that he had to sleep standingup. ¡°I wrote my grandfather these pathetic letters, too, and he sort of said, ¡®You¡¯ve got to send that boy back. You know, you¡¯re destroying my grandson.¡¯¡± Succumbing, the Buffetts put Warren on a train back to Nebraska for a few months¡¯ stay. To his delight, his companion on the train was Nebraska Senator Hugh Butler. He had always gotten alongwell with older people and chatted easily with Butler, in his precocious manner, all the way back to Omaha, his ¡°allergy¡± forgotten. 
Bertie, nine years old, felt close to her grandfather and thought she had a specialbond with him. She was jealous. Trustingin her relationship with Ernest, she wrote him: ¡°Don¡¯t tellmy parents, but send for me too.¡± 
13 
¡°When Bertie wrote the same kind of letters, I said, ¡®Don¡¯t pay any attention. She¡¯s a fake.¡¯¡± 
Ernest wrote back, ¡°A girlshould be with her mother.¡± Bertie sat in Fredericksburg, fumingthat her brother always seemed to get his way. 14 
Warren returned to Rosehill Schooland reunited with his friends. Every day he showed up around noontime 
at the house of his father¡¯s former partner, Carl Falk, whose wife, Gladys, served himsandwiches and tomato soup and kindness for lunch. He ¡°worshipped¡± Mrs. Falk15 as if she were a surrogate mother, just as he had done with his friend Jack Frost¡¯s mother, Hazel, and with his aunts. 
Though Warren was comfortable with all these middle-aged women, he was shy, hopelessly shy, and girls his own age terrified him. Even so, he soon developed a crush on Dorothy Hume, one of the girls in his new eighth-grade class. His friend Stu Erickson had a similar crush on Margie Lee Canady, and his other friend Byron Swanson had a crush on Joan Fugate. After weeks of talk, they worked themselves up to ask the girls 
to go to the movies.16 But when Warren walked over to Dorothy¡¯s house to invite her, he chickened out when her father answered the door. Warren tried to sell him a magazine subscription instead. Finally, however, he managed to ask Dorothy, and she said yes. 
On the appointed Saturday, Byron and Warren went together to pick up their dates because they were afraid to show up alone. Thus the afternoon started with a lengthy trudge fromhouse to house to the streetcar stop, 
walkingfor blocks in uncomfortable silence. Margie Lee, who lived in the opposite direction, arrived at the stop with Stu and they all boarded the streetcar, where the boys stared red-faced at their shoes throughout the trip downtown as the girls chatted easily with one another. When they reached the theater, Margie Lee, Dorothy, and Joan strolled directly to a row of seats and sat down next to each other. The boys¡¯ plan to cuddle up with the girls duringtwo horror films, The Mummy¡¯s Tomb and Cat People, instantly fell apart. Instead, they sat in their own group and watched the girls¡¯ brunette heads huddled together as they giggled and shrieked through the weekly serials, the cartoons, and both movies. After a painful trip to Walgreen¡¯s for after-movie treats, the boys retraced their trip on the streetcar in a dazed little group and began the long march to the girls¡¯ houses before beingdismissed by their dates. They had barely spoken a word the entire 
afternoon.17 Allthree were so mortified that it took each of them years thereafter to summon the courage to ask another girl out on a date.18 
But while Warren lost heart, he did not lose interest; he next developed a crush on another girl in his class, Clo-Ann Kaul, a strikingblonde. Yet she was not interested in him either; he seemed unable to make any headway at all with girls. His way of divertinghimself from disappointment was, again, makingmoney. 
¡°My grandfather liked the idea that I was always thinking of ways to make money. I used to go around the neighborhood collecting wastepaper and magazines to sell for scrap. My aunt Alice would take me down to the collection drop-off, where you could get thirty-five cents for a hundred pounds, or something like that.¡± 
At Ernest¡¯s house, Warren read a shelf full of back issues of the Progressive Grocer. Subjects like ¡°how to stock a meat department¡± fascinated him. On the weekends, Ernest put himto work at Buffett & Son, the empire over which he presided. About the size of a two-story garage, it had a Spanish-style tile roof that stood out in the pleasant upper-middle-class suburb of Dundee. The Buffetts had always sold on ¡°credit and delivery.¡± Ladies or their cooks would ringup Walnut 0761 on the telephone and read their lists to clerks 
who took down their orders.19 Clerks rushed around the store, scramblingup and down a rollingwooden ladder that flew back and forth alongthe shelves, retrievingboxes, bags, and cans, and fillingtheir baskets from the pyramids of vegetables and fruit. To cut a hand of bananas, they took down the wicked sharp knife next to a four-foot bunch of bananas that hungfroma hook by the back door. They ran down to the basement to fill orders for sauerkraut and pickles that lay coolingin barrels near crates of eggs and other perishables. All the goods went into baskets, which the clerks on the mezzanine raised on a pulley, priced and packaged, and sent back downstairs. Then the orange Buffett & Son delivery trucks with rolled-up rubber or leather panels on the side drove the packages off to Omaha¡¯s waitinghousewives. 
Ernest sat at a desk on the mezzanine and glared down at the clerks. Behind his back, the employees called him Old Man Ernie. ¡°He didn¡¯t do a damn thing. He just gave orders,¡± says Warren. ¡°I mean, he was king. He could see everything. And if a customer walked in who wasn¡¯t waited on like that¡­¡± Snap of the fingers and woe to the clerks. He believed in ¡°work, work, plenty of work.¡± Ernest felt so responsible for making sure that no one in his charge had foolish notions about there beingany free lunch in this world that he had once made a lowly stock boy bringtwo pennies to work to pay his Social Security tax in cash. This handover had been accompanied by a half-hour lecture on the evils of socialism, so that said stock boy would fully understand how that devil Roosevelt and the tweedy, pipe-smokingIvy League professors he had brought 
into the government were ruiningthe country.20 
The only time Ernest left the mezzanine was the minute he saw an important woman drive up with her 
chauffeur. He would tear down the stairs, grab an order slip, and wait on her himself, showingher the new ¡°alligator pears¡±¡ªavocados¡ªjust flown in fromHawaii and handingpeppermint sticks to her children.21 In the face of allthis attention to rank, when her brother-in-law Fred once stopped waitingon Leila in order to 
attend to another customer, she stalked out in a huff and never shopped at the store again.22 Howard bought the groceries fromthen on. 
Warren now felt like one of these clerks, hustlingaround the store under Old Man Ernie¡¯s thumb. Workingin his grandfather¡¯s store, he came as close to beinga slave as he ever would be in his life. 
¡°He had me do a lot of little lesser jobs. Sometimes I was on the floor. Sometimes he had me counting 
wartime rationing stamps¡ªsugar stamps, coffee stamps, sitting up on the mezzanine with him. And sometimes I was hiding where he couldn¡¯t see me. 
¡°The worst job was when he hired me and my friend John Pescal to shovel snow. We had this huge snowstorm, a foot of superwet snow. We had to shovel out the whole bank of snow, in front where the customers parked and in the alleyway behind the store, in the loading dock, and by the garage where we had the six trucks. 
¡°We worked at this for about five hours¡ªshoveling, shoveling, shoveling, shoveling. Eventually, we couldn¡¯t even straighten our hands. And then we went to my grandfather. He said, ¡®Well, how much should I pay you boys? A dime¡¯s too little and a dollar¡¯s too much!¡¯ 
¡°I¡¯ll never forget¡ªJohn and I looked at each other¡­.¡± 
That worked out to¡ªat most¡ªtwenty cents an hour for shovelingsnow. 
¡°Oh no! This was the amount we were supposed to split. That was my grandfather¡­.¡± 
Well, a Buffett was a Buffett, but Warren had learned a valuable lesson:Know what the deal is in advance.23 
Ernest had two other Buffett traits:an impulsive streak with women and an obsession with perfection. He had entered into two short-lived marriages after Henrietta died, once comingback froma vacation in California newly wed to a woman he had just met. His perfectionism, however, expressed itself at work. Buffett & Son was a direct descendant of the oldest grocery store in Omaha and Ernest¡¯s demandingways were allin pursuit of an idealvision of service to his customers. He felt certain the discount national chain stores that were encroachingon the neighborhoods were a fad that would disappear because they could never provide a comparable level of service. Sometime duringthis period, he wrote confidently to one of his relatives: ¡°The 
day of the chain store is over.¡±24 
When Buffett & Son ran out of bread, rather than disappoint his customers, Ernest sent Warren trottingdown the street to the nearby Hinky Dinky supermarket to buy bread at retail. Warren did not enjoy this errand because he was quickly recognized once inside. ¡°Hellooooooo, Mr. Buffett!¡± the clerks would callout to him, loud enough for everyone to hear, as he slunk through the store, ¡°tryingto look inconspicuous,¡± weighed down with armfuls of loaves. Ernest resented the Hinky Dinky, which, like Sommers, his other major competitor in Dundee, was run by a Jewish family. It rankled himto pay good money to a competitor, much less somebody Jewish. Like much of America before mid-century, Omaha practiced de facto segregation by both religion and race. Jews and Christians (and even Catholics and Protestants) lived essentially separate lives, with social clubs, civic groups, and many businesses refusingto accept Jews as members or hire them as employees. Ernest and Howard used the code name ¡°Eskimos¡± to make offensive remarks about Jews when they were out in public. Since anti-Semitismwas so much a matter of course in society at the time, Warren never gave their attitudes a thought. 
Ernest, in fact, was an authority figure to Warren, and he only escaped that authority when he was at school, and for a few hours every Saturday when his grandfather put himto work on the delivery truck. Unloading groceries from the truck was exhaustingwork, and Warren started to figure out how much he disliked manual labor. 
¡°There was this driver, Eddie, that I thought was a hundred years old. He was probably about sixty-five, although he had driven a mule truck back when Buffett & Son delivered that way. 
¡°He had the craziest delivery system that involved going first to Benson, then about five miles back to Dundee to drop somebody¡¯s groceries off, then back to Benson. All this during wartime gas rationing. Finally I asked why, and he gave me this disgusted look and said, ¡®If it¡¯s early enough, we may catch her when she¡¯s undressed.¡¯¡± Warren at first had no idea what this cryptic phrase meant. ¡°He took the groceries up to the house personally in the mornings while I carried twenty-four-bottle boxes of empty soda bottles that were being returned to the store. Eddie would be there ogling Mrs. Kaul, the best-looking customer, trying to catch her undressed.¡± Mrs. Kaul was Clo-Ann Kaul¡¯s mother, and while Warren was haulingempty soda bottles, Clo-Ann was ignoringhim. ¡°I may have been the lowest-paid person to ever work in the grocery business. I didn¡¯t learn anything¡ªexcept that I didn¡¯t like hard work.¡± 
Warren took his battle for autonomy home to Ernest¡¯s Sunday dinner table. He had despised everything green from birth, except money. Now, broccoli, Brussels sprouts, and asparagus lined Warren¡¯s plate like foot soldiers in a battle of wills. With his parents, he had generally gotten his way. Ernest, however, brooked no nonsense. While Alice tried coaxingher nephew, his grandfather glared fromhis seat at one end of the table, waiting, waiting, waitingfor Warren to finish his vegetables. ¡°You sat at the table for two hours to finish your asparagus, but he always won in the end.¡± 
In most other ways, however, beingat Ernest¡¯s brought Warren a large measure of freedom. In his grandfather¡¯s garage, he had spotted Doris¡¯s blue Schwinn bicycle with her initials on it¡ªa gift fromErnest, left behind when they went to Washington. Warren had never owned a bicycle. ¡°A bicycle was a pretty big present in those days, you know,¡± he says. He started ridingDoris¡¯s. After a while he traded it in, usingit as 
most of the down payment on a boy¡¯s bike.25 Nobody said anything. Warren had that ¡°halo.¡± 
His grandfather doted on him, in his way. At night he and Ernest listened with ¡°reverential attention¡± to Ernest¡¯s favorite radio host, Fulton Lewis Jr., who expounded constantly on the theme that America should not get involved in foreign wars. Ernest needed no convincing. 
After Fulton Lewis Jr. recharged his conservative energies, Ernest would gather his latest thoughts on the best seller he was writing. He had decided to callit How to Run a Grocery Store and a Few Things I Learned about Fishing, feelingthese were ¡°the only two subjects about which mankind had any valid concern. 26 
¡°I would sit there at night, or late afternoon, early evening, and my grandfather would dictate this to me. I¡¯d write it on the back of old ledger sheets because we never wasted anything at Buffett and Son. He thought that it was the book all America was waiting for. I mean, there wasn¡¯t any sense writing another book. Not Gone with the Wind or anything like that. Why would anybody want to read Gone with the Wind 
27 
when they could be reading How to Run a Grocery Store and a Few Things I Learned about Fishing?¡± 
Warren loved it all, or almost all. He was so glad to be back in Omaha and reunited with his aunt, grandfather, and friends that he almost forgot about Washington for a while. 
A few months later, the rest of the family made the three-day drive to Nebraska for the summer and moved into a rented house. Their finances were becomingstretched. Heretofore, the stockyards had simply been the home of some of Howard¡¯s constituents. But when their reek drifted through town every time the wind blew from the south, everybody in Omaha knew¡ªthat was the smellof money. Howard now bought the South Omaha Feed Company to supplement his Congressional salary. And Warren went to work for his father. 
¡°South Omaha Feed was a huge warehouse that seemed hundreds of feet long and had no air-conditioning. My job was to carry fifty-pound sacks of animal feed from a freight car into the warehouse. You can¡¯t imagine how big a freight car looks when you get inside and it is packed to the top. And a freight car in the summer, that is really something. There was a guy named Frankie Zick who was tossing these things around. He was a weight lifter. I had on a short-sleeved shirt because it was so hot, and struggling to sort of get these feed bags into my arms and drag them. By noon my arms were kind of a bloody mess. That job lasted for about three hours. I just walked over to the streetcar and went home. Manual labor is for the birds.¡± 
Before the summer ended, the family took a short vacation at Lake Okoboji. As they were leaving, Doris discovered that Warren had traded in her bicycle. But through some miscarriage of family justice, again he suffered no consequences. Indeed, when summer ended and his parents forced Warren, sullen and grim-faced, onto a train headed back to Washington, the new bicycle he had bought for himself with his filched funds went along. Doris was furious. But the theft of her bicycle only marked the beginningof her brother¡¯s descent into behavior that would ultimately force his parents to take action. 
*** 
Back in Washington, the Buffetts moved into the Fitchous¡¯ house, an attractive two-story white colonialwith a mimosa tree in the yard in the sophisticated Washington suburb of SpringValley, right off Massachusetts 
Avenue. A restricted community*6 built in 1930 for the ¡°socially and officially prominent,¡± SpringValley was designed as a little ¡°colony of outstandingpersonages.¡±28 The homes ranged fromgigantic stone Tudor mansions to white two-story clapboard colonials like the Buffetts¡¯ house. Leila had paid $17,500 for it, includingsome furniture. Warren got the front bedroom. The families on either side had sons, allolder than Warren. Across the street lived the Keavneys, and Warren, now thirteen years old, developed a crush on Mrs. Keavney, the nearest motherly middle-aged woman in sight. ¡°I was nuts about her,¡± he says. 
The neighborhood had an international feel; it teemed with diplomats. The WAVES,29 women members of the wartime Navy, were headquartered at the nearby huge Gothic-style campus of American University. The Buffetts began adjustingto wartime life in Washington, a very different place fromOmaha. The country had finally become prosperous, the Depression over, but with wartime rationingon, money mattered less and less. Everyday life was measured in points and coupons: 48 blue points a month for canned goods; 64 red points for perishables; coupons for meat, shoes, butter, sugar, gasoline, and stockings. No amount of money would buy meat without coupons; only chicken went unrationed. With butter rationed and scarce, everyone learned to squeeze yellow food coloringinto containers of tasteless white oleomargarine. No one could buy a new car, because the carmakers devoted their plants to defense work. To take an automobile trip, you pooled the family¡¯s gas coupons. Blowingout a tire could mean serious trouble, since automobile tires were amongthe most strictly rationed commodities. 
Every morning, Howard took the streetcar that ran down Wisconsin Avenue to M Street in Georgetown, then turned down Pennsylvania Avenue. He got off near the old Executive Office Buildingand went to work in a Washington that heaved and roiled. The government and diplomatic community had ballooned, and the streets were packed with people in kilts and turbans and saris, with armies of clerical workers, and with a sea of uniformed military. 
From time to time, black women in Sunday dresses and church hats picketed the Capitol to protest lynchings in the South. Air-raid wardens walked the neighborhoods to check that all houses had opaque blackout curtains. Once or twice a month the Buffetts were required to go down to their basement and turn out allthe lights for a mandatory blackout drill. 
Leila disliked Washington fromthe day she arrived. She was homesick for Omaha, and lonely too. Immersed in his new job, Howard had become a more distant husband and father. He worked at the office allday, then read the CongressionalRecord and legislative materials all evening. He spent Saturdays at the office and often returned there on Sunday afternoons after church. 
Doris now attended Woodrow Wilson High School, where again she fellin right away with the popular 
crowd. Bertie, too, made friends easily, findinga compatible group of girls in the neighborhood. Warren¡¯s experience was nothinglike his sisters¡¯. He enrolled at Alice DealJunior High School,30 which sat atop the highest hill in Washington, overlookingSpringValley, the black school in the hollow behind it, and the rest of the city below. 
The students in his class¡ªmany of them diplomats¡¯ kids¡ªwere a world more polished than Warren and his now-lost friends from Rosehill School. At first, he had difficulty makingfriends. He went out for basketball and football, but since he wore glasses and was timid in physical contact sports, neither was a success. ¡°I¡¯d been pulled away from my friends and I wasn¡¯t making new friends. I was young for my class. I was not poised at all. I wasn¡¯t a terrible athlete, but I wasn¡¯t a great athlete in the least, so that was not an entry ticket. And Doris and Bertie were knockouts, so they did fine. A good-looking girl does not have trouble, because the world will adjust to her. So they both fit in better than I did, far better, which was a little 
irritating too.¡± 
His grades started out at Cs and Bs and improved to As, except in English. ¡°Mostly my grades related to how 31 
I felt about the teachers. I hated my English teacher, Miss Allwine. Music class was also Cs all the way through.¡± Miss Baum, the music teacher, was the best-lookingteacher in the school. Most of the boys had crushes on her, but Warren had realdifficulties with Miss Baum, who reported that he needed to improve in cooperation, courtesy, and self-reliance. 
¡°I was the youngest one in the class. I was interested in girls, and I wasn¡¯t avoiding them, but I felt I had less poise. The girls were way ahead of me socially. When I left Omaha, nobody in my class was dancing. When I moved to Washington, everybody had been dancing for a year or two. So I never caught up, in effect.¡± 
The Buffetts¡¯ move when Warren was twelve had deprived him of a crucial experience: Addie Fogg¡¯s dancingclass. At the American Legion hall in Omaha on Friday nights, Addie Fogg, a short, stout woman of middle age, lined the boys and girls up by height and paired themoff, boys in bow ties and girls in stiff petticoats. They practiced the fox trot and box-step waltz. A boy learned how a ¡°gentleman¡± behaves in public with a younglady, and struggled through elementary small talk to break a painful silence. He felt the touch of a girl¡¯s hand, learned to hold her by the waist, and sensed her face close to his own. He tasted for the first time the demands and potentialpleasures of leadinga partner as they moved in unison. With its many smallbut shared embarrassments and triumphs, this group rite of passage awakened in its graduates a sense of belonging. To miss it could be profoundly isolating. Already insecure, Warren had been left behind, a child amongbuddingyoungmen. 
His classmates noticed he was friendly but seemed shy, especially around girls.32 He was a year younger than most of them, born in August and havingskipped a half grade at Rosehill. ¡°I was out of whack. I felt very inept with girls at that time, and socially in general. But with older people, I was fine.¡± 
Not longafter the family¡¯s arrivalin SpringValley, Howard¡¯s friend Ed S. Miller¡ªone of those older people ¡ªcalled fromOmaha. He wanted to talk to Warren. 
¡°¡®Warren,¡¯ he said, ¡®I¡¯m in a terrible jam. The board of directors told me to get rid of our Washington, D.C., warehouse. This is a real problem for me. We have hundreds of pounds¡ªcases¡ªof stale cornflakes and cases of Barbecubes dog biscuits. I¡¯m in a real pickle. I¡¯m twelve hundred miles away and you¡¯re the only businessman I know in Washington.¡¯ 
¡°So he said, ¡®I know I can count on you. As a matter of fact, I told our warehouse men to deliver these cornflakes and Barbecubes dog biscuits to your house. Whatever you get for them, send me half; you keep the rest.¡¯ 
¡°And all of a sudden, these huge trucks come up and fill our garage, fill our basement, everything! Now my dad couldn¡¯t get the car in or anything. 
¡°And now I¡¯ve got these things. 
¡°Well, I just tried to figure out who it would be useful to, you know. And obviously the dog biscuits would be useful to a kennel. The cornflakes were not fit for human consumption anymore, so I figured they might be good for some animal. I sold the cornflakes to some poultry guy. I made probably a hundred bucks for the 
33
merchandise. When I sent the fifty percent to Mr. Miller, he wrote back and said, ¡®You saved my job.¡¯ 
¡°There were some awfully nice people like that back in Omaha. I always liked to hang around with adults when I was a kid. Always. I would walk over to church or something, and then I would just drop in on people. 
¡°My dad¡¯s friends were very nice too. They had this Bible class and various things at the rectory, and they 
would come over to the house and play bridge afterward. All these guys were very, very nice to me; they all liked me and called me Warreny. I¡¯d learned Ping-Pong from taking out books from the library and practicing at the Y. They knew I enjoyed playing with them down in the basement, and they¡¯d take me on. 
¡°I had all these things I was doing in Omaha. I had a nice niche there. 
¡°When we moved to Washington, the Ping-Pong table disappeared. It was like my cornet. And the Boy Scouts. I was doing all these different things, but they all ended when we moved. 
¡°So I was mad. 
¡°But I didn¡¯t know exactly how to direct that. I just knew I was having a whole lot less fun than I was having before my dad got elected.¡± 
After his father took himto watch a couple of sessions of Congress, Warren decided he wanted to become a congressionalpage, but Howard was not in a position to pull that off. Instead, Warren got a job caddyingat the Chevy Chase Club, but once again discovered that physicallabor did not suit him. ¡°My mother sewed towels inside my shirts because I was carrying these heavy bags around. Sometimes the golfers¡ªmainly women golfers¡ªwould feel sorry for me and practically carry the things themselves.¡± He needed a job that better fit his skills and talents. 
Almost from birth, like all the Buffetts, Warren had lived and breathed the news. He loved hearingit and now he would enter the business of deliveringit and find he loved that too. He got himself hired to throw a paper route, deliveringthe Washington Post and two different routes for the Times-Herald. The Times-Herald belonged to Cissy Patterson, the autocratic cousin of Chicago Tribune publisher Robert McCormick. It catered to the right wing, which hated FDR and kept the President up nights worryingwhat it would print the next day. Cissy Patterson feuded with Eugene Meyer, a financier who owned the Washington Post and supported FDR in every line of his paper¡¯s type. 
Warren started deliveringin SpringValley, near his home. ¡°The first year, the houses were far apart, which I was not too keen on. You had to deliver it every day, including Christmas Day. On Christmas morning, the family had to wait until I had done my paper route. When I was sick, my mom delivered the papers, but I 
handled the money. I had these jars in my room with half dollars and quarters.34 Then he added an afternoon route to his workload. 
¡°The Evening Star, which was owned by this blue-blooded Washington family, was the dominant paper in town.¡± 
In the afternoons, he rolled down the streets on his bike, grabbingcopies of the Star to throw from the huge basket on the front. Near the end of the route he had to steel himself. ¡°On Sedgwick was this terrible dog. 
¡°I liked to work by myself, where I could spend my time thinking about things I wanted to think about. Washington was upsetting at first, but I was in my own world all the time. I could be sitting in a room thinking, or I could be riding around flinging things and thinking.¡± 
The thoughts he was thinkingwere angry thoughts. He spent his days actingthem out at Alice Deal Junior High. Bertie Backus, Alice Deal¡¯s principal, prided herself on knowingeach pupil by name. She soon had special reason to know Warren Buffett¡¯s. 
¡°I was kind of behind when I got there, and then I fell further behind. I was just mad at the world. I did a lot of daydreaming, and I was always charting things¡ªI would bring stock charts to school and just wasn¡¯t paying attention to what was going on in class. Then I got to be friends with John McRae and Roger Bell. And I became disruptive.¡± 
The pleasingpersonality of his childhood allbut disappeared. In one class, Warren enlisted John McRae to play chess with himwhile the teacher was talking, just to be obnoxious. In another class, he cut open a golf 
ball, which squirted some sort of liquid onto the ceiling. 
The boys had started to golf. John McRae¡¯s father worked as a greenskeeper at Tregaron, a famous estate close to downtown Washington that belonged to heiress Marjorie Merriweather Post and her husband, Joseph 
E. Davies, who was ambassador to Russia. The family had dozens of servants and was almost never home, so the boys went over and played on the nine-hole golf course. Then Warren convinced Roger and John to run away with himto Hershey, Pennsylvania, where they were goingto try to get jobs caddyingat a well-known 
golf course. 35 ¡°We hitchhiked. And after we had successfully gone a hundred fifty miles or so, we made it to Hershey and stopped at this hotel and we made the mistake of bragging to the bellboy. 
¡°The next morning, when we came down, there was this huge highway patrolman waiting for us, who took us down to the highway patrol headquarters. 
¡°We just started lying. And we lied and lied and lied about having our parents¡¯ permission. All the while there was this Teletype machine spitting out alerts about this and that. I was sitting there thinking that pretty soon there was going to be an alert from Washington, D.C., and this guy will know we¡¯re lying. All I wanted to do was get out of there.¡± 
Somehow they lied convincingly enough that the patrolman let themgo.36 ¡°We started walking toward Gettysburg or someplace. We were having no luck hitchhiking, and then a trucker picked us up and stuffed all three of us into the cab.¡± They were so scared by then, they only wanted to go home. ¡°The trucker stopped at a diner in Baltimore and divided us up with other truckers. It was getting dark and we felt like we¡¯d never get out of there alive, but they took us back to Washington, separately. Roger Bell¡¯s mother was in the hospital. I mean, she had gone to the hospital over this, which made me feel terrible ¡¯cause I had talked Roger into going. I was on my way to being a four-star delinquent.¡± 
He had made another friend by then, Lou Battistone; but, as in Omaha, he had kept his friendship with Lou separate fromhis relationship with Roger and John. Meanwhile, Warren was doingworse than ever at school. His grades dropped to Cs and Ds and even D minuses: in English, in history, in freehand drawing, in music, 
even Cs in mathematics.37 ¡°Some of these grades were from the classes where I was supposedly good.¡± Warren¡¯s teachers found himstubborn, rude, and lazy.38 Some of the teachers gave him double black Xs, for extra bad. His behavior was shockingfor the times. In the 1940s, children did what they were told and obeyed their teachers. ¡°I was going downhill fast. My parents were dying, they were dying.¡± 
He excelled in only one class, and that was typing. Washington was fightingthe war on paper, and typingwas considered a criticalskill. 
At Alice Deal, typingwas taught by placingblack covers over the keys so that the students were forced to type by touch.39 It helped to be able to memorize, and it paid to have good hand-eye coordination. Warren was gifted at both. ¡°I made As every semester in typing. We all had these manual typewriters and, of course, you¡¯d slam the carriage back to hear this ¡®ding!¡¯ 
¡°I was¡ªby far¡ªthe best in the class at typing out of twenty people in the room. When they¡¯d have a speed test, I would just race through the first line so I could SLAM the carriage back. Everybody else would stop at that point, because they were still on the first word when they would hear my ¡®ding!¡¯ Then they¡¯d panic, and they¡¯d try to go faster, and they¡¯d screw up. So I had a lot of fun in typing class.¡± 
Warren put this same ferocious energy into his three paper routes. He took to the paper-throwingas if he had been born with inky fingers. Next, says Lou Battistone, ¡°he conned the route manager, with that personality of his, into givinghimThe Westchester¡± in historic Tenleytown. In this, Warren had pulled off a coup. The Westchester was the kind of route an adult news carrier would ordinarily manage. 
¡°It was a great opportunity. The Westchester was classy. The Westchester was just the cr¨¨me de la cr¨¨me. 
40 
Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands owned it. There were six U.S. Senators on that route, and colonels, and Supreme Court justices, all these biggies. There was Oveta Culp Hobby, and Leon Henderson, the head 
of the Office of Price Administration.¡± Mrs. Hobby came from a famous Texas publishingfamily, and had moved to Washington to serve as director of the WACs, the Women¡¯s Army Corps. 
¡°So all of a sudden, I had this huge operation. I might have been thirteen or fourteen years old. I first got The Westchester just for the Post. I had to give up my other morning routes when I got The Westchester, and I felt badly.¡± Warren had grown close to his Times-Herald manager. ¡°And when I told him that I had the chance to get the Post at The Westchester and that meant I had to give up his route in Spring Valley¡­he was terrific with me, but that was really kind of a sad moment.¡± 
By then Warren considered himself an experienced paper-route operator, but he was tacklinga complex logistical challenge. The Westchester consisted of five buildings that sprawled over 271/2 acres, four of them connected and one separate. The route included two more apartment buildings across CathedralAvenue, the Marlin and the Warwick. He would also be coveringa small route of single-family homes up to Wisconsin Avenue. 
¡°I started on a Sunday, and they handed me a book telling me the people and their apartment numbers. There was no training session and I didn¡¯t have the book in advance.¡± He put on his tennis shoes and pulled out his bus pass, which cost three cents each way, and climbed sleepily aboard the Capital Transit bus. He did not stop for breakfast. 
¡°I got up there around four-thirty a.m. There were these bundles and bundles of papers. I didn¡¯t know what the hell I was doing. I didn¡¯t know how the numbering system worked or anything. I sat there for hours and hours sorting and bundling the papers. I was short papers in the end, because people just took them from the bundles as they left for church. 
¡°The whole thing was a disaster. I thought, what the hell have I gotten into? It took until ten or eleven in the morning to finish up. 
¡°But I stumbled my way through. And it got better and I got good very fast. It was easy.¡± 
Warren raced out of his house to catch the first N2 bus over to The Westchester at 3900 Cathedral Avenue every morning. Often he had bus-pass number 001, the first person buyinga bus pass each week.41 The driver got used to lookingout for himif he was runninga little late. He would jump off the bus and run the couple of blocks over to The Westchester. 
He had figured out the most efficient route and turned what could have been a boringand repetitive job deliveringhundreds of newspapers each day into a competition with himself. ¡°See, the papers were a little thinner in those days, because of newsprint rationing. A thirty-six-page paper was a pretty good-size paper. I¡¯d stand at one end of the hallway with a bundle and pull off a paper, fold it over flat, and tuck it to make a pancake, or roll it into a biscuit. Then I smacked it against my thigh. And I¡¯d twist it against my wrist to put some spin on it and slide it down the hall. I could slide that thing fifty, even a hundred feet. It was kind of a test of skill, because the apartment doors were at different lengths down the hallway. I¡¯d do the longest ones first. But the trick was to be able to do it in such a way that they¡¯d all come to rest a few inches from the door. And sometimes people would have milk bottles, which made it more interesting.¡± 
He also sold calendars to his newspaper customers, and he developed another sideline too. He asked all his customers for their old magazines as scrap paper for the war effort.42 Then he would check the labels on the magazines to figure out when the subscriptions were expiring, usinga code book he had gotten fromMoore-
Cottrell, the publishingpowerhouse that had hired him as an agent to sell magazines. He made a card file of subscribers, and before their subscriptions expired, Warren would be knockingat their door, sellingthem a new magazine.43 
Because The Westchester had so much turnover in wartime, Warren¡¯s biggest dread was customers who skipped out and didn¡¯t pay, leavinghimstuck with the cost of their papers. After a few people skipped out on him, he started tippingthe elevator girls to let him know when people were about to move. Then the imperious Oveta Culp Hobby got behind. He thought that she should have a little more empathy for her paperboy, since she owned her own newspaper, the Houston Post. But he began to worry that she would skip out on him. 
¡°I paid my own bills monthly, always on time, and I always showed up to deliver the papers. I was a responsible kid. I got presented with a war bond for perfect service. With the customers, I didn¡¯t want to let the receivables build up. I tried all kinds of things with Oveta Culp Hobby¡ªleaving notes¡ªand finally ended up knocking on her door at six in the morning to catch her before she could escape.¡± Shy in other ways, Warren was never timid when it came to money. When Mrs. Hobby answered the door, ¡°I handed her an envelope, and she had to pay me.¡± 
After school, Warren rode the bus back to SpringValley and jumped on his bike to deliver the Star. On rainy winter afternoons, he would sometimes come off his paper route and appear on the doorstep of his friends¡¯ homes. He always wore battered canvas sneakers, so fullof holes that his feet were swimmingto the ankles; his skin would be pimply with cold inside a soaking-wet oversize plaid shirt. For some reason he never seemed to wear a coat. Motherly Mrs. Whoever would smile and shake her head at the pitifulsight, bundle 
him up, and towelhimoff while he basked in her warmth.44 
At the end of 1944, Warren filed his first income tax return. He paid only seven dollars in taxes; to get it down to that, he deducted his wristwatch and bicycle as business expenses. He knew that was questionable. But at the time, he was not above cuttinga few corners to get where he wanted to go. 
At age fourteen, he had now fulfilled the promise laid out in his favorite book, One Thousand Ways to Make $1,000. His savings now totaled around a thousand dollars. He took great pride in that accomplishment. So far, he was ahead of the game, way ahead of the game, and gettingahead of the game, he knew, was the way to his goal. 
10 
TrueCrimeStories 
Washington, D.C. . 1943¨C1945 
Bad grades, tax evasion, and runningaway were the least of Warren¡¯s troubles in junior high. His parents didn¡¯t know it, but their son had turned to a life of crime. 
¡°Well, I was antisocial, in eighth and ninth grade, after I moved there. I fell in with bad people and did things I shouldn¡¯t have. I was just rebelling. I was unhappy.¡± 
He started with minor schoolboy pranks. 
¡°I loved print shop. I used to make calculations in print-shop class of the frequency of letters and numbers. That was something I could do by myself. I could set type, you know, and that sort of thing. I enjoyed printing up all kinds of things. 
¡°I made up a letterhead from the American Temperance Union, Reverend A. W. Paul, President. I¡¯d write letters to people on that letterhead saying that for years I¡¯d lectured around the country on the evils of drink, and in these travels my appearances were always accompanied by my young apprentice, Harold. Harold was an example of what drink could do to men. He¡¯d stand there on the stage with a pint, drooling, unable to comprehend what was going on around him, pathetic. Then I said that, unfortunately, young 
1
Harold died last week, and a mutual friend had suggested that you might be a replacement for him.¡± 
The people with whomWarren felt most comfortable encouraged his antisocialimpulses. He and a couple of new friends, Don Danly and Charlie Tron, took to hangingout at the new Sears store. Near Tenley Circle where Nebraska and Wisconsin Avenues intersected, the store was an eye-openingswoop of modern design dropped into the middle of Tenleytown, the second oldest neighborhood in Washington. Letters the height of 
a man spelled out SEARSon a curved metaldeck severalstories above sidewalk level.2 On the roof behind the Sears sign was hidden a great novelty, an open-air parkinggarage, which quickly became popular with high schoolkids as a place to park and neck. The store had become the hangout for all the junior high kids too. Warren and his friends rode the H2 bus there at lunchtime or on Saturdays. 
Most of the kids liked the dark little lunch counter Sears had installed in the basement, with its mesmerizing conveyer belt that spit out doughnuts allday long. But Warren, Don, and Charlie preferred Woolworth¡¯s across the street, even though the police station was on the opposite corner. Woolworth¡¯s sat kitty-corner from Sears. They could eat lunch and case the joint through the windows. 
After their hamburgers, the boys would stroll down the stairs into Sears¡¯s lower level, bypassingthe lunch counter and goingstraight to the sporting-goods section. 
¡°We¡¯d just steal the place blind. We¡¯d steal stuff for which we had no use. We¡¯d steal golf bags and golf clubs. I walked out of the lower level where the sporting goods were, up the stairway to the street, carrying a golf bag and golf clubs, and the clubs were stolen, and so was the bag. I stole hundreds of golf balls.¡± 
They referred to their theft as ¡°hooking.¡± 
¡°I don¡¯t know how we didn¡¯t get caught. We couldn¡¯t have looked innocent. A teenager who¡¯s doing 
3
something wrong does not look innocent. 
¡°I took the golf balls and filled up these orange sacks in my closet. As fast as Sears put them out, I was hooking them. I had no use for them, really. I wasn¡¯t selling them then. It¡¯s hard to think of a reason why you had this multiplying group of golf balls in the closet, this orange sack that¡¯s just getting bigger all the time. I should have diversified my theft. Instead, I made up this crazy story for my parents¡ªand I know they didn¡¯t believe me, but¡ªI told them I had this friend, and his father had died. He kept finding more of these 
4
golf balls that his father had bought. Who knows what my parents talked about at night.¡± 
The Buffetts were aghast. Warren was their gifted child, but by the end of 1944, he had become the school delinquent. ¡°My grades were a quantification of my unhappiness. Math¡ªCs. English¡ªC, D, D. Everything Xs for self-reliance, industry, courtesy. The less I interacted with teachers, the better it was. They actually put me in a room by myself there for a while where they would kind of shove my lessons under the door like 
5
Hannibal Lecter.¡± 
When graduation day came and the students were told to show up in a suit and tie, Warren refused. With that his principal, Bertie Backus, had had enough. 
¡°They wouldn¡¯t let me graduate with the class at Alice Deal, because I was so disruptive and I wouldn¡¯t wear clothes that were appropriate. It was major. It was unpleasant. I was really rebelling. Some of the teachers predicted that I was going to be a disastrous failure. I set the record for checks on deficiencies in deportment and all that. 
¡°But my dad never gave up on me. And my mother didn¡¯t either, actually. Neither one. It¡¯s great to have parents that believe in you.¡± 
Yet by the springof 1945, as Warren was startinghigh school, the Buffetts had had enough too. By now, it was no great mystery how to motivate Warren. Howard threatened to take away the source of his money. 
¡°My dad, who was always supportive of me, said, ¡®I know what you¡¯re capable of. And I¡¯m not asking you to perform one hundred percent, but you can either keep behaving this way or you can do something in 
relation to your potential. But if you don¡¯t do it, you have to give up the paper routes.¡¯ And that hit me. My dad was low-key, just sort of letting me know he was disappointed with me. And that killed me probably a lot more than his telling me I couldn¡¯t do this or that, you know.¡± 
11 
PudgySheWasNot 
Washington, D.C. . 1944¨C1945 
The disruption Warren had created in his family¡¯s life undoubtedly made his father¡¯s already challenging career as a new Congressman no easier. Members of the 78th Congress fraternized under a sort of jolly monarchy ruled by House Speaker SamRayburn, a Texas Democrat who kept five portraits of Robert E. Lee in his office, all facingsouth. The House that Rayburn oversaw was a comfortable home for the typical backbencher, an elbow-grabber who lived for county fairs and the chance to kiss somebody¡¯s grandma, a beauty queen, or any secretary he could catch. Famed for his artful behind-the-scenes vote-wranglingand powerful oratory, Rayburn operated a sort of private saloon in the afternoons where he served ¡°bourbon and branch¡± water to his favorites. 
Naturally, Howard was not amongthem. Besides the fact that he was a Republican, his idea of a good time was readingthe Congressional Record every night. He never went near a saloon. And yet, in many other ways, he did fit the profile of the typicalCongressman of the era¡ªhailingfroma small city, graduate of a state university, middlingstudent, background in community politics, Rotarian from the middle of the middle class, not part of the country-club set, and a foe of Communism. 
But instead of joiningthe rest of his peers in what amounted to a club and beginningthe climb up the ladder of power, Howard Buffett quickly gained a reputation as perhaps the least-backslappingCongressman ever to represent his state. He stayed miles away fromthe ¡°rubber chicken circuit¡± of campaign money and vote-gettingevents that occupied so many Congressmen, and made it known his vote was not for sale or barter. He turned down a raise because the people who elected himhad voted himin at a lower salary. He went around with eyebrows lofted at the perks that came with beinga Congressman. The subsidized restaurants, the payrolls padded with friends, relatives, and mistresses, the greenhouse that supplied free plants, the ¡°stationery store¡± that sold, at wholesale prices, everythingfromtires to jewelry¡ªHoward was shocked by all of it and let that be known. 
His long-standingisolationismwas shared by a friend, Republican leader Robert Taft.1 But isolationists were no longer enteringCongress; they were leavingor retiring. Moreover, with the country at war and the government runningat a deficit, Howard was obsessed with the quixotic goalof tryingto return the country to the ¡°gold standard.¡± The United States had dropped the gold standard in 1933. Ever since, the Treasury had been printingmoney freely to finance first the New Deal and now the war. Howard feared that someday the United States might wind up like Germany in the 1930s, when people had to cart wheelbarrows of money down the street to buy a head of cabbage¡ªthe direct result of Germany beingforced to deplete its gold stock 
to pay reparations after World War I.2 The economic chaos that resulted was one of the major factors that had led to Hitler. 
Certain that the government was goingto spend the country into ruination, Howard bought a farmback in Nebraska to serve as a refuge for the family when everybody else starved. A distrust of government bonds was so well-entrenched in the Buffett household that when the family held a powwow about givinga savings bond to somebody for a birthday present, youngBertie, nine years old, thought her parents were tryingto put 
one over on the guy. ¡°But won¡¯t he know they¡¯re worthless?¡±3 she asked. 
Howard¡¯s rigidity impeded himfromdoinghis job, which was to legislate. 
¡°He would lose these votes in the House, maybe 412 to 3. My dad would be among the three. And it just didn¡¯t get to him. He was very much at peace. It would have gotten to me¡ªI get mad when I lose. I can¡¯t ever recall seeing him depressed or despondent. He just figured he was doing the best he could. He went his own way, and he knew why he was there¡ªfor us kids. He had a very pessimistic appraisal of where the country was going, but he was not a pessimist.¡± 
The way Howard invariably held aloft his principles¡ªinstead of workingtoward Republican Party goals by joiningcoalitions¡ªstrained relationships with his colleagues and took a toll on the family. Leila cared about fittingin; other people¡¯s opinions mattered to her. She was also competitive. ¡°Why can¡¯t you be a little more flexible,¡± she said, ¡°like Ken Wherry?¡±¡ªthe junior Nebraska senator who was movingquickly up the ranks. Howard was havingnone of it. ¡°We believed in him,¡± says Doris, ¡°but it was hard to see himlose allthe time.¡± That was an understatement. All the Buffetts admired Howard¡¯s fortitude and credit their father for teachingthemintegrity. But each of the children absorbed in their own way a desire to belongthat somehow muted or balanced the family streak of independence. 
Her husband¡¯s stance as the lone wolf of the party exacerbated Leila¡¯s irritable mood. Still miserable about livingin Washington, she tried to create a miniature Omaha and spent her free time with the women of the Nebraska delegation. But that free time was limited, for she no longer had a cleaninglady. She felt put upon. 
¡°I gave it all up to marry Howard,¡±4 she would say, addingthis lament to her stories of how she and Howard had sacrificed for their ungratefulchildren¡¯s welfare. But rather than teachingthose children to help around the house, she did everything, because ¡°it was just easier to do it myself.¡± Feelings of martyrdommade her angry at the kids a lot of the time, especially at Doris, who was havingher own issues about fittingin. 
Although strikingly pretty, Doris says she never felt that way, and was insecure about whether she was good enough for the sophisticated Washington crowd of which she longed to be a part. She was invited to the French Embassy for Margaret Truman¡¯s birthday party and was added to The Debutante Register, as she 
began planningto debut as a Princess of Ak-Sar-Ben*7 with the crowd she would have been graduatingwith back in Omaha. Warren made fun of her for her pretensions. 
Leila, herself a determined striver who cared deeply about appearances, would pore over every bit of news about the Duchess of Windsor, a penniless commoner who had been rescued by a prince.5 But, unlike the duchess, who spent the rest of her life amassingone of the world¡¯s most impressive collections of jewels, Leila¡¯s ambition and pride wrapped themselves in a self-conscious disdain for ostentation. She pictured the family as a middle-class Midwestern archetype, a Saturday Evening Post magazine cover, and berated Doris for beingsocially ambitious. 
Still fourteen years old, Warren became a sophomore at Woodrow Wilson High Schoolin February 1945, upon his graduation from Alice Deal.6 He wanted to be both ¡°special¡± and ¡°normal¡± at the same time. Much less mature than his classmates, he was beingcarefully watched by his parents, who were determined to see him straighten out. His paper routes were the source of his autonomy, such autonomy as he now had. And he had been reading¡ªas wellas throwing¡ªthe papers. 
¡°I read the comics, the sports section, and looked at the stock pages every morning before I delivered the newspapers. I read the cartoon Li¡¯l Abner every morning. I had to know what Li¡¯l Abner was doing every day. His appeal was that he made you feel so smart. You¡¯d read this thing and think, ¡®If I was in that position¡­this guy is so dumb.¡¯ Because here was Daisy Mae, this incredible woman who was just nuts about him, and was always chasing after him, and he just kept passing her up and not noticing her. Every red-blooded American boy in those days would have been just waiting there for Daisy Mae to catch him.¡± 
Daisy Mae Scragg, the hillbilly heroine of the Appalachian cartoon hamlet of Dogpatch, was a bodacious blonde whose cleavage burst froman off-the-shoulder polka-dot blouse. The dim-witted strongman Li¡¯l Abner Yokum spent most of his time tryingto evade Daisy Mae¡¯s marital designs on him. But the faster he 
ran away, the more deaf he seemed to her attention and longing, the more he spurned her, the harder Daisy Mae chased him. Even though rich and powerfulmen wooed her, to Daisy Mae there was but one man on earth, Li¡¯l Abner.7 
Besides elusiveness, Li¡¯lAbner¡¯s only apparent asset was his manly physique. Warren¡¯s poor record with girls so far suggested that if he ever wanted to attract the interest of a girl like Daisy Mae, he had better do somethingto make himself more attractive. Now he developed a new interest, which conveniently gave him an excuse as well for hidingaway down in the basement. The way that Frankie Zick could clean-and-jerk fifty-pound bags of animalfeed for hours at a time at South Omaha Feed had impressed him. He got his friend Lou Battistone interested and they embarked on a weight-liftingprogram. At the time, weight training was not the stuff of serious athletes, but it had many qualities that appealed to Warren: systems, measuring, counting, repetition, and competingwith yourself. In search of technique, he had discovered Bob Hoffman and his magazine, Strength and Health. 
Strength and Health was Hoffman¡¯s attempt to overcome the stigma against weight liftingthrough aggressive promotion. It was edited, published, and apparently written largely by Hoffman himself. Ads for his products appeared on nearly every page. ¡°Uncle¡± Bob¡¯s technical knowledge, his razzle-dazzle, the man¡¯s unflagging ability to market himself, were striking. 
¡°He was the coach of most of the Olympic team. He was the head of the York Barbell Company, and he was the author of the Big Arms and the Big Chest books. The basic thing he sold initially was barbell sets. If you went to a sporting-goods store then, everything was York barbells. You could buy all these different kinds of sets.¡± 
Warren got a set of dumbbells and a barbellwith a set of plates in increments of one and a quarter pounds that slipped on and off the bar, which he tightened with a little screwdriver that came with the set. He kept the weights in the basement and was ¡°always down there clanking. My parents got a big kick out of the whole thing.¡± 
Sometimes he went down to the YMCA to lift weights amongother youngmen. He and Lou took their hobby seriously, makinginsider jokes about the ¡°heavy and light¡± liftingsystem and ¡°upright rowingmotions.¡± They paid close attention to everythingUncle Bob wrote. Hoffman knew how to adapt to the tenor of the times. Everyone knew about the vicious Jap soldier¡¯s ability to withstand pain and suffering, so he wrote that the point of liftingweights was to fight the Japanese. He illustrated this with a photo of a vicious Jap soldier, arched in a backbend fromhis toes to the crown of his head, liftinga huge set of cement barbells over his chest, trainingto beat the Allies. Warren was not liftingweights to fight the Japanese, or, for that matter, to fight anybody. Everythingthat Uncle Bob wrote, however, inspired himin his competition with himself. 
But while Warren was clankingdown in the basement, the Republicans were in hell. Franklin Roosevelt had managed to win a fourth term as President, ensuringthe Democrats another four years in the White House. At the dinner table, the family listened to much rantingfrom Howard. Then, on April12, Roosevelt died of a cerebral hemorrhage, and his Vice President, Harry Truman, succeeded himas President. 
Roosevelt¡¯s death sent most of the country into deep mourning, tinged with fear. Three and a half years into the war, the country had lost the man who made it feelsecure, and it had low expectations of Truman. He retained FDR¡¯s cabinet and sounded so humble that some thought he might be overwhelmed by the job. But to the Buffetts, no one could be worse than FDR. The family down the street whose father worked for the Canadian Embassy came to call on their Congressman neighbor upon the President¡¯s death and pay their 
condolences. But when they arrived, Doris says, ¡°Yo, ho, ho, we were celebrating.¡±8 
And to Warren, the death of a President meant another way to make money. Newspapers put out special editions, and he hustled himself out to the street corner, hawkingpapers while everybody mourned. 
One month later, on May 8, 1945, came V-E Day, the formalend of the war in Europe, followingGermany¡¯s unconditionalsurrender. Again there were special editions to sell, and Warren echoed his father¡¯s political convictions as a matter of course. But at the time, he was only passingly interested in these adult concerns, because his realobsession was weight liftingand Bob Hoffman. He spent most of his free time down in the basement. A few weeks later, when school was out, he could wait no longer. He had to meet his idol, Uncle Bob. ¡°He was it. I had to see him in person.¡± 
With their parents¡¯ amused blessing, Warren and Lou took off for York, Pennsylvania, hitchhhikingpart of the way. 9 
¡°He had this barbell factory up there in York where they turned this stuff out. It was really more of a foundry. And he had the whole Olympic team working there. John Grimek was the big bodybuilder. Steve Stanko held the world¡¯s record then for the clean and jerk: three hundred eighty-one pounds. But this is before they had super-heavyweight classifications.¡± 
In one sense the visit was demoralizing. ¡°The guys did not bulk up the same way in those days. It blew my mind that here were these guys that were Olympic champions, but a lot of them were small because they were in smaller-weight classes. And if you saw them in a foundry, wearing foundry-type clothes, they just looked like nothing.¡± But in another sense, the sight of those fairly ordinary-lookingmen lifted the boys¡¯ aspirations. Maybe success in bodybuildingwas within their reach. They saw themselves becomingmen, physical specimens who could impress a woman. ¡°Uncle Bob¡ªwhen he spoke, it was like God was talking to us. And when you looked at yourself in the mirror, you saw deltoids and abs and the latissimus dorsi and everything. You learned every muscle group.¡± 
But the most impressive celebrity in Strength and Health¡ªapart fromUncle Bob himself¡ªwas not John Grimek, the greatest bodybuilder in the world. It was a woman. 
¡°There were not a lot of women in Strength and Health. Pudgy Stockton¡¯s about the only one that ever made it. I liked Pudgy. She was impressive. We talked about her a lot at school.¡± 
That was more than a slight understatement. Warren and Lou were obsessed with Abbye ¡°Pudgy¡± Stockton, a work of art in human flesh¡ªtaut thighs ripplingas her chiseled arms lofted a huge barbellabove her wind-whipped hair, bikini showingoff her tiny waist and perky bosom to all the musclemen and gaping onlookers at Santa Monica¡¯s Muscle Beach. Five foot one and 115 pounds, she could lift a grown man in the air over her head and do it without sacrificingany of her femininity. As the world¡¯s ¡°Foremost Female Physical Culturist,¡± she wrote ¡°Barbelles,¡± a column in Strength and Health, and conducted a Salon of 
Figure Development, ¡°specializingin bust development, figure contouring, and reducing¡± in Los Angeles.10 
¡°She had the muscle tone of Mitzi Gaynor and the mammary development of Sophia Loren,¡± says Lou Battistone. ¡°She was phenomenal. And we¡ªI have to admit to you¡ªwe lusted for her.¡± 
Untilnow, Daisy Mae had been Warren¡¯s fantasy girl. He would always look for the qualities of Daisy Mae in a woman. But Pudgy¡ªPudgy was real. 
It was not clear, however, exactly what you did if you had a girlfriend like Pudgy.11 The boys puzzled over ads for ¡°Bob Hoffman¡¯s guide to a successful happy marriage,¡± which featured ¡°Premaritalexamination. How to examine your wife before marriage to make sure she¡¯s ¡®intact,¡¯ as wellas courtship, why people marry, and minor forms of lovemaking.¡± Just what were the minor forms of lovemaking? they wondered. Even the major forms were largely a mystery to them; the ads in the back of Strength and Health were the best the 1940s could do in terms of sex education. Don¡¯t worry, Dad, we¡¯re down in the basement, doinga little studyingfor our physics exam. 
However, in the end, Warren¡¯s fascination with numbers won out. 
¡°You know, you kept measuring that biceps to see if it¡¯d gone from thirteen to thirteen and a quarter inches. And you were always worried whether you were loosening up the tape or anything. But I never improved from looking like the Charles Atlas ¡®before¡¯ picture. I think my biceps went from thirteen inches to thirteen and a quarter inches after thousands of curls. 
¡°The Big Arms book didn¡¯t do me much good.¡± 
12 
SilentSales 
Washington, D.C. . 1945¨C1947 
That August, while the Buffetts were back in Omaha, the United States dropped two atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki; on September 2, Japan formally surrendered. The war was over. Americans celebrated in near hysteria. But Warren recalls that he quickly started thinkingthrough the next chess moves after the droppingof the bombs. 
¡°I didn¡¯t know anything about physics. But I knew you could kill a couple of hundred thousand people if you were the first one to use the bomb in a war. It¡¯s as if I run into some guy in a dark alley, and I¡¯ve got a cannon, but he¡¯s got a gun. If he¡¯s willing to pull the trigger and I have some moral compunction against doing it, he wins. Einstein said right away, ¡®This has changed everything in the world except how men think.¡¯ It put a fuse to the end of the world. Now, it may be a long fuse, and there may be ways to interrupt it, but once that metaphorical bomb has a dozen fuses all burning, the problem becomes a different sort of thing than if no fuse is lit. I was only fourteen, but it seemed to me just totally clear what was going to happen, and it has happened to quite a degree.¡± 
A few weeks later, with the family back in Washington, Warren returned to finish tenth grade at Woodrow Wilson High School, at fifteen still a kid but now also a businessman. He was makingso much money throwingpapers that he had accumulated more than $2,000. Howard had let his son invest in Builders Supply 
Co., a hardware store that he and Carl Falk were openingnext to the feed store back in Omaha.1 Meanwhile, 
Warren himself had bought a forty-acre farmfor $1,200 about seventy miles away, near Walthill, in Thurston County, Nebraska.2 A tenant farmer worked the farmand they shared the profits¡ªjust the kind of arrangement Warren liked, with someone else doingthe sweaty, boringwork. Warren began introducing himself to people in high school as Warren Buffett from Nebraska, who owned a tenant farmback in the 
Midwest.3 
He thought like a businessman but did not look like one. He fit uncomfortably into the high schoolcrowd, showingup with the same tattered sneakers and droopy socks peekingout from under baggy trousers day after day, skinny neck and narrow shoulders swallowed inside his shirt. If forced into dress shoes, he wore startlingyellow or white socks above the scuffed leather. He seemed to squirmin his seat all the time. Sometimes he looked shy, almost innocent. At others, he wore a sharp, tough expression. 
Doris and Warren ignored each other if their paths crossed in the halls of high school. ¡°Doris, who was very popular, was particularly ashamed of me, because I dressed terribly. Sometimes your sister would help you get socialized but I rejected that, basically. It wasn¡¯t her fault; I was painfully aware of being socially maladjusted. I may just have felt so hopeless.¡± 
Warren¡¯s stone-faced, smart-aleck act covered up the feelings of inadequacy that had made his life so difficult since leavingOmaha. He desperately wanted to be normal, but still felt very much the outsider. 
He was ¡°hesitant,¡± said classmate Norma Thurston, his friend Don Danly¡¯s girlfriend, ¡°and he chose his words carefully and never made any commitment, however small, if he thought he might have to take it back.¡±4 
Many of his classmates plunged enthusiastically into teenage life, joiningfraternities and sororities, getting pinned, and goingto parties in their families¡¯ basements where they served soda pop, hot dogs, and ice cream and then turned the lights down while everybody necked. Instead of necking, Warren rubber-necked. He had a regular Saturday night reservation with Lou Battistone at Jimmy Lake¡¯s theater, a local burlesque joint, where they had a fantasy flirtation with one of the dancers, Kitty Lyne. Warren would roar with laughter 
when a comedian took a pratfall or the second banana in the balcony started hecklinghim.5 He spent twenty-five dollars on a 1920s-style raccoon coat. When he wore it down to Jimmy Lake¡¯s, the bouncer told him, ¡°No clowningaround, you guys. Either take that coat off, or you can¡¯t come in.¡±6 He took it off. 
The side of Warren that had robbed Sears blind was in transition: fading, but not gone. He and Danly still took the occasional five-finger discount at Sears. When his teachers told himthey had most of their retirement savings in AT&T stock, he shorted it, then showed them the trade tickets to give themheartburn. 
¡°I was a pain in the ass,¡± he says. 7 
His exceptional powers of reasoningand smart-aleck tendencies combined into a talent for takingperverse stands. Somehow, probably because he was the son of a Congressman, he wound up appearingon a radio program on January 3, 1946. CBS¡°American Schoolof the Air¡± brought its programto WTOP, the local station owned by the Washington Post. On that Saturday morning, Warren went down to the station, where he and four other kids sat around a microphone and debated as ¡°Congress in Session.¡± 
The show¡¯s hostess assigned him the job of spicingup the debate. He argued convincingly in favor of absurdities¡ªideas on the order of eliminatingincome taxes or annexingJapan. ¡°When they wanted someone to take a crazy position,¡± he says, ¡°I did it.¡± But while he relished argument for its own sake, his clever retorts, lightning-fast counterarguments, and general contrariness hindered his quest to be liked by his peers. 
Untilnow, Warren¡¯s efforts to get alongwith people had had mixed results. He charmed adults, except for his teachers. He felt ill at ease with his peers, but had always managed to make a few close friends. He desperately wanted people to like himand especially not to attack himpersonally. He wanted a system. In fact, he already had one, but he wasn¡¯t usingthe system to its fulleffect. Now, lackingany other resources, he began to work harder at it. 
Warren had found this systemat his grandfather¡¯s house, where he read everythinghe could get his hands on at a blazingpace, just as he did at home. Browsingthe bookshelf in the back bedroom, he had consumed every issue of the Progressive Grocer and every single copy of the Daily Nebraskan that had been edited by his father, and worked his way like a boll weevilthrough allfifteen years of the Reader¡¯s Digest that Ernest had accumulated. This bookcase also held a series of small biographies, many of them on business leaders. Since a youngage Warren had studied the lives of men like Jay Cooke, Daniel Drew, JimFisk, Cornelius Vanderbilt, Jay Gould, John D. Rockefeller, and Andrew Carnegie. Some of these books he read and reread. 
One of them was special¡ªnot a biography but a paperback written by former salesman Dale Carnegie,8 enticingly titled How to Win Friends and Influence People. He had discovered it at age eight or nine. 
Warren knew he needed to win friends, and he wanted to influence people. He opened the book. It hooked him from the first page. ¡°If you want to gather honey,¡± it began, ¡°don¡¯t kick over the beehive.¡±9 
Criticismis futile, said Carnegie. 
Rule number one: Don¡¯t criticize, condemn, or complain. 
This idea riveted Warren. Criticismwas somethinghe knew everythingabout. 
Criticismputs people on the defensive, Carnegie said, and makes them strive to justify themselves. It is dangerous, because it wounds people¡¯s precious pride, hurts their sense of importance, and arouses resentment. Carnegie advocated avoidingconfrontation. ¡°People don¡¯t want criticism. They want honest and sincere appreciation.¡± I amnot talkingabout flattery, Carnegie said. Flattery is insincere and selfish. 
Appreciation is sincere and comes fromthe heart. The deepest urge in human nature is ¡°the desire to be important.¡±10 
Although ¡°don¡¯t criticize¡± was the most important, there were thirty rules in all. 
Everybodywantsattentionandadmiration.Nobodywantstobecriticized. ThesweetestsoundintheEnglishlanguageisthesoundofaperson¡¯sownname. Theonlywaytogetthebestofanargumentistoavoidit. Ifyouarewrong,admititquicklyandemphatically. Askquestionsinsteadofgivingdirectorders. Givetheotherpersonafinereputationtoliveupto. Callattentiontopeople¡¯smistakesindirectly.Lettheotherpersonsaveface. 
I am talkingabout a new way of life, Carnegie said. I am talking about a new way of life. 
Warren¡¯s heart lifted. He thought he had found the truth. This was a system. He felt so disadvantaged socially that he needed a systemto sell himself to people, a system he could learn once and use without havingto respond in a new way to each changingsituation. 
But it took numbers to prove that it actually worked. He decided to do a statistical analysis of what happened if he did follow Dale Carnegie¡¯s rules, and what happened if he didn¡¯t. He tried givingattention and appreciation, and he tried doingnothingor beingdisagreeable. People around himdid not know he was performingexperiments on themin the silence of his own head, but he watched how they responded. He kept track of his results. Filled with a risingjoy, he saw what the numbers proved:The rules worked. 
Now he had a system. He had a set of rules. 
But it did you no good to read about the rules. You had to live them. I am talking about a new way of life, said Carnegie. 
Warren began to practice. He started at a very elementary level. Some of it came naturally to him, but he found that this systemcould not be applied in an automatic and easy manner. ¡°Don¡¯t criticize¡± sounded simple, but there were ways to criticize without even realizingit. It was hard not to show off, not to display annoyance and impatience. And admittingyou were wrongwas easy sometimes and very difficult at other times. Givingpeople attention and sincere appreciation and admiration was one of the hardest. Someone sunk in misery much of the time, as Warren was, found it hard to focus on others, not himself. 
Nevertheless, he gradually worked out for himself that the dark years of junior high were livingproof that ignoringDale Carnegie¡¯s rules didn¡¯t work. As he started to gain his footingin high school, he continued to practice the rules in encounters with others. 
Unlike most people who read Carnegie¡¯s book and thought, gee, that makes sense, then set the book aside and forgot about it, Warren worked at this project with unusualconcentration; he kept comingback to these ideas and usingthem. Even when he failed and forgot and went for longstretches without applyinghimself to the system, he returned and resumed practicingin the end. By high school, he had accumulated a few more friends, joined the Woodrow Wilson golf team, and managed to make himself inoffensive if not popular. Dale Carnegie had honed his naturalwit; above all, it enhanced his persuasiveness, his flair for salesmanship. 
He seemed intense, yet with an impish side; even-tempered and congenial, yet somehow solitary. Certainly his passion for makingmoney¡ªwhich occupied most of his spare time¡ªmade himunique at Woodrow 
Wilson. 
No one else in high school was a businessman. Just from pitchingnewspapers a couple of hours a day, he was 
earning$175 a month, more money than his teachers. In 1946, a grown man felt wellpaid if he made $3,000 a year for full-time work.11 Warren kept his money in a chifforobe at home, which no one but he was allowed to touch. ¡°I was in his house one day,¡± says Lou Battistone, ¡°and he opened up a drawer and said, ¡®This is what I¡¯ve been saving.¡¯ And he had seven hundred dollars in smallbills. That¡¯s a bigstack, let me tell 
you.¡±12 
He had started severalnew businesses. Buffett¡¯s Golf Balls peddled refurbished golf balls for six bucks a dozen.13 These he ordered froma fellow in Chicago named Witek, whom Warren couldn¡¯t resist nicknaming ¡°Half-Witek.¡± ¡°They were classy balls, really good golf balls too, Titleist and Spalding Dots and Maxflis, which I bought for three and a half bucks a dozen. They looked brand-new. He probably got them the way 
we first tried to get them, out of water traps, only he was better.¡± Nobody at school knew about Half-Witek. Even his family didn¡¯t seemto realize that he bought the used golf balls that he and his friend Don Danly were selling. Fellow members of the Wilson golf team thought he fished themout of water traps.14 
Buffett¡¯s Approval Service sold sets of collectible stamps to collectors out of state. Buffett¡¯s Showroom Shine was a car-buffingbusiness that he and Battistone ran out of Lou¡¯s father¡¯s used-car lot, untilthey abandoned this because it involved manual labor and turned out to be too damn much work.15 
Then one day when Warren was seventeen and a senior, he raced to tellDon Danly about a new idea. It had the same exponential quality to it as the weighingmachines from One Thousand Ways to Make $1,000 ¡ªwhere one machine could pay for another and another. ¡°I bought this old pinballmachine for twenty-five 
bucks,¡± he said, ¡°and we can have a partnership. Your part of the dealis to fix it up. 16 And, lookit, we¡¯lltell Frank Erico, the barber, ¡®We represent Wilson¡¯s Coin-Operated Machine Company, and we have a proposition from Mr. Wilson. It¡¯s at no risk to you. Let¡¯s put this nickel machine in the back, Mr. Erico, and 
your customers can play while they wait. And we¡¯ll split the money.¡¯¡±17 
Danly was game. Although no one had ever put pinballmachines in barbershops before, they presented their proposition to Mr. Erico, who bit. The boys took the legs off the pinball machine, put it in Don¡¯s father¡¯s car, and hauled it over to Mr. Erico¡¯s barbershop, where they installed it. Sure enough, the very first evening, when Warren and Don came back to check, ¡°Gee zip!¡± Warren said¡ªfour bucks¡¯ worth of nickels had 
found their way into the machine. Mr. Erico was delighted, and the pinballmachine stayed.18 
After a week, Warren emptied the machine and scooped the nickels into two piles. ¡°Mr. Erico,¡± he said, ¡°let¡¯s not bother goingone for you, one for me. Just pick the pile you want.¡±19 It was like the old-fashioned way of dividingcake: one child cuts, the other child chooses. After Mr. Erico swept one pile over toward his side of the table, Warren counted out the other and found $25 in his pile. That was enough to buy another pinball machine. Pretty soon, seven or eight of ¡°Mr. Wilson¡¯s¡± pinballmachines were sittingin barbershops around town. Warren had discovered the miracle of capital:money that works for its owner, as if it had a job of its own. 
¡°You had to get along with the barbers. That was crucial. I mean, these guys could all go buy these machines for twenty-five bucks themselves. So we would always convince them that it took someone with a four-hundred IQ to repair pinball machines. 
¡°Now, there were some pretty unsavory characters in the pinball business, and they all hung out at a place called Silent Sales. That was our hunting ground. Silent Sales was in the 900 block of D Street, right near the Gayety burlesque house on the seedy side of downtown. These characters at Silent Sales were amused by us, sort of. Danly and I would go down there, and we¡¯d look at these machines and buy whatever we could for twenty-five bucks. New machines cost about three hundred dollars. I used to subscribe to Billboard magazine in those days to keep track of what was going on in pinball machines. 
¡°The guys at Silent Sales taught us some things. There were some illegal slot machines around. And they showed us how to pour beer into them to make a fifty-cent piece get stuck in the mechanism, and you could just keep pulling the handle until it paid. They showed us how to disable the electric cutoff for the coin-operated soda machines at the movie theaters so if you stuck a nickel in, then immediately pulled the plug, you could empty the whole machine. 
¡°These guys would explain all this stuff to us and we¡¯d just eat it up. 
¡°My dad probably suspected the kind of characters we were hanging out with. But he always felt I¡¯d turn out okay.¡± 
Warren and Don were already makinggood money with single pinballmachines in barbershops, but then they found a gold mine. ¡°Our home run of all time was down near Griffith Stadium, which is the old baseball park.¡± In the middle of Washington¡¯s worst slums, they found ¡°a seven-chair black barbershop. There were a lot of dudes down there. After we put a pinball machine in, we would come back to collect, and these guys had drilled holes in the bottom of the machine and rigged the tilt mechanism. It was a real contest of wills. But that was our mother lode, our best location by far. The guys who played at these barbershops were constantly imploring us to adjust the tilt mechanism so you could shove the machine harder without making it tilt. 
¡°Listen, we were not judgmental about our customers.¡± If anything, they were probably tryingto pick up more ideas like the scams the guys at Silent Sales had taught them, and those they were inventingon their own. ¡°One time we were down in Danly¡¯s basement playing with my coin collection. To make collecting on the paper route more interesting, I used to collect different kinds of coins. So I had these Whitman coin boards with slots for the coins. I said to Don, ¡®It looks to me like we could take these coin boards and use them as molds for casting slugs.¡¯ 
¡°Danly was the brains of the operation. And so, sure enough, he learned how to pour these molds for casting slugs, and I supplied the coin boards. We would try to use the slugs for vending machines for soda pop and things like that. Our basic formula was to have our income in currency and our outgo in slugs. 
¡°One time, Danly¡¯s father came down in the basement and said, ¡®What are you boys doing?¡¯ 
¡°We were pouring metal into these things. And it was, ¡®We¡¯re doing this experiment for school, Dad.¡¯ We were always doing experiments for school.¡± 
At school, however, Warren mostly liked to talk about his businesses¡ªnot his scams¡ªand by the spring semester, near the end of high school, his raconteuringhad turned himand Don into a minor legend around Woodrow Wilson. 
¡°Everybody knew we had the pinball-machine business, and everybody kind of knew we were raking it in. We probably exaggerated too when we told them. And so people wanted in on it. It was like stocks.¡± 
One of them was a boy named Bob Kerlin¡ªan intense kid who played on the golf teamwith Warren.20 He and Don weren¡¯t open to lettinganyone in on their pinball business, but they did have a plan for usingKerlin for their newest venture. ¡°We had given up stealing the golf balls from Sears, but we got this idea that we were going to retrieve lost golf balls from the lakes on golf courses around Washington. And now we saw a position for Kerlin, because neither one of us wanted to retrieve the golf balls.¡± 
They created an elaborate scenario for how Kerlin would do this. It bordered on an evilprank, but school was out in a couple of months, so what the hell. 
¡°We went down again to Ninth and D, where the army surplus store was located, right by Silent Sales, and bought a gas mask. And then we got this garden hose and we hooked them up and tested this thing in a bathtub by putting our faces in three inches of water.¡± 
Doingwhat he called his TomSawyer routine, Warren said to Kerlin: ¡°¡®This is your chance. We¡¯re going to deal you in.¡¯ We told him that we would go out at four in the morning to some golf course in Virginia, and that he would wear the gas mask in the lake and retrieve the balls, and we¡¯d split the money three ways. 
¡°Kerlin said, ¡®How do I stay down on the bottom?¡¯ I said, ¡®Oh, I¡¯ve got that all worked out. What we will do is, you¡¯ll strip, and you¡¯ll be nude, but you¡¯ll wear my Washington Post newspaper bag, and we¡¯ll put barbell plates in the newspaper bag so that you¡¯ll stay on the bottom.¡¯ 
¡°So we went out to this golf course, and all the way Kerlin was expressing some doubt. And Danly and I said, ¡®Have we ever failed? I mean, you¡¯re looking at a couple of guys¡­if you want to quit now, okay, but, you know, you¡¯re not in any future deals.¡¯ 
¡°So we got out there at the crack of dawn. Kerlin was stripped, and we were dressed warmly. He was totally nude with a Washington Post newspaper bag on and all these barbell plates, and he started wading into the lake. Of course, he didn¡¯t know if he was stepping on snakes or golf balls or whatever. And then he got down and when he tugged on the rope, we pulled him back up. He said, ¡®I can¡¯t see anything.¡¯ We said, ¡®Don¡¯t worry about seeing anything, just grope around.¡¯ And he started to go back down. 
¡°But before his head went under, this truck came over the rise, carrying the guy that¡¯s going to fill up sand traps in the morning. He saw us and drove up, saying, ¡®What are you kids doing?¡¯ Danly and I were thinking fast. ¡®We¡¯re conducting an experiment for our high school physics class, sir.¡¯ Kerlin was nodding 
21 
the whole time. So we had to get him out of the pond. The whole thing blew up on us.¡± 
Whatever happened to poor Kerlin, and however nude he actually was, a watered-down version of this story got around. It would be the last great TomSawyeringof Warren¡¯s high school career. 
By now, however, he had made a small fortune: a glistening$5,000 heap, sticky with the newsprint from throwingmore than five hundred thousand newspapers. Newsprint snowflakes made up more than half his snowball. Rich as he was, however, Warren meant to keep that snowballrolling.*8 
13 
TheRulesoftheRacetrack 
Omaha and Washington, D.C. . 1940s 
Warren¡¯s Dale Carnegie tests of behavior were handicapping: a mathematicalexperiment on human nature. The data he collected gave himthe odds that Carnegie was right. 
This way of thinkingwas an extension of his childhood hobby of calculatingthe odds on the life expectancies of hymn composers. But his interest in longevity was no mere abstraction. Ernest Buffett, to whom Warren was extremely attached, had died in September 1946 at age sixty-nine, while the family was in Omaha campaigningfor Howard¡¯s third term. Warren was sixteen. Of his four grandparents, only Stella, age seventy-three, remained alive, confined in the Norfolk State Hospital. Longbefore Ernest¡¯s death, Warren had been preoccupied with his own lifespan; these latest family events did nothingto ease his mind about either longevity or insanity. Warren¡¯s passion for handicapping, however, extended to many other subjects, and in an embryonic formhad started much earlier¡ªwellbefore he even knew the meaningof the term¡ªback when he was a little kid with marbles and license plates and bottle caps and a fingerprint kit for nuns. 
The art of handicappingis based on information. The key was having more information than the other guy¡ªthen analyzingit right and usingit rationally. Warren had first put this into practicaluse as a child down 
at the Ak-Sar-Ben racetrack, when his friend Bob Russell¡¯s mother introduced the boys to the world of pari-mutuelbetting. 
Warren and Russ were too youngto wager, but they quickly figured out how to make a buck. Amid the cigarette butts, beer slops, old programs, and hot-dogremnants in the grime and sawdust of the Ak-Sar-Ben floorboards were thousands of discarded tickets, peepingout like mushrooms on the forest floor. The boys turned themselves into truffle hounds. 
¡°They call that ¡®stooping.¡¯ At the start of the racing season you get all these people who¡¯d never seen a race except in the movies. And they¡¯d think that if your horse came in second or third, you didn¡¯t get paid, because all the emphasis is on the winner, so they¡¯d throw away place and show tickets. The other time you would hit it big was when there was a disputed race. That little light would go on that said ¡®contested¡¯ or ¡®protest.¡¯ By that time, some people had thrown away their tickets. Meanwhile, we were just gobbling them up. We wouldn¡¯t even look at them when we were working. At night we¡¯d go through them. It was awful; people would spit on the floor. But we had great fun. If I found any winning tickets, my aunt Alice, who didn¡¯t care anything at all about races, would cash them in for us, because they wouldn¡¯t cash them for kids.¡± 
Warren wanted to go to the races all the time. When Mrs. Russellwasn¡¯t takinghim, ¡°my dad would never go to the races,¡± says Buffett. ¡°He did not believe in the races.¡± Instead, his parents let his great-uncle Frank, the oddballof the family, take him. Frank had longago reconciled with Ernest and had eventually 
married a woman whomthe family referred to as ¡°the gold-digger.¡±1 He had no particular interest in the horses, but he took Warren to Ak-Sar-Ben because his great-nephew wanted to go. 
At Ak-Sar-Ben, Warren had learned somethingabout how to read the tip sheet, and it opened up a whole new world. Handicappinghorses combined two things he was very, very good at:collectinginformation and math. It was not unlike countingcards at blackjack, except that the winninghand had four legs and ran around a track. Soon, he and Russ knew enough to put out their own tip sheet, the cannily named Stable-Boy Selections. 
¡°We got away with it for a while. They weren¡¯t the hottest sellers in the world. I mean, a couple of little kids selling this thing we typed up in my basement on an old Royal typewriter. The limiting factor was carbons in those days. You could probably only get in five or so carbons. But I got on the Royal and Bob Russell and I doped out the horses and then we typed up this thing. 
¡°We were in the track, yelling, ¡®Get your Stable-Boy Selections!¡¯ But the Blue Sheet was the number-one tip sheet, and the racetrack was getting a commission on it. The Blue Sheet sold for a little more. At twenty-five cents, we were a cut-rate product. They shut down the Stable-Boy Selections fast because they were getting a cut on everything sold in the place except for us.¡± 
When the Buffetts moved to Washington, D.C., the only plus for Warren was the chance to upgrade his handicappingskills. 
¡°The one thing I knew about Congress was that Congressmen had access to the Library of Congress¡ªand the Library of Congress had everything that had ever been written. So when we got to Washington, I said, ¡®Pop, there¡¯s just one thing I want. I want you to ask the Library of Congress for every book they have on horse handicapping.¡¯ And my dad said, ¡®Well, don¡¯t you think they¡¯re going to think it¡¯s a little strange if the first thing a new Congressman asks for is all the books on horse handicapping?¡¯ I said, ¡®Pop, who was out there at the county fairs stumping for your election? Who was down there at the packinghouses ready to get to the cops if something happened?¡¯ I said, ¡®And you¡¯re coming up for reelection in two more years. 
You¡¯re going to need me. So this is payoff time.¡¯ And he got me hundreds of books on horse handicapping. 
¡°Then what I would do is read all these books. I sent away to a place in Chicago on North Clark Street where you could get old racing forms, months of them, for very little. They were old, so who wanted them? I would go through them, using my handicapping techniques to handicap one day and see the next day how it worked out. I ran tests of my handicapping ability day after day, all these different systems I had in my 
mind. 
¡°There are two kinds of handicappers. There are speed handicappers and class handicappers. Speed handicappers figure out the horse with the best times in the past. The fastest horse will win. Class handicappers feel that the horse that¡¯s run against ten-thousand-dollar horses and done well and now is running against the five-thousand-dollar horses will beat them. Because, they say, the horse runs just fast enough to win. 
¡°In horse racing it pays to understand both types of handicapping. But back then I was basically a speed guy. I was a quantitative guy to start with.¡± 
As he tested, thought, and observed, Warren discovered the Rules of the Racetrack: 
1.Nobody ever goes home after the first race. 
2.You don¡¯t have to make it back the way you lost it. 
The racetrack counts on people to keep bettinguntil they lose. Couldn¡¯t a good handicapper turn these rules around and win? 
¡°The market is a racetrack too. But I was not developing elaborate theories in those days. I was just a little kid.¡± 
Bettingin Washington was ubiquitous. 
¡°I would go down to my dad¡¯s office fairly often, and there was actually a bookie in what was then called the Old House Office Building. You could go to the elevator shaft and yell ¡®Sammy!¡¯ or something like that and this kid would come up and take bets. 
¡°Now, I used to do a little bookmaking too, for guys who wanted to bet on the Preakness or something like that. That¡¯s the end of the game I liked, the fifteen percent take with no risk. My dad, you know, was struggling somewhat to keep this under control. He was amused by it to some extent, but he could also see how it could veer off in the wrong direction.¡± 
Duringsummer vacations, Warren returned to Omaha and went stoopingat the Ak-Sar-Ben track, this time with his friend Stu Erickson.3 Back in Washington, he found a new friend to go to the racetrack with, 
someone who could advance his handicappingskills. Bob Dwyer, his high schoolgolf coach, a potbellied, enterprisingyoungman, made far more than his teacher¡¯s stipend by sellinglife insurance and ice chests and other things duringthe summer when schoolwas out.4 The other members of the golf teamviewed Dwyer as 
tough and crusty, but he took a shine to Warren, who had a way about himand played enthusiastically despite his glasses always foggingup. 
One day Warren asked Dwyer to take himto the races. His coach said he needed permission. ¡°The next 
morning,¡± Dwyer says, ¡°bright and early, he came prancingin with a note from his mother, sayingit was all right to go to the races.¡± So Dwyer wrote Warren some phony excuse to get out of class5 and then they took the Chesapeake & Ohio fromSilver Spring, Maryland, over to the racetrack in Charleston, West Virginia. Goingto the races with a teacher polished Warren¡¯s sophistication about handicapping. Dwyer taught Warren advanced skills in readingthe most important tip sheet, the Daily Racing Form. 
¡°I¡¯d get the Daily Racing Form ahead of time and figure out the probability of each horse winning the race. Then I would compare those percentages to the odds. But I wouldn¡¯t look at the odds first, to avoid prejudicing myself. Sometimes you would find a horse where the odds were way, way off from the actual 
probability. You figure the horse has a ten percent chance of winning but it¡¯s going off at fifteen to one. *9 
¡°The less sophisticated the track, the better. You have people betting on the jockey¡¯s colors, and you have 
them betting on their birthdays, you have them betting on the horses¡¯ names. And the trick, of course, is to be in a group where practically no one is analytical and you have a lot of data. So I would study the forms like crazy when I was a kid.¡± 
One grade behind Warren at Woodrow Wilson but slightly older, Bill Gray went to a few horse races with 
him. ¡°He was very sharp with numbers. Very talkative.6 Very outgoing. We would discuss baseball, batting 7 
averages, sports. 
¡°He knew which horses he was goingto pick the minute he got off the train. He would go down to the track and say, well, this horse is too much weight, or this horse, where he¡¯s come in the last few races has not been good enough, or his times are not good enough. He knew how to judge the horses.¡± Warren made six-to 
ten-dollar bets, sometimes on the nose. *10 He only bet bigif the odds looked good, but he had a way of riskingsome of his hard-earned paper-route money on the right horse. ¡°He might change his mind as the different races came forward,¡± says Gray. ¡°But for a sixteen-year-old, that¡¯s not so common, you know?¡± 
Then one time, Warren went to Charleston by himself. And he lost in the first race. But he didn¡¯t go home. He kept on bettingand he kept on losing, untilhe had lost more than $175 and his pockets were stripped nearly bare. 
¡°I came back. I went to the Hot Shoppe, and I treated myself to the biggest thing they offered¡ªa giant fudge sundae or something¡ªand there went all the rest of my money. While I ate, I figured out how many newspapers I had to deliver to make up what I had lost. I was going to have to work more than a week to make back the money. And I¡¯d done it for dumb reasons. 
¡°You¡¯re not supposed to bet every race. I¡¯d committed the worst sin, which is that you get behind and you think you¡¯ve got to break even that day. The first rule is that nobody goes home after the first race, and the second rule is that you don¡¯t have to make it back the way you lost it. That is so fundamental, you know.¡± 
Did he realize that he¡¯d made an emotional decision? 
¡°Oh, yeah. Oh, I was sick. It was the last time I ever did anything like that.¡± 
14 
TheElephant 
Philadelphia . 1947¨C1949 
Warren graduated sixteenth out of 350 in his high school class, putting ¡°future stockbroker¡± under his 
picture in the yearbook.1 The first thinghe and Danly did with their freedom was to go in together and buy a used hearse. Warren parked the hearse in front of the house and used it to take a girl out on a date.2 When Howard came home later, he asked, ¡°Who put that hearse out here?¡± Then Leila said one of their neighbors was gravely ill, and she was not havinga hearse in front of the house. That was the end of the hearse. 
While he and Don were sellingthe hearse, Warren gave up his paper routes and got a summer job as a relief circulation manager for the Times-Herald, movingup in the world. Whenever he had to substitute for his paper carriers, he rose at four a.m., and delivered the papers froma little Ford coupe he borrowed from 
David Brown, a youngman fromFredericksburgwho had a crush on Doris and who had gone into the Navy.3 Standingon the runningboard of the car with the door open, he coasted at about fifteen miles an hour, one hand reachinginside the car to hold on to the wheel, the other hand grabbingthe papers and pitchingthem 
onto the subscribers¡¯ lawns. He rationalized that at such an early hour of the morning, nothingtoo terrible was likely to result fromdrivingthe car that way. 4 
Afterward he stopped by the Toddle House at four forty-five a.m. to treat himself to a double order of hash browns with paprika for breakfast. Then he went on to his second job, distributingpapers at Georgetown University Hospital. 
¡°I had to give the priests and nuns about a half a dozen papers free, which always irritated me no end. I thought they weren¡¯t supposed to be interested in secular things. But this was part of the deal. And then I went room by room, ward by ward. 
¡°After they had the baby, the women in the obstetrics ward would see me come in and say, ¡®Oh, Warren! I¡¯m going to give you something more valuable than a cash tip. I¡¯m going to tell you when my baby was born and how much it weighed. Eight thirty-one a.m., six pounds and eleven ounces.¡¯¡± The babies¡¯ birth times and 
weights were meant for bettingon the ¡°policy racket,¡± the numbers game in Washington.5 
Warren ground his teeth whenever he got useless information instead of a cash tip. As a handicapper, he would never have played the policy racket. The odds were terrible. ¡°The policy racket paid off six hundred to one, and the guy that was your runner got ten percent of it. So you have a five hundred forty-to-one payoff on what was a thousand-to-one shot, basically. People made penny bets and dime bets. If you put a penny up, you might win $5.40 net. And everybody in town played. Some of my newspaper delivery customers used to ask me, ¡®Do you run policy numbers?¡¯ I never did. My dad would not have approved if I¡¯d become a policy runner.¡± 
He was already a good enough oddsmaker to work in Vegas, but he probably would not have bet on the next thinghis father did. Howard Buffett voted for a bill that actually passed, joining330 other Congressmen who made the Taft-Hartley Act law over President Truman¡¯s veto. One of the most controversial pieces of legislation ever enacted in the United States, the 1947 Taft-Hartley Act severely restricted the tactics used by labor unions. It made it illegal for themto support one another through secondary strikes and authorized U.S. Presidents to declare a nationalemergency and force strikingworkers back to work. It was referred to as a 
¡°slave labor¡± bill.6 Omaha was, of course, a union town, but it would never have occurred to Howard to vote accordingto his constituents¡¯ preferences; he always voted his principles. 
So when the Buffetts went home to Omaha for a visit duringthe summer, and Warren went to a hometown baseball game with his father, he saw just how unpopular Howard had become amongthe blue-collar voters. 
¡°They introduced the dignitaries in between the doubleheader. And he stood up and everybody in the place started booing. He just stood there and didn¡¯t say anything. He could handle things like that. But you just can¡¯t imagine the effect that has on a kid.¡± 
Even the mildest forms of confrontation terrified him. But soon he would be standingon his own, out from under his father¡¯s wing. At almost seventeen, Warren was barely a kid. One year older and a few years earlier he might have been fightingin the war. 
Instead of the military, in the fall he was startingcollege. The Buffetts had longtaken for granted that Warren would attend the University of Pennsylvania¡¯s Wharton business school.7 Wharton was the nation¡¯s most important undergraduate business college and Penn the brainchild of Benjamin Franklin, creator of aphorisms like ¡°he that goes a¡¯borrowinggoes a¡¯sorrowing,¡± ¡°time is money,¡± and ¡°a penny saved is a penny earned.¡± In theory, Penn and Warren, who had the energy of two people and hustled like a stevedore while other kids played, were a perfect fit. 
However, Warren would have just as soon skipped the whole thing. ¡°What was the point?¡± he asked himself. ¡°I knew what I wanted to do. I was making enough money to live on. College was only going to slow me down.¡± But he would never have defied his father on somethingso important, so he acquiesced. 
Knowingtheir son¡¯s immaturity, the Buffetts arranged a roommate for himwho was the son of some friends 
from Omaha. Five years older, Chuck Peterson had just returned fromeighteen months¡¯ service in the war. He was a handsome youngman-about-town, datinga different girl every night, and drinking. Naively, the Petersons supposed that Warren might settle Chuck down, while the Buffetts reckoned that an older boy might help Warren adjust to college. 
In the fallof 1947, the entire family piled into the car and drove Warren to Philadelphia, where they deposited himand his raccoon coat in a little dormitory suite with a shared bathroom. Chuck had already moved in, but was out on a date somewhere. 
As the Buffetts drove away to return to Washington, they left their son at a campus filled with people much like Chuck. An army of World War II veterans marched across College Green and filled the Quad, the centers of Penn university life. Their worldliness widened by years the gap Warren had felt between himself and his classmates ever since movingto Washington. On an organized, busy, socialcampus, his baggy T-shirts and worn tennis shoes stood out amongthe purposeful men dressed in sports coats and polished oxfords. Penn was a footballpowerhouse; its fallsociallife revolved around football dates, followed by fraternity parties. Warren loved sports, but the socialrequirements were beyond him. He was used to spendingmuch of his time honingideas, countinghis money, organizinghis collections, and playingmusic in the privacy of his room. At Penn, his solitude battered by the sixteen hundred flirting, necking, jitterbugging, 
keg-tapping, football-tossingmembers of the Class of 1951,8 he was a butterfly in a beehive. 
The bees reacted much as expected to the butterfly that had flown into their midst. Chuck retained his military tidiness and the habit of constantly polishinghis shoes. When he met his new roommate, Warren¡¯s disgraceful wardrobe shocked him. He soon discovered that the way Warren dressed symptomized something else. Just as Leila waited hand and foot on Howard and did all the work around the house, Warren had never been taught the most basic ways of takingcare of himself. 
Chuck stayed out late socializingas usual his first eveningafter they met. The next morning, he woke late to find the bathroomin a mess and his new roommate gone to early classes. When he saw Warren that evening, he said, ¡°Clean up after yourself, willyou?¡± ¡°Okay, Chas-o,¡± Warren said. ¡°I came in this morningand you left a razor lyingat the bottomof the sink,¡± Chuck went on. ¡°You left soap all over the sink, the towels were on the floor, and it¡¯s sloppier than hell. I like things neat.¡± Warren appeared to agree. ¡°Okay, Chas-o, okay, Chas-o,¡± he said. 
The next morning, when Chuck got up, he stepped through sodden towels on the bathroomfloor to find tiny damp hairs coveringthe sink, and a brand-new, soaking-wet electric razor lyingin the basin, tethered to the outlet in the wall by its cord. ¡°Warren, lookit,¡± said Chuck that evening. ¡°Unplugthe damn thing. Somebody¡¯s goingto get electrocuted. I¡¯m not goingto pick it up out of the sink every morning. You¡¯re drivingme nuts with your sloppiness.¡± ¡°Okay, okay, fine, Chas-o,¡± said Warren. 
The next day was exactly as before, the razor lyingin the sink. Chuck realized that his words were bouncing off Warren¡¯s head. He lost his temper and decided to take action. He unplugged the razor, filled the sink with water, and threw the razor in. 
The followingmorning, Warren had bought a new razor, plugged it in, and left the bathroom in the same state as before. 
Chas-o gave up. He was livingin a pigsty with a hyperactive teenager who hopped around in constant motion, drumminghis hands, beatingthem on every nearby surface. Warren was obsessed with AlJolson and played Jolson records day and night.9 He sang, over and over, imitatingJolson: ¡°Mammy, my little Mammy, I¡¯d walk a million miles for one of your smiles, my Mammy!¡±10 
Chuck needed to study, and he could not hear himself think inside the suite. Warren, on the other hand, had plenty of time to sing. He hadn¡¯t bought a lot of textbooks, but he had read the ones he bought at the beginningof the semester, before classes started, the way someone else might flip through a Life magazine. Then he threw themaside and never opened themagain. This left himall night longto sing ¡°Mammy¡± if he felt like it. Chuck thought he was goingmad. Warren knew he was immature, but he couldn¡¯t help it. 
¡°I probably wouldn¡¯t have fit in very well anyplace at that time. I was still out of sync with the world. But I was also younger than anybody else, and, on top of that, I was young for my age in many ways. I really didn¡¯t fit in socially.¡± 
Chuck¡¯s social life, on the other hand, was in full swing; he had pledged Alpha Tau Omega. Warren had little interest in Greek life but pledged his father¡¯s fraternity, Alpha Sigma Phi. It was not a jock house nor particularly brutal, but the rituals of pledgingturned him red-faced. The secret motto of Alpha Sigwas zeal, 
humility, courage. 11 Warren had plenty of the first two, but courage was his Achilles¡¯ heel. When the pledges were sent to Wanamaker¡¯s to buy extra-large women¡¯s panties and brassieres, he circled the underwear department for a looooongtime before facingthe snickeringcoed salesgirls.12 
That fall, Leila and Doris struggled to describe Warren¡¯s crew-cut, slightly bucktoothed appearance truthfully on a radio show in Washington called Coffee with Congress. 
Host:Incidentally, is Warren good-looking? 
Leila: He was good-lookingas a smallchild. He¡¯s just boyish¡ªI wouldn¡¯t call himgood-looking, but he¡¯s not poor-lookingeither. 
Host:He¡¯s handsome-looking. 
Leila: No, not handsome, just friendly. 
Host:Let¡¯s take the girls¡¯ angle: Is he a cute boy? 
Doris (diplomatically): I think he has a rugged sort of look.13 
Despite the drummingand the ¡°Mammy¡± singing, Chuck came to be fond of Warren, viewinghimas a sort of goofy kid brother, although he still could not believe his roommate continued to wear beat-up Keds throughout the winter, and even when dressed up, was likely to wear one black shoe and one brown shoe without noticing. 
Like many people who met Warren, Chuck began to feelthe urge to take care of him. They had lunch together at the Student Union a couple of times a week. Warren always ordered the same thing: a minute steak, hash browns, and a Pepsi. Then he discovered chocolate sundaes topped with malted-milk powder and had those every day too. One day after lunch Chuck took Warren over to the new Ping-Pongtable that had just been installed in the Student Union. After four years in Washington, Warren was so rusty that Chuck got the impression he had never played Ping-Pong. In the first couple of games Warren could just about return Chuck¡¯s serve. Chuck won easily. 
Within a day or two, however, Warren played like a demon. The first thingevery morning, he got up, went straight over to the Student Union, found a hapless victim, and slaughtered himat the Ping-Pongtable. Before long, he was playingPing-Pongthree or four hours at a stretch every afternoon. Chuck could no longer hold his own. ¡°I was his first victimat Penn,¡± he recalls. But Ping-Pongkept Warren out of the suite 
and away from the record player while Chuck was studying.14 
Ping-Pong, however, did not fulfill Penn¡¯s physical-education requirement. Rowingand scullingon the SchuylkillRiver were two of Penn¡¯s most popular sports. Gaily painted boathouses belongingto the school¡¯s many rowingclubs lined the riverbanks. Warren went out for the 150-pound freshman crew with the Vesper Boat Club. He rowed on a team of eight oarsmen guided by a coxswain. Rowingwas repetitious and rhythmic, like weight lifting, basketball, golf, Ping-Pong, and his game of bolo, all activities that Warren enjoyed¡ªbut it was a team sport. Warren liked to shoot a basketball in his driveway because you could practice alone. He had never succeeded at teamsports or learned to dance with a partner. He had been the leader of every stunt or business venture in which he had ever been involved. He couldn¡¯t play the part of the echo. 
¡°It was miserable. The thing about crew is, you can¡¯t coast or fake it. You have to put your oar in the water at exactly the same time as everybody else. You can be unbelievably tired but you have to match the pace, and it must be done in unison. It¡¯s an incredibly grueling sport.¡± He came back to the dormevery afternoon sweating, head bowed, hands bloodied and blistered, and dropped crew as soon as he could. 
Warren was lookingfor a different kind of team. He wanted Chuck to sell used golf balls with him, but Chuck was too busy tryingto study and maintain his social life. Warren also suggested that Chuck join him in a pinball business. He didn¡¯t need Chuck¡¯s money or labor, and it wasn¡¯t even clear what Chuck¡¯s role would be. But Warren, a one-man bandwagon, wanted someone to whom he could talk about his businesses, always and endlessly. If Chuck became a partner, it would make himpart of Warren¡¯s world. 
He had always been good at this TomSawyering, but for once, he failed with Chuck. Still, he wanted Chuck as a friend as wellas a business partner. He invited Chuck to visit himin Washington. Leila was astonished when Chuck ate everythingshe offered him, even oatmeal. ¡°Warren won¡¯t eat anything,¡± she said. ¡°He won¡¯t eat this, he won¡¯t eat that. He always makes me fix somethingspecial for him.¡± Chuck was amused to find that Warren had his mother so welltrained. 
To Chuck, Warren seemed an odd mix of immature kid and brilliant prodigy. In many of his classes, he simply memorized what the professor said, not needingto look at a textbook.15 He flaunted obnoxious feats of memory by quotingpage numbers and passages back in class and correctinghis teachers on their text 
17 
citations.16 ¡°You forgot the comma,¡± he said to one. 
In an accountingcourse, the proctors had not even finished passingout the exampapers to the two-hundred-odd students when Warren, showingoff, stood up and turned in his paper. He was done. Chuck, sittingon the other side of the room, was frustrated. Wharton was no picnic; a quarter of the class would flunk out. But Warren cruised through with no apparent effort, leavinghim as much time as he wanted to drum his hands and singMammy, my little Mammy, allnight long. 
Chuck liked Warren well enough, but it all finally got to him. 
18 
¡°He moved out on me. One morning I woke up and Chuck was gone.¡± 
At term¡¯s end that summer, Warren¡ªwho would never have thought he¡¯d actually be glad to return to Washington¡ªwent home. Leila was in Omaha helpingHoward campaign for reelection. So the Buffett kids, who had rarely gotten any relief fromtheir parents¡¯ austere regimen, experienced a glorious summer of freedom. Bertie was a camp counselor. Doris had a job at Garfinkel¡¯s, where she was shocked that the store asked your religion on the job application and blacks could shop only on the first floor, where no clothingwas 
sold.19 
Washington was then the most segregated city in the United States. Blacks could not work as streetcar conductors or motormen or at anythingother than the most menial jobs. They could not enter the YMCA, eat in most restaurants, rent hotel rooms, or buy theater tickets. Dark-skinned diplomats had to be chaperoned, embarrassed and scandalized by a provincialismlike no place else in the world. ¡°I would rather be an 
Untouchable in the Hindu caste systemthan a Negro in Washington,¡± one foreign visitor said.20 The 
Washington Post, referred to by some right-wingers as ¡°The Uptown Communist Sheet,¡± had been on a crusade about racismfor some time,21 and President Truman had desegregated the military and was pushing for civil-rights reforms. But change was slow. 
Warren, who did not read the liberal Post, paid little attention to Washington¡¯s racism. He was both unaware and immature, too absorbed in his own insecurity, his stunts, and his businesses. He returned that summer to his duties as relief circulation manager for the conservative Times-Herald. He still had the borrowed Ford and once again used it to deliver papers if he had to fillin for one of his paperboys, usingthe runningboard technique he had perfected earlier. He also reunited with his palDon Danly. They thought about buyinga fire engine together as their latest stunt, but instead found a 1928 Springfield Rolls-Royce PhantomI Brewster coupe for $350 in a junkyard in Baltimore. It was gray, weighed more than a Lincoln Continental, and was adorned with little bud vases. The car had two sets of instruments, so the lady in back¡ªthe employer¡ªcould see how fast the chauffeur was driving. The starter was broken, so Don and Warren took turns crankingit until it finally started up, then they drove it the fifty miles or so back to Washington. It belched smoke, leaked oil, and lacked taillights and license plates, but when they were stopped by a cop, Warren kept 
¡°talkingand talkingand talking¡± untilhe wiggled their way out of a ticket.22 
They put the Rolls in the garage underneath the Buffett house and started the motor up. The house immediately filled with acrid smoke, so they pulled it back out and up the steep driveway onto the street. They worked on it Saturday after Saturday. ¡°Danly did all the work,¡± accordingto Doris, tinkeringwith the pipes and doingthe welding, ¡°and Warren watched admiringly and encouraged it along.¡± 
When they decided to paint the car, Don and his girlfriend, Norma Thurston, bought somethingcalled a Pad-o-Paint, which smeared on the color with a sponge. They painted the car dark blue; it looked really good to them. 23 Naturally, word had gotten around, so they rented it out, thirty-five bucks a pop. 
Then Warren had an idea for a stunt. He wanted to be seen in the car. Danly dressed up like a chauffeur, Warren put on the raccoon coat, and the two cranked and cranked to start the car, then drove downtown with platinum-blond Norma. As Danly lunged about under the hood, pretendingto fix the motor, Warren directed himwith a cane and Norma draped herself over the hood like a movie star. ¡°It was Warren¡¯s idea,¡± says Norma. ¡°He was the more theatrical one. We were goingto see how many people would look at us.¡± 
Norma knew that Warren had never really dated in high school and needed help with girls, so she set him up with her cousin, Bobbie Worley. They dated chastely that summer, goingto movies and playingbridge, Warren barragingher with an endless series of brainteasers and riddles.24 
When fallcame, he left Bobbie behind and returned to Penn as an eighteen-year-old sophomore. He now had two roommates, his fraternity brother Clyde Reighard and a freshman who was assigned to them, George Oesmann. The year before, he had TomSawyered Clyde into actingas the front man for a business venture that went nowhere, but duringtheir short-lived partnership, the two had become friends. 
Warren had not changed much since his freshman year, but he had much more in common with Clyde than he had with Chuck Peterson. Clyde was amused by Warren¡¯s tennis shoes and T-shirts and dirty khakipants, and he took it in stride when Warren needled and taunted him about his grades. While ¡°he didn¡¯t make me any smarter,¡± says Reighard, ¡°he did make me use what I had more efficiently.¡± Indeed, Warren was a master at usingwhat he had efficiently, his own time especially. He rose early in the morning, ate chicken 
salad at the dormfor breakfast, then headed off to classes.25 After sleepwalkingthrough his freshman year, he had finally found one class he liked: Professor Hockenberry¡¯s Industry 101, which discussed different industries and the nuts and bolts of runninga business. ¡°It was textiles, it was steel, it was petroleum. I can still remember that book. I got a lot of stuff from it. I can remember talking about the laws of capture in petroleum, and the Bessemer processes in steel. I devoured that book. That was really interesting to me.¡± 
But his suitemate Harry Beja, a grind who sweated through Hockenberry¡¯s class alongside Warren, resented the way he tobogganed ahead effortlessly.26 
It was the same in business law, taught by Professor Cataldo, who ¡°had very close to a photographic mind. He would quote cases at length. I can still remember Hadley versus Baxendale and Kemble versus Farren. So I would do the same thing back to him on the exams, which entertained him to no end. I would quote from his stuff in answering questions, whether applicable or not. And he just ate it up.¡± 
Helped by his prodigious memory, Warren was free to do as he pleased for much of the day. At lunchtime, he dropped by the Alpha Sighouse, an old three-story mansion with a spiral staircase, where Kelsen, the black houseman, cooked, cleaned, and, in his white jacket, gave the place a degree of dignity. A bridge game went 
on twenty-four hours a day in a corner alcove, and Warren would sit down and play a few hands.27 His taste for practical jokes continued unabated. He occasionally enlisted one of his fraternity brothers, Lenny Farina, to pose for attention-gettingphotographs out on the street while he pretended to pick Lenny¡¯s pocket or shine his shoes.28 
Meanwhile, in a scamreminiscent of sendingpoor old Kerlin into a water trap naked wearinga gas mask, he and Clyde had told their third roommate, George, that he looked ¡°run-down and puny and would never attract girls unless he developed muscles.¡± They finally maneuvered George into buyinghimself some barbells. ¡°And then we used to bang these barbells up and down while Harry Beja was studying down below. 
29 
We had great fun taunting him by banging these barbells on the floor.¡± 
By college, however, the evidence had become convincing. Warren had begun to give up on the idea of becominga strongman. ¡°After a while, I decided my bones were wrong. My clavicles were not long enough. It¡¯s your clavicles that determine how broad-shouldered you¡¯ll be, and you can¡¯t do much about your clavicles. That¡¯s why I got disgusted and eventually quit. I decided that if I was going to have girl-like muscles anyway, then to hell with it.¡± 
Girl-like muscles did not attract girls, and Warren had still not gone out on any dates since he arrived at Penn. Saturdays were bigfraternity party days, with prefootballluncheons and postgame cocktail parties, dinners, and eveningdances. Warren wrote a letter to Bobbie Worley, askingher to come up for a weekend and saying, in effect, that he had fallen in love. Bobbie liked himand was touched by his letter, but did not return 
his feelings. She would have enjoyed the weekend but said no because she felt it was wrongto lead himon.30 
Warren had one date, with Ann Beck, a Bryn Mawr girl. He had worked at her father¡¯s bakery shortly after movingto Washington, when he was in eighth grade and she was ¡°just a little girlwith longblond hair.¡± Ann had been voted the most bashful girl at her high school, and the day she and Warren spent together was like a 
shyness contest:They walked around Philadelphia in awkward silence.31 ¡°We were probably the two shyest people in the whole United States.¡± Warren had no idea how to make small talk; when stressed, he emitted smallgrunts instead.32 
Sometimes Warren and Clyde took the borrowed Ford coupe and drove off to the suburbs in search of movies about mummies, Frankenstein, vampires, or anythingmacabre.33 Since hardly anybody had a car at that time, his fraternity brothers were impressed.34 That was the irony: Warren was the only one with a car to 
make out in, but nobody to make out with. He passed on the Ivy Ball and the Inter-Fraternity Ball. He always skipped the Alpha SigSunday tea dances and never had a date at the fraternity house.35 His face would flush and he would stare at his shoes if anyone talked about sex. 36 He was out of his element at such a 
hard-partyingschool, where the college fight songwas ¡°Drink a Highball.¡± 
¡°I tried drinking because I was in a fraternity where about half my dues were going to buy alcohol for these parties. I felt I was getting screwed. But I just didn¡¯t like the taste. I don¡¯t like beer. And I can behave silly enough without it. I mean, I was right there with the rest¡ªthe drinkers didn¡¯t have anything on me when it came to being silly.¡± 
But even without a date on his armor a glass in his hand, Warren sometimes showed up at his fraternity¡¯s Saturday night parties. He was able to draw a little crowd by sittingin a corner and lecturingon the stock market. He had a wit and an arrestingway of talking. His Alpha Sigbrothers deferred to his opinion when it came to money and business; they respected his deep, if one-sided, knowledge of politics. They decided he 
had some ¡°politician in him¡± and gave him a paddle with his nickname: the Senator.37 
Warren had joined the YoungRepublicans as a freshman because he was attracted to a girl who was a member. But instead of becomingher boyfriend, he became the group¡¯s president when he was a sophomore. Warren took over at an excitingtime¡ªthe fallof a presidential election year. In 1948, the Republicans were supportingThomas F. Dewey against the weak incumbent Harry Truman, who had become President on FDR¡¯s death. 
The Buffetts had grown to hate Truman. Though he had created what was known as the ¡°Truman Doctrine¡± of containment, which was meant to prevent the spread of Communism, Howard, like many conservatives, felt that Truman and GeneralGeorge C. Marshall, his Secretary of State, were playingpalsy-walsy with 
Soviet premier Stalin.38 Moreover, Truman had implemented the MarshallPlan, which sent eighteen million tons of food to Europe after World War II, and Howard was one of seventy-four Congressmen who had voted against it. Convinced that the Marshall Plan was another version of Operation Rat Hole and that the Democrats were wreckingthe economy, Howard started buyinggold chain bracelets for his daughters so they could feed themselves when the day came that the dollar was worthless. 
Howard was runningfor reelection to his fourth term that year. Even though Warren had been present when Howard was hissed and booed after he¡¯d voted for passage of the Taft-Hartley ¡°slave labor¡± bill, he, like the rest of the family, considered Howard¡¯s Congressional seat relatively safe. Nonetheless, Howard had placed his reelection in the hands of a campaign manager for the first time¡ªfamily friend Dr. WilliamThompson. Well-known and admired in Omaha, Thompson knew the pulse of the town and was a psychologist to boot. Day after day as the campaign progressed, people in Omaha would come up and say, ¡°Congratulations, Howard, you¡¯re in again, and I worked for you,¡± as if the election were over. 
Dewey, too, appeared to be a shoo-in. The polls showed that Truman was trailinghimbadly¡ªin fact, so badly that the Roper organization, a pollingresearch firm, simply stopped takingpolls. Truman ignored this, and for months had been travelingaround the country speakingfrom the back of his train on a ¡°whistle-stop¡± tour, advocatingwhat he called his ¡°Fair Deal¡± policy:universal health insurance, broad-based civil-rights legislation, and the repeal of Taft-Hartley. He had whistle-stopped in Omaha, marched in a parade, and 
dedicated a park, lookingas cheerful as if he hadn¡¯t read the newspapers predictinghis defeat.39 
As Election Day approached, in happy anticipation of his father¡¯s reelection and of Dewey¡¯s victory, Warren made arrangements with the Philadelphia Zoo to ride an elephant down Woodland Avenue on November 3. He envisioned it as a sort of triumphalmarch, like HannibalenteringSardinia. 
But on the morningafter Election Day, Warren had to cancelhis stunt. Not only had Truman won the 1948 election, but his father had lost. The voters had thrown Howard Buffett out of Congress. ¡°I¡¯d never ridden an elephant before. When Truman beat Dewey, the elephant went down the tube. And my dad lost an election for the first time in four campaigns. That was a really lousy day.¡± 
*** 
Two months later, just a few days before the Buffetts left Washington at the end of Howard¡¯s term, Warren¡¯s great-uncle Frank died. Frank had boomed ¡°IT¡¯SGOING TO ZERO!¡± about every stock down at Harris Upham when Warren was a boy, and when his willwas read, the family discovered that he owned 
government bonds and nothingelse.40 He had outlived ¡°the gold-digger,¡± and the terms of his willplaced the bonds in a restricted trust that required that, upon maturing, they could only be reinvested in more U.S. government bonds. As if to convince his nephew and trustee, Howard, Frank had also apparently left various family members subscriptions to Baxter¡¯s Letter, a doomsday sheet that preached that government bonds were the only safe investment. Frank meant to be at peace in the afterlife, the only Buffett (so far) to arrange that his opinions would resound fromthe grave. 
But Howard, of course, dreaded inflation and believed that government bonds could turn into worthless paper. Overcominghis scruples, he went to work to break the terms of Frank¡¯s willand got a judge to approve some technical changes so the money could eventually be invested in stocks.41 
These events took place duringwhat Leila called the ¡°worst winter in years.¡± Blizzards buried the Midwest 
and hay had to be airlifted to Nebraska fromsurroundingstates for weeks duringthe freeze to keep the snowbound livestock from dyingon their feet.42 The winter of the haylift became emblematic of the Truman victory. Howard, who had never gotten rich, now had two kids in college and another about to start. He went 
back to work at his old firm, now known as Buffett-Falk, but his partner CarlFalk, who had been handling his clients duringhis absence in Washington, was not interested in sharingthem now. Stridingaround downtown Omaha with the bitter snow peltinghis face, Howard tried to drumup new clients. But his long absence meant that his writings were the way most people knew him now, and articles like ¡°Human Freedom 
Rests on Gold Redeemable Money¡± had given himthe reputation of an extremist.43 In the springof 1949, he went out into the countryside and knocked on farmhouse doors in search of a new clientele.44 
As for Warren, his father¡¯s defeat left himheartsick, but also offered himan excuse for leavingthe East Coast. He was bored at school and hated Philadelphia so much that he had nicknamed it ¡°Filthy-delphia.¡±45 
At the end of the springsemester he headed back home for good, so relieved that he signed his letters 

¡°Ex-Wharton Buffett.¡± He rationalized this by sayingthat enrollingat the University of Nebraska in Lincoln, where he would spend the last years of his college career, would be cheaper than Penn.46 He gave the little Ford coupe back to David Brown, its tires threadbare. It was Brown¡¯s problem to figure out how to replace 
them, since tires were still rationed.47 Warren wanted only one memento of Penn. On the way out the door, he and Clyde flipped a coin to see who got to keep their treasured copy of S.J. Simon¡¯s Why You Lose at Bridge. Warren won. 
15 
TheInterview 
Lincoln and Chicago . 1949¨CSummer 1950 
The first thingWarren did on returningto Nebraska in that summer of 1949 was get a job in newspapers, managingcountry circulation for the Lincoln Journal. He and his friend Truman Wood, who was Doris¡¯s boyfriend, went halves on a car. Warren felt comfortable in Lincoln, goingto university classes in the morning, then drivingaround managinghis route in the afternoon. In his spare moments he called on the local newspaper editors and talked business, politics, and journalism. Supervisingruralpaperboys was a serious job, for he was now the boss. Fifty youngboys in six rural counties reported to ¡°Mr. Buffett.¡± The challenges of management suddenly became clear when he hired a minister¡¯s daughter in the town of Beatrice, thinking she would be a responsible paper carrier. The three paperboys in Beatrice promptly quit: He¡¯d turned it into a sissy job. 
Warren spent part of his time that summer in Omaha, sellingmen¡¯s furnishings at JC Penney¡¯s. His spirits had begun to revive. He bought a ukulele to compete with the uke-playingboyfriend of a girl he was pursuing, but wound up holdingonly the ukulele instead of the girl. 
Penney¡¯s, however, was a good place to work. The employees put on an unofficial pep rally in the basement every morningwhere Warren, clad in a cheap suit, played his new ukulele¡ªoff the clock¡ªwhile everyone sang, before headingoff to his seventy-five-cents-an-hour job in men¡¯s furnishings. Penney¡¯s called him back over the Christmas holidays, improbably puttinghimto work sellingmenswear and Towncraft shirts. Looking at racks filled with products about as comprehensible to himas a French restaurant menu, he asked his manager what to tellthe customers about the clothes. ¡°Just tell them it¡¯s a sort of worsted,¡± Mr. Lanford said. ¡°Nobody knows what a worsted is.¡± Warren never did learn what a worsted was, but at JC Penney¡¯s he sold 
nothingbut.*11 
In the fall, he had moved into a furnished house on Pepper Avenue in Lincoln, which he shared with Truman Wood, and started fulltime at the University of Nebraska. He liked the teachers better than at Penn and he enrolled with a heavy course load, studyingaccountingwith Ray Dein, the best professor he had had thus far. 
That year Warren revived his golf ball business, this time with a college friend fromPenn, Jerry Orans, as a 
partner. He would drive down to the Omaha train station and pick up the golf balls from his old supplier, Half-Witek.1 Orans acted as his East Coast distributor, but in fact Warren had always wanted partners for the sake of partnership alone; in every business venture, he looked to friends to partner with him. (Needless to say, in Warren¡¯s partnerships, he was always the senior partner.) He was also investingand got the idea of shortingstock in the automaker Kaiser-Frazer. This company produced its first cars in 1947, but saw its share of the auto market fallfromnearly one out of every twenty cars to fewer than one out of every hundred in less than a year. ¡°Dear Pop,¡± he wrote his father on Nebraska Cornhusker stationery. ¡°If there isn¡¯t a trend line apparent in those percentages, I¡¯mno statistician.¡± Kaiser-Frazer had lost $8 million duringthe first six 
months, ¡°so even with phony bookkeepingthe loss willprobably run more.¡±2 He and Howard shorted the stock together. 
Back at school, he went down to the broker Cruttenden-Podesta¡¯s office and asked a stockbroker, Bob Soener, where the stock was trading. Soener looked at the chalkboard and said, ¡°Five bucks.¡± Warren explained that he had shorted the stock, borrowingshares to sell. If the price dropped, as he expected, he could buy the stock back, return the shares, and keep the difference. Since Warren thought Kaiser-Frazer was goingbust, if he had sold the shares at five bucks, he could buy themback for pennies and make nearly five dollars on each share. 
I¡¯llshow this youngwhippersnapper, thought Soener. ¡°You¡¯re not old enough to short a stock legally,¡± he 
said. ¡°Oh yes,¡± Warren said, ¡°I did it in my older sister Doris¡¯s name.¡± He explained why the stock was going to zero and laid out the evidence.3 ¡°And he cut my feet right out fromunder me,¡± says Soener. ¡°I had no retort whatsoever.¡± 
Warren waited for the Kaiser-Frazer idea to work. And waited. He started hangingaround Cruttenden-Podesta while he waited. He was convinced the idea would work. It was so obvious that Kaiser-Frazer would eventually go broke. Meanwhile, he and Soener became friends. 
In the springof 1950, Warren was close to finishingcollege. After three years of study, he only needed to take a few classes at summer school to graduate. And then he made a decision that completely reversed his path to date. After high school he had felt fully qualified to achieve his goal of becominga millionaire by age thirty-five with no further education. But now that he was close to graduating, at the point when most people are done studyingand ready to go to work, Warren prepared to put work aside. He had fixed his ambitions on attendingthe Harvard Business School. Throughout his entire educational history he had shown little interest in formal schooling¡ªas opposed to learning¡ªand considered himself largely self-taught. Harvard, however, offered himtwo important things:prestige and a network of future connections. He had just seen his father thrown out of Congress and his career as a stockbroker crushed, in part because he had tended to isolate himself by sacrificingrelationships for the sake of rigid ideals. So perhaps it was not surprisingthat Warren chose Harvard. 
He was so certain that Harvard would choose himthat he was already urginghis friend ¡°BigJerry¡± Orans to ¡°Join me at Harvard.¡±4 Furthermore, he wasn¡¯t even goingto have to pay for all of his tuition. 
¡°One day I read in the Daily Nebraskan a little item that said, ¡®The John E. Miller Scholarship will be 
5
awarded today. Applicants should go to Room 300 at the Business Administration building.¡¯ And it provided five hundred dollars*12 to go to the accredited school of your choice. 
¡°I went to Room 300, and I was the only guy who showed up. The three professors there kept wanting to wait. I said, ¡®No, no. It was three o¡¯clock.¡¯ So I won the scholarship without doing anything.¡± 
Enriched with this nugget mined fromthe college newspaper, Warren rose in the middle of the night to catch the train to Chicago, where his Harvard interview would take place. He was nineteen, two years younger than the average college graduate, and younger stillthan the average business-school student. His grades were good but not stellar. Despite beingthe son of a U.S. Congressman, he was usingno connections to try to get into Harvard. Since Howard Buffett scratched no backs, his own back went unscratched, and his son¡¯s as well. 
Warren was relyingon his knowledge of stocks to make a good impression in the interview. So far his experience had been that whenever he started talkingabout stocks, people could not help but listen. His relatives, his teachers, his parents¡¯ friends, his fellow students¡ªall wanted to hear himdiscourse on this subject. 
But he had misunderstood Harvard¡¯s mission, which was to turn out leaders. When he arrived in Chicago and introduced himself to the interviewer, the man saw past his confidence as a prodigy in a single subject straight through to his self-consciousness, his shaky inner core. ¡°I looked about sixteen and emotionally was about nine. I spent ten minutes with the Harvard alumnus who was doing the interview, and he assessed my capabilities and turned me down.¡± 
Warren never got the chance to show off his knowledge of stocks. The man fromHarvard told him gently that he would have a better chance in a few years. Warren was naive; it did not quite sink in what this meant. When the letter arrived fromHarvard refusinghimadmission, he was shocked. His first thought, he says, was, ¡°What amI goingto tellmy dad?¡± 
Awkward and stiff-necked he might be, but Howard was undemandingof his children. The Harvard dream was Warren¡¯s, not his father¡¯s. Howard was accustomed to failure and resolute in defeat. The realquestion must have been:What amI goingto tellmy mom? 
These conversations took place, but their memory has drained away. And yet Warren would later come to consider his rejection by Harvard the pivotalepisode of his life. 
Almost immediately, he started investigatingother graduate schools. While leafingthrough the Columbia catalogone day, he came across two names that were familiar to him: Benjamin Grahamand David Dodd. 
¡°These were big names to me. I¡¯d just read Graham¡¯s book, but I had no idea he was teaching at Columbia.¡± 
¡°Graham¡¯s book¡± was The Intelligent Investor, published in 1949.6 This book of ¡°practicalcounsel¡± for all types of investors¡ªthe cautious (or ¡°defensive¡±) and speculative (or ¡°enterprising¡±)¡ªblew apart the conventions of WallStreet, overturningwhat had heretofore been largely uninformed speculation in stocks. It explained for the first time in a way that ordinary people could understand that the stock market does not operate through black magic. Through examples of realstocks such as the Northern Pacific Railway and the American-Hawaiian Steamship Company, Grahamillustrated a rational, mathematical approach to valuing stocks. Investing, he said, should be systematic. 
The book had mesmerized Warren. For years, he had been goingdowntown to the library and checkingout every book available on stocks and investing. Many of the books dealt with stock-pickingsystems based on models and patterns; Warren wanted a system, somethingthat would work reliably. He had been fascinated by numerical patterns¡ªtechnicalanalysis. 
¡°I read all of them over and over. The book that probably had the most influence on me was Garfield Drew, 
7
who wrote an important book about odd-lot stock trading. I read that about three times. I read Edwards 
8
and McGee, which is the bible of technical analysis. I would go down to the library and just clean them 
out.¡± But when he found The Intelligent Investor, he read and reread it. ¡°It was almost like he found a god,¡± said Truman Wood, his housemate.9 After careful study and thought, he had gone ahead and made a ¡°value¡± investment on his own. Through a connection of his father¡¯s, he had heard of a company called Parkersburg 
Rig& Reel, which he researched accordingto Graham¡¯s rules. He bought two hundred shares.10 
Accordingto the catalogWarren had now picked up, the man who had become his favorite author, Ben Graham, was lecturingin finance at Columbia University. And David Dodd was there too. Dodd was 
associate dean of the Graduate School of Business, and head of the department of finance. In 1934 Graham and Dodd had coauthored the seminaltext on investing, Security Analysis. The Intelligent Investor was the layman¡¯s version of Security Analysis. Enrollingat Columbia would mean he could study with Graham and Dodd. And as Columbia¡¯s catalogpointed out: ¡°No other city in the world offers as many opportunities to become acquainted at firsthand with the actual conduct of business. Here a student may come into personal contact with the outstandingleaders of American business, many of whom give generously of their time to take part in seminars, institutes, and conferences¡­. Business establishments of the city cheerfully welcome 
groups of students as visitors.¡±11 Even Harvard could not offer this. 
Warren now determined that he would go to Columbia. But it was almost too late. 
¡°I wrote in August, about a month before school started, way past when you were supposed to do it. Who knows what I wrote? I probably wrote that I just found this catalog at the University of Omaha, and it said that you and Ben Graham taught, whereas I thought you guys were on Mount Olympus someplace just smiling down on the rest of us. And if I can get in, I¡¯d love to come. I¡¯m sure it was not a very conventional application. It was probably fairly personal.¡± 
But in a written application, however unconventional, Warren could shape the impression he made more successfully than in a personal interview. The application wound up on the desk of David Dodd, who as associate dean was in charge of admissions. By 1950, after teachingat Columbia for twenty-seven years, Dodd had effectively become the junior partner of the famous Benjamin Graham. 
A thin, frail, baldingman who cared for a disabled wife at home, Dodd was the son of a Presbyterian minister and eight years older than Warren¡¯s father. While Dodd may have been touched in some way by the personal nature of the application, it was also true that at Columbia, he and Grahamwere more interested in their students¡¯ aptitude for business and investingthan their emotional maturity. Grahamand Dodd were not trying to create leaders. They taught a specialized craft. 
Whatever the reason, after the deadline, and without an interview, Warren was accepted by Columbia. 
16 
StrikeOne 
New York City . Fall 1950 
Warren arrived in New York City alone. The only person he knew there was his aunt Dorothy Stahl, widow of the revered Marion Stahl. Otherwise, the motherly women to whom he usually attached himself were unavailable. His teachers and classmates at the business school would consist almost entirely of men. Unlike Penn, where his family had been only a couple of hours away, he was on his own. And his father was once again immersed in politics, runningto regain his seat in Congress¡ªthis time managingthe campaign himself. But even if he won, New York was a longway fromWashington. 
Warren had applied to Columbia too late to get into a university dorm, so he found the cheapest lodgings available:joiningthe YMCA for a dime a day and payinga dollar a day for a roomat the Y¡¯s Sloane House on West 34th Street, down near Penn Station.1 He was far from broke, enriched by $500 fromthe Miller 
scholarship and $2,000 fromHoward, a graduation gift and part of a deal not to start smoking.2 He also had $9,803.70 saved, some of it placed in stocks.3 His net worth included $44 in cash, his half interest in the car, and $334 invested in his Half-Witek golf ball business. But since Warren looked at every dollar as ten dollars someday, he wasn¡¯t goingto hand over a dollar more than he needed to spend. Every penny was another snowflake for his snowball. 
On his first day in David Dodd¡¯s class, ¡°Finance 111¨C112: Investment management and security analysis,¡± he recalls that Dodd broke his customary reserve and greeted himpersonally and warmly. Warren had already more or less memorized the course textbook, Security Analysis, Graham and Dodd¡¯s seminal book on 
investing.4 As the principaldrafter and organizer of Security Analysis, Dodd was of course intimately familiar with its contents. Yet when it came to the text itself, Buffett says, ¡°The truth was that I knew the book even better than Dodd. I could quote from any part of it. At that time, literally, almost in those whole seven or eight hundred pages, I knew every example. I had just sopped it up. And you can imagine the effect that would have on the guy, that somebody was that keen on his book.¡± 
Published in 1934, Security Analysis was a mammoth textbook for serious students of the market, layingout in much more detailthe innovative concepts that were later summarized for a popular audience in The Intelligent Investor. Dodd had taken meticulous notes at Ben Graham¡¯s lectures and seminars for four years, organizingthemand enrichingthe examples with his own knowledge of corporate finance and accounting. He structured the book and proofread the galleys fromhis summer home on rustic Chebeague Island in Maine¡¯s 
Casco Bay, in between golf games and mackerel-fishingtournaments.5 He described his role modestly: ¡°The genius was [Graham¡¯s], supplemented by longexperience of a distinguished character, and exceptional literary talent. My most important role was to be a devil¡¯s advocate on a variety of issues where I thought he 
had got himself out on a limb.¡±6 
Dodd¡¯s class focused on valuingdefaulted railroad bonds. Since childhood, Warren had been slightly 
obsessed with trains, and, of course, thanks to the long, checkered, and colorful history of the Union Pacific, Omaha was practically the center of the universe when it came to bankrupt railroads.7 Warren had read his favorite book on bonds, Townsend¡¯s Bond Salesmanship, for the first time at the age of seven after makinga 
special plea to Santa Claus for this tome.8 Now he took to the subject of bankrupt railroad bonds like a duck to the warmspringrain. Unsurprisingly, Dodd showed an unusualinterest in him, introducinghimto his family and takinghimto dinner. Warren soaked up the fatherly attention and also felt sympathy for Dodd, who cared for his mentally illwife. 
In class, Dodd would ask a question and Warren¡¯s arm would shoot into the air before anyone else¡¯s, waving for attention. He knew the answer every time, wanted to give it, was not afraid of attention, and did not mind lookingsilly. Nor did he seem to be showingoff, as a classmate recalled; he was simply young, eager, and 
immature.9 
Unlike Warren, most of his Columbia classmates had little interest in stocks and bonds and were probably bored by this mandatory class. They were a remarkably homogenous group of men, 10 mostly headed to General Motors, IBM, or U.S. Steelafter they got their degrees. 
One of them, Bob Dunn, was on his way to becomingthe academic star of the class of 1951. Warren admired his presence and intelligence and often went over to the dorm to visit him. One afternoon, in the other room of Dunn¡¯s two-room suite, Fred Stanback found himself wakened from a nap by a loud voice. Half asleep, he began to realize that the voice was sayingsuch interestingthings that he didn¡¯t want to doze off again. Rising from his bunk, he wandered into the next room. There he found a crew-cut, badly dressed kid, rattlinga mile a minute, who leaned forward in his seat as if a startinggun were poised behind his head. Stanback plopped down in a chair and began to listen to Warren, who was declaimingwith great authority about some undervalued stocks he¡¯d found. 
It was clear Warren had already immersed himself in the stock market. He talked about a clutch of tiny 
companies, includingTyer Rubber Company and Sargent & Co., which made locks, and a somewhat larger business, hardware wholesaler Marshall-Wells.11 Listening, Stanback became an instant disciple. He went out straightaway and bought stocks for the first time in his life. 
Stanback was the son of a live-wire salesman who had gotten rich peddlingenvelopes of headache powder 
and ¡°SnapBack Stimulant Powders¡±¡ªfullof caffeine¡ªfrom the back seat of a Model T Ford.12 Fred Jr. grew up, analytical and reserved, on Confederate Avenue in the tiny hamlet of Salisbury, North Carolina. He was a born audience for Warren. The two started spendingtime together¡ªa fast-talking, scrawny-lookingkid and a sandy-blond handsome youngman with a molasses voice. One day Warren had an idea. He asked Professor Dodd¡¯s permission to cut class to attend the annualmeetingof Marshall-Wells. A few months before startingat Columbia, he and Howard had jointly bought twenty-five shares of this stock. 
¡°Marshall-Wells was this wholesale hardware company up in Duluth, Minnesota. That was the first annual meeting I ever attended. They held their meeting in Jersey City, New Jersey, probably so fewer shareholders would attend.¡± 
Warren¡¯s vision of shareholder meetings rose fromhis conception of the nature of a business. He had recently sold his tenant farm, doublinghis money over five years. Duringthe time he had owned it, he and his tenant farmer had shared the profits on the crop. But his tenant didn¡¯t share the profits fromsellingthe land. As the capitalist, Warren put up the money and took the risk, and then he got the gain, if there was any. 
Warren thought of all businesses this way. The employees who managed the business shared in the earnings that their labors produced. But they were accountable to their owners, and it was the owners who got the gains as the value of the business increased. Of course, if the employees bought stock themselves, they became owners, too, and partners with the other capitalists. But no matter how much stock they owned, as employees their job required themto report to the owners on how well they had done. Thus, Warren saw a shareholder meetingas a time of accountingfor the stewardship of the managers. 
This vision was rarely shared by company managements, however. 
Warren and his new friend Stanback took the train to Jersey City. Arrivingin a drab meetingroomon an upper floor of the Corporation Trust Company, they found half a dozen people awaitinga session in which the company planned to shuffle through an agenda of legal obligations in a perfunctory fashion. Paradoxically, management¡¯s indifference and shareholder negligence both worked on Warren¡¯s behalf, for the fewer folks came to the show, the more valuable would be whatever knowledge he could wrest fromthe 
13 
company. 
One of those few was Walter Schloss, a thirty-four-year-old man who was workingfor the pittance of fifty dollars a week as one of four employees of Ben Graham¡¯s company, the Graham-Newman Corporation.14 As the meetingbegan, Schloss startingaskingpointed questions of management. He was a bantamweight, mild-mannered, dark-haired man from a family of New York Jewish immigrants, but he probably struck the 
Marshall-Wells crowd as abrupt by the standards of Duluth. ¡°They were a little upset,¡± says Stanback, ¡°that these outsiders were bargingin on their meeting. They¡¯d never had anybody come to their meetingbefore, and they didn¡¯t like that.¡±15 
Warren was immediately taken with Schloss¡¯s approach, and when Schloss identified himself as workingfor Graham-Newman, he reacted as though at a family reunion. As soon as the meetingended, Warren approached Schloss and they began to talk. He found him a man after his own heart, a believer that wealth is hard to accumulate and easy to lose. Schloss¡¯s grandfather had dallied away his hours in New York City at the Harmonie Club, leavinghis apparel company in the charge of a bookkeeper who¡ªas custodian of the money and the records¡ªapplied himself to usingthe latter to embezzle the former. Next, his father had set up a radio factory with a partner. The warehouse burned down under suspicious circumstances before a single radio was sold. Then, when Walter was thirteen, his mother lost her inheritance in the crash of 1929. 
The Schloss family got by through perspiration and determination. Walter¡¯s father got a job as a factory manager, then sold stamps. Fresh out of high school in 1934, Walter worked as a Wall Street runner¡ªa member of the Pony Express of the brokerage firms¡ªcarryingmessages up and down the street. Next, workingin the company¡¯s ¡°cage¡± handlingsecurities, he had asked his boss if he could analyze stocks. The answer was no¡ªbut, he was told, ¡°There¡¯s a fellow named Ben Grahamwho¡¯s just written a book called 
Security Analysis. Read that book and you won¡¯t need anythingelse.¡±16 
Schloss read Graham¡¯s book cover to cover and wanted more. Two nights a week fromfive to seven, he started goingto the New York Institute of Finance, where Graham taught investing. Graham had begun these seminars in 1927 as trial runs for a college course he was thinkingof teachingat Columbia. At the time, the public couldn¡¯t get enough of stocks, and the class was packed. ¡°Although I warned my students that any stocks mentioned were for illustration only and under no circumstances were to be taken as recommendations to buy, it did happen that some of the issues I discussed as undervalued subsequently enjoyed substantial 
advances,¡± he said, in somethingof an understatement.17 
When Grahammentioned names of stocks he was currently buying, people like Gustave Levy, the head trader at Goldman Sachs, scurried back to act on these ideas and make their firms and themselves rich. Schloss was so captivated that he wound up as one of a couple of employees workingfor his idol, Ben Graham, and his partner, Jerry Newman. Warren found himself instinctively drawn to Walter, not just for his enviable job but also because of the story of his gritty, disadvantaged background. At the Marshall-Wells meeting, Warren also recognized another shareholder by his barrel-shouldered, cigar-smokingprofile. This was Louis Green, a well-known investor who was a partner in a small but respected securities firm, Stryker & 
Brown, and an ally of Ben Graham¡¯s.18 Together, Green, Graham, and Jerry Newman hunted for companies whose stock was cheaper than a warehouse full of stale Barbecubes dogbiscuits. They tried to buy enough stock to get elected to the board of directors and thus influence management. 
Warren was mightily impressed by Lou Green and wanted to make a good impression, so he struck up a conversation with him, and he and Stanback and Green rode back together on the train from New Jersey. Green offered to take the two youngmen to lunch. 
That was like hittingthe jackpot. Warren discovered Green was tightfisted, a man after his own heart. ¡°This guy was enormously wealthy, and we went to some cafeteria or something like that.¡± 
At lunch Green began explainingwhat it was like to be pursued by women who were after his money. As he was somewhat past middle age, his technique for dealingwith this was to confront the woman¡¯s motives directly: ¡°You like these false teeth? How about my bald head? Or the pot belly?¡± Warren was enjoyingthe conversation, untilGreen suddenly changed the subject and put himon the spot. 
¡°He said to me, ¡®Why did you buy Marshall-Wells?¡¯ 
¡°And I said, ¡®Because Ben Graham bought it.¡¯¡± 
True, Grahamwas already his hero, even though the two had never met. And since the inspiration for buying 
Marshall-Wells had indeed come from Security Analysis, Warren may have felt he had to be scrupulous about how he had learned of it.19 But, in fact, he had good reason to own Marshall-Wells beyond its mention in Security Analysis. 
Reputedly the largest hardware wholesaler in North America, Marshall-Wells was earningso much money that if it had paid out those earnings to shareholders as a dividend, they would have gotten $62 a share. The stock traded at around $200 a share. Owninga Marshall-Wells share was somethinglike owninga bond, one that paid thirty-one percent interest (the $62 earnings on a $200 share). At that rate, in three years, Warren would have nearly two dollars of value for every dollar he had invested in Marshall-Wells. Even if the company didn¡¯t pay the money out, the stock would have to rise eventually. 
You would be crazy to pass up such a stock. 
But Warren did not explain any of this to Lou Green. Instead, he said, ¡°¡®Because Ben Graham bought it.¡¯ 
¡°Lou looked at me and said, ¡®Strike one!¡¯ 
¡°I¡¯ll never forget the way he looked at me when he said it.¡± 
It dawned on him: ¡°Warren, think for yourself.¡± He felt foolish. 
¡°We¡¯re sitting in this little cafeteria, I¡¯m with this impressive character, and all of a sudden I¡¯m striking out.¡± 
He did not want to make any more mistakes like this, and he did want to find more stocks like Marshall-Wells, so as Graham¡¯s seminar approached, Warren started memorizingeverythinghe could find out about Ben Graham¡¯s method, his books, his specific investments, and Grahamhimself. He had learned that Graham 
was chairman of the board of a company called Government Employees Insurance Company, or GEICO.20 This stock was not mentioned in Security Analysis. When he looked in the Moody¡¯s Manual, he found that the Graham-Newman Corporation had owned fifty-five percent of it but had recently given out the stock to 
its shareholders.21 
What was this GEICO? Warren was curious. So on a cold, wintry Saturday morninga few weeks later, he jumped on the earliest train to Washington, D.C., and showed up at GEICO¡¯s door. No one was about, but a guard answered his knock. As he recalls, Warren asked in his humblest manner whether anyone was there who might explain GEICO¡¯s business to him. He made sure to mention that he was a student of Ben Graham¡¯s. 
The guard trotted upstairs to the office where GEICO¡¯s financial vice president, Lorimer Davidson, sat 
working. Faced with this request, Davidson thought to himself that ¡°beinga pupilof Ben¡¯s, I would give him five minutes and thank him, find a polite way of sendinghim on his way.¡±22 He told the guard to show Warren in. 
Warren introduced himself to Davidson with precise but flatteringsincerity: ¡°¡®My name is Warren Buffett. I¡¯m a student at Columbia. Ben Graham is going to be, probably, my professor. I read his book, and I think he¡¯s wonderful. And I noticed that he¡¯s the chairman of Government Employees Insurance. I don¡¯t know anything about it, but I wanted to come here and learn.¡¯¡± 
Davidson started talkingto Warren about the arcane business of auto insurance, thinkingthat out of kindness to a pupilof Graham¡¯s, he would waste a few minutes of his valuable time. But, he said, ¡°After about ten to twelve minutes of his questions, I realized that I was talkingto a highly unusual youngman. The questions he was askingme were the questions that would have been asked by an experienced insurance-stock analyst. His follow-up questions were professional. He was young, and he looked young. He described himself as a student, but he was talkinglike a man who had been around a longtime, and he knew a great deal. When my opinion of Warren changed, I began asking him questions. And I found out that he had been a successful businessman at age sixteen. That he had filed his own income tax at age fourteen and every year since then. That he had had a number of small businesses.¡± 
Lorimer Davidson had accomplished so much himself that he was hard to impress. ¡°Davy,¡± as he was universally known, had been a mediocre student, but, he says, ¡°Almost from the time I was ten, eleven years old, I knew what I wanted to do. I wanted to be just what my father was. I never thought of any other business [than beinga bond salesman].¡± He saw Wall Street as Mecca, ¡°the ultimate place.¡± 
In 1924 Davidson had made $1,800 in commissions in his first week sellingbonds. Over time, he began to play the stock market usingborrowed money, trading ¡°Radio,¡± the Radio Corporation of America, or RCA. In July 1929, he ¡°shorted¡± Radio, which was tradingat an absurd price, bettingthat it would go down. But absurd prices can become even more absurd, and when the stock went up another 150 points, Davidson lost everything. Then, when the market crashed on October 29, he had to forget his pregnant wife and the loss of every cent he¡¯d ever made in order to navigate the horror his clients now faced. He and his colleagues stayed up untilfive a.m. callingtheir accounts. Almost without exception, they, too, had traded on borrowed money. 
At first the clients came up with the cash to repay their loans. Market seers and government officials kept sayingstocks would quickly rebound. They got the velocity right but the direction allwrong. With each 
succeedingwave of ¡°margin¡± calls, half of Davidson¡¯s remainingclients were wiped out, unable to pay their 
debts, forfeitingtheir accounts. Davidson, who had been pocketingan incredible $100,000 a year in commissions before the crash,23 was soon makingabout $100 a week sellingbonds¡ªand consideringhimself well off. ¡°It was a pretty sorry sight,¡± he recalled of those Depression years, ¡°to see an old friend, married with children, very successful, and now he has to work to get a nickel for an apple¡± sellingfruit at the corner of Walland Broad. 
It was through his job sellingbonds that Davy happened to call on the Government Employees Insurance Company. When he found out how GEICO worked, he was instantly captivated. 
GEICO sought to make auto insurance cheaper by marketingthrough the mail without an agent.24 That was a 
revolutionary concept at the time. To make it work, GEICO needed a rule that would allow it to avoid the folks who drive thirty miles over the speed limit after downinghalf a bottle of tequila at three a.m. 25 Borrowingan idea froma company called USAA that sold only to military officers, GEICO¡¯s founders, Leo Goodwin and Cleves Rhea, had decided to sellits insurance only to government employees because, like military officers, they were responsible individuals who were accustomed to followingthe law. Better still, there were a lot of them. Thus, the Government Employees Insurance Company was born. 
Later, the Rhea family had hired Davidson to sell their stock, since they were based in Texas and no longer wanted to commute. While puttingtogether a syndicate of buyers, he approached Graham-Newman Corporation in New York. Ben Grahamwas interested but deferred to his gruff partner, Jerry Newman. ¡°Jerry thought that to buy somethingat the offeringprice was illegal. He said, ¡®I never bought anythingat the offeringprice before; I¡¯mnot goingto start now,¡¯¡± Davidson said. 
They dickered. Davidson brought Jerry Newman around to investing$1 million for fifty-five percent of the company, with some modest concessions. Ben Grahambecame chairman of GEICO, and Newman joined its board. Six or seven months later, Lorimer Davidson told GEICO¡¯s CEO Leo Goodwin that he would take a pay cut to work for GEICO, managingits investments. Goodwin consulted with Ben Graham, who agreed. 
Hearingthis story from Davidson, Warren was fascinated. ¡°I just kept asking questions about insurance and GEICO. He didn¡¯t go to lunch that day¡ªhe just sat there and talked to me for four hours like I was the most important person in the world. When he opened that door to me, he opened the door to the insurance world.¡± 
Now, the door to the insurance world is one most people would rather stayed firmly nailed shut. But insurance was taught in business schools, Warren had studied it at Penn, and there was an aspect of it a little like gamblingthat intrigued the oddsmaker in him. He had become interested in an insurance scheme called a tontine, in which people pooltheir money and the last survivor gets the whole pot. But tontines were now 
illegal.26 
Warren had even considered actuarialscience¡ªthe mathematics of insurance¡ªas a career. He could have spent decades toilingover tables of mortality statistics, handicappingpeople¡¯s life expectancies. Besides the obvious ways this suited his personality¡ªwhich tended toward specialization; relished memorizing, collecting, and manipulatingnumbers; and preferred solitude¡ªworkingas a life actuary would have let him spend his time ponderingone of his two favorite preoccupations: life expectancy. 
However, his other favorite, collectingmoney, had won out. 
Warren was startingto grapple with the fundamentalconcept of business: How do companies make money? A company was much like a person. It had to go out and find a way to keep a roof over its employees¡¯ and shareholders¡¯ heads. 
He grasped that because GEICO sold insurance at the cheapest price, the only way it could make money would be to have the lowest possible costs. He also learned that insurance companies take their customers¡¯ premiums and invest themlongbefore the claims are paid. That sounded to him like gettingto use somebody else¡¯s money for free, just the kind of idea that appealed to him. 
GEICO seemed to Warren a no-lose proposition. 
That Monday, less than forty-eight hours after he arrived back in New York, Warren dumped stocks worth three-quarters of his growingportfolio and used the cash to buy 350 shares of GEICO. It was an extraordinary move for the normally cautious youngman. 
That was especially true because, at its current price, GEICO was an investment that Ben Grahamwould not have approved of, even though Graham-Newman had only recently become its largest shareholder. Graham¡¯s idea was to buy stocks tradingfor less than the value of their assets, and he did not believe in concentrating in just a few stocks. But Warren was amazed by what he had learned fromLorimer Davidson. GEICO was growingso fast that he felt confident of beingable to predict what it would be worth in a few years. On that basis, it was cheap. He wrote a report about it for his father¡¯s stockbrokerage firm, sayingthat GEICO was tradingat $42 per share, a multiple of about eight times its recent earnings per share. Other insurance companies, he noted, were sellingat much higher multiples of their earnings. Yet GEICO was a small company in a large field, whereas its competitors were companies ¡°whose growth possibilities have largely been exhausted.¡± Warren then made a conservative projection of the company¡¯s value in five years. He 
thought the stock would be worth between $80 and $90 per share.27 
A less Graham-like analysis could hardly be imagined. Graham¡¯s 1920s bubble and Depression experiences had made himsuspicious of earnings projections, so suspicious that while he paid lip service to this method of valuation in his teaching, he never used it himself in valuingstocks to buy for his firm. But Warren was bettingthree-quarters of his patiently accumulated money on the numbers he had calculated. 
In April, he wrote to Geyer & Co. and Blythe and Company, the most prominent brokerage firms specializing in insurance stocks, askingfor their research. Next he visited these experts to talk to themabout GEICO. After he heard their views, he explained his own theory. 
They told Warren he was nuts. 
GEICO, they said, could not succeed over the larger, more established companies that used agents. It was a tiny company, with a market share of less than one percent. Huge insurance companies with thousands of agents dominated the industry, and so it would ever be. Yet here was GEICO, growinglike a dandelion in June and printingmoney like the U.S. Mint. 
Warren didn¡¯t understand why they couldn¡¯t see what was right before their eyes. 
17 
MountEverest 
New York City . Spring 1951 
As his second semester began at Columbia, Warren hummed with excitement. His father had just been reelected to Congress for a fourth time¡ªby the largest majority yet¡ªand he was finally goingto meet his hero. 
In his memoir, Ben Grahamdescribes himself as a loner who never had an intimate friend after high school: ¡°I was cut out to be everybody¡¯s friend but no one¡¯s bosom palor crony.¡±1 ¡°Nobody cracked his shell. Men all admired him, they all liked him, and they all wanted to be his friend more than he wanted them to be. 
You came away feeling terrific about him, but you never got to be his pal.¡± Buffett would later callthis Graham¡¯s ¡°protective coating.¡± Even his partner David Dodd never became an intimate. Grahamhad great difficulty in understandingand empathizingwith others. People found himalmost painful to talk to¡ªso cerebral, so erudite, so clever. He was not relaxingto be around; people had to keep their wits about them all the time in his company. While he was always kind, he quickly tired of conversingwith his fellow human beings; the ¡°realfriends and intimates¡± of his life were his favorite authors¡ªGibbon, Virgil, Milton, Lessing¡ªand their subjects, which, he said, ¡°had far more significance for me and left a greater impression on my memory than the livingpeople around me.¡± 
Born Benjamin Grossbaum,2 Graham passed his first twenty-five years in a period when the country experienced four financial panics and three depressions.3 His family¡¯s fortune dwindled after his father¡¯s death when Ben was nine; his worldly, ambitious mother lost most of her own small stake in the stock-market panic of 1907, and she wound up havingto pawn her jewelry. One of Graham¡¯s earliest memories was 
standingat a bank teller window, tryingto cash his mother¡¯s check as the teller audibly asked a colleague whether Mrs. Grossbaum was good for five dollars. Duringthis time, Graham recalled, the family was saved through the charity of relatives ¡°frommisery, though not from humiliation.¡±4 
Nonetheless, Ben excelled throughout his education in the New York City public schools, where he read Victor Hugo in French, Goethe in German, Homer in Greek, and Virgil in Latin. Upon graduation, he wanted to attend Columbia University but needed financial aid. When the scholarship examiner visited the Grossbaums, he turned Ben down. Ben¡¯s mother was convinced that he did so because the family still clung to a few Louis XVI chairs and some other fine pieces of furniture, despite its reduced circumstances. Ben, however, was sure the examiner had detected a ¡°secret deformity¡± in his soul: ¡°For years I had been strugglingagainst somethingthe French call mauvaises habitudes [bad habits, a euphemismfor masturbation], and which a combination of innate puritanismon my part and the hair-raisinghealth tracts 
prevalent in those days had raised to a moral and physical issue of enormous proportions.¡±5 
Graham and his bad habits wound up at tuition-free City College, bereft and broke, convinced that a degree from this schoolwould not advance himin the snobbish, cultivated world to which he aspired. The last straw came when two borrowed books were stolen fromhis locker and he had to pay to replace them. He had no pocket money at all. He dropped out, got a job assemblingdoorbells, and recited the Aeneid and the Rub¨¢iy¨¢t to himself as he worked. Eventually, he reapplied to Columbia and this time was given the scholarship that had earlier been denied him¡ªthrough a clerical error, it turned out. At Columbia, he became an academic star, even while workingat a variety of menialjobs to help pay his expenses. Checkingwaybills, he would mentally compose sonnets for distraction. On graduation, he turned down a scholarship to law school as well as offers from three different departments¡ªto teach philosophy, mathematics, and English¡ªin order to 
follow his dean¡¯s advice and go into the advertisingbusiness.6 
Graham¡¯s sense of humor always tended toward irony. His first effort at writinga jingle for the nonflammable cleaningfluid Carbona was rejected as too frighteningto customers when he produced this limerick: 
There was a younggirlfromWinona Who never had heard of Carbona She started to clean With a can of benzene And now her poor parents bemoan her. 
After this episode, Columbia¡¯s Dean Keppelrecommended Graham for a job at the brokerage house Newburger, Henderson & Loeb. Grahamsaid of Wall Street, ¡°I knew it only by hearsay and in novels as a place of drama and excitement. I felt the urge to participate in its mysterious rituals and momentous events.¡± 
He started in 1914 on the bottomrungof the Wall Street ladder, earning$12 a week as a runner. Then he worked as an assistant board boy, scurryingto and fro in a customer¡¯s room, changingstock prices on a chalkboard. Grahamparlayed these jobs into a career through a classic WallStreet maneuver:He did research on the side, until one day a floor broker gave a report he had written¡ªnegatively appraisingthe 
bonds of the Missouri Pacific Railroad¡ªto a partner at Bache & Company, which hired him as a statistician.7 Later, he returned to Newburger, Henderson & Loeb as a partner, where he remained until 1923. Then, a group of financial backers, includingmembers of the Rosenwald family (early partners in Sears), lured himaway by providinghim with startingcapital of $250,000, which enabled himto go out on his own. 
Graham closed this business in 1925 when he and his backers disagreed over his compensation, and established the ¡°Benjamin GrahamJoint Account¡± on January 1, 1926, with $450,000 from clients and his own money. Shortly afterward, Jerome Newman, the brother of one of his clients, offered to make an investment in the firmand join Grahamas a partner at no salary until he learned the business and added value. Graham, however, insisted on payinghim, modestly at first, and Newman brought to the partnership a broad generalknowledge of business as wellas management skills. 
In 1932, Graham wrote a series of articles in Forbes, ¡°Is American Business Worth More Dead Than Alive?¡± in which he chastised company managements for sittingon troves of cash and investments, and investors for overlookingthis value, which was not reflected in the prices of stocks. Grahamknew how to dislodge the value, but his problemwas capital. Through its stock-market losses, the firm¡¯s account was down from$2.5 
million to $375,000.*13 Graham felt responsible for recoupinghis partners¡¯ losses, but that meant he would have to more than triple their money. It would take some doingeven to keep the Joint Account alive. Jerry Newman¡¯s father-in-law saved it by puttingin $50,000. And by December 1935, Grahamdid triple the money, and earned the losses back. 
For tax reasons, in 1936 Grahamand Newman reorganized the Joint Account into two businesses¡ªGraham-Newman Corporation, and Newman & Graham.8 Graham-Newman charged a fixed fee and had issued shares to the public which now traded on an exchange. Newman & Grahamwas a ¡°hedge fund,¡± or private partnership with a limited number of sophisticated partners, that paid Grahamand Newman based on their performance as managers. 
The two men remained partners for thirty years, although in his memoir, Grahamcited Jerry Newman¡¯s ¡°lack of amiability,¡± his demanding, impatient, and fault-findingpersonality, and his inclination to be ¡°too tough¡± in negotiation. Newman, said Graham, was ¡°far frompopular, even amonghis friends, of whomhe had many,¡± and ¡°had numerous quarrels with close associates,¡± which he always made up in the end. He and Graham got alongbecause of Graham¡¯s protective coating; other people¡¯s behavior never seemed to disturb Graham¡¯s equanimity. 
The one exception to this was Graham¡¯s penchant for takingon established business figures in a fight. Through diligent research diggingthrough a report published by the Interstate Commerce Commission, he had discovered that Northern Pipeline, an oil transmission company whose stock sold for $65, owned railroad bonds worth $95 per share in addition to its pipeline assets. However, the Rockefeller Foundation, which controlled the stock, was doingnothingto release the value of the railroad bonds to shareholders. The stock traded at a depressed price that did not reflect the value of the bonds, so Grahambegan quietly accumulating shares untilhis firmbecame the largest owner after the Rockefeller Foundation. Then he pushed for the bonds to be distributed to the shareholders. Northern Pipeline¡¯s management, who had come fromStandard Oilwhen it was broken up in 1911, gave him a runaround. It said the company needed to keep the bonds in order to be able to pay for replacingthe agingpipeline someday. But Graham knew better. Finally, the managers simply said: Runninga pipeline is a very complex and specialized business, about which you know very little but which we have done for a lifetime. If you don¡¯t agree with our policies, why don¡¯t you just sell your shares? 
But Graham viewed his role as servingallthe company¡¯s investors, not just himself, and instead of selling, he went down to the shareholders¡¯ meetingin remote Oil City, Pennsylvania, where he was the only person who attended other than company employees. He made a motion about the railroad bonds, but the management refused to recognize himbecause he had brought no one alongto second the motion. In its dealings with him, the management also made what he felt were some anti-Semitic innuendos, which hardly inclined himto give up the fight. Over the next year, he bought additionalshares, teamed up with other investors, and prepared to mount a legalbattle with management¡ªa proxy fight. By the time of the next shareholders¡¯ meeting, he had assembled enough votes to get two additional directors elected to the board, which tilted the balance in favor of distributingthe bonds. The company submitted and ended up handingout the equivalent of $110 per share in cash and stock to its shareholders. 
The battle became a famous incident on Wall Street, and Graham went on to build the Graham-Newman Corporation into one of the best-known, although far from the largest, investment firms in the business. 
He did it even while inflictinga handicap on his own performance. His teachingstyle used examples taken directly fromGraham-Newman¡¯s office. Every time he mentioned a stock in the classroom, the students ran out and bought it, pushingup the price and makingit more expensive for Graham-Newman to buy. This drove Jerry Newman crazy. Why make the firm¡¯s job harder by lettingother people in on what they were doing? To make money on Wall Street meant keepingyour ideas to yourself. But, as Buffett said, ¡°Ben didn¡¯t really care how much money he had. He wanted to have enough, and he went through that period in ¡¯29 to ¡¯33 that was very rough. But if he had as much money as he felt he needed, anything else was totally immaterial to him.¡± 
Over the twenty-year life of Graham-Newman Corporation, its performance had beaten the stock market¡¯s performance by an average of 2.5 percent a year¡ªa record exceeded by only a handfulof people in the history of Wall Street. That percent might sound trifling, but compounded for two decades, it meant that an investor in Graham-Newman wound up with almost sixty-five percent more in his pocket than someone who earned the market¡¯s average result. Much more important, Grahamhad achieved this superior performance while takingconsiderably less risk than someone who simply invested in the stock market as a whole. 
And Graham did it mainly through his skill at analyzingnumbers. Before him, assessments of a security¡¯s value were largely guesswork. Grahamdeveloped the first thorough, systematic way of analyzingthe value of a stock. He preferred to work by studyingonly publicly available information¡ªusually a company¡¯s financial 
statements¡ªand rarely attended even public meetings with a company¡¯s management.9 Although his associate Walter Schloss had been at the Marshall-Wells meeting, it was his own idea to go, not Graham¡¯s. 
Ben¡¯s third wife, Estey, drove her husband up to Columbia from the Graham-Newman Corporation¡¯s office at 55 Wall Street every Thursday afternoon after the market closed to teach his ¡°seminar on common stock valuation.¡± This course was the culmination of the Columbia finance curriculum, so highly regarded that men who were already workingin money management signed up for it, sometimes more than once. 
Warren, of course, looked up to Graham with worshipfulawe. He had read the Northern Pipeline story over and over when he was ten years old, well before he understood who Benjamin Grahamwas in the investing world. Now he hoped to bond with his teacher. But outside the classroom, he and Ben had few hobbies in common. Grahamdabbled in the arts and sciences in a quest for knowledge, writingpoetry, failing spectacularly as a Broadway playwright, and putteringaround fillingnotebooks with ideas for clumsy inventions. He also devoted himself to ballroomdancing, clumpingaround for years at the Arthur Murray studio, where he danced like a wooden soldier and counted the steps out loud. Duringdinner parties, Graham often disappeared in the middle of a course to work on mathematical formulas, read Proust (in French), or 
listen to the opera in solitude, rather than suffer the dull company of his fellow man. 10 ¡°I remember the things I learn,¡± he wrote in his memoir, ¡°rather than the things I live.¡± The one exception where livingtook precedence over learningwas his assignations. 
About the only way a human beingcompeted with the classic authors for Graham¡¯s attention was to be 
female and beddable. He was short and physically unimposing, but people had told himthat his sensual full lips and penetratingblue eyes reminded themof the actor Edward G. Robinson.11 There was something elfish-lookingabout him, and he was not a handsome man. Nonetheless, Grahamseemed to be a Mount Everest for women who liked a challenge:they met him and wanted to climb on top. 
In his three wives, Graham¡¯s taste had ranged wide: from the passionate, strong-willed teacher HazelMazur to Broadway showgirl Carol Wade¡ªeighteen years his junior¡ªto his third wife and former secretary, the 
intelligent, lighthearted Estelle ¡°Estey¡± Messing. Complicatingallthese marriages was his complete indifference to monogamy. Grahamlater wrote a memoir12 in which he begins, ¡°Let me describe my first extramaritalaffair in the soberest fashion,¡± a sobriety he giddily abandons six sentences later as he explains the recipe for his liaison with the sharp-tongued, ¡°by no means beautiful¡± Jenny: ¡°one part attraction and four parts opportunity.¡± If more attraction was present, he needed less opportunity, makinghimshameless, even annoying, in his sexual advances toward women he found attractive. Combiningtwo of his hobbies, 
Graham might dash off a seductive little poemto a woman he fancied on the subway. Yet he was so cerebral that, even for his lovers, it must have been a challenge to hold his attention. The dartingfromamour to business in the followingpassage of the memoir is pure Graham:13 
I have a sentimentalmemory of the last hour we spent together in the cabin of her Ward Line steamer. (Little did I think then that my firmwas later to controlthat old-established steamship company.) 
He drove his wives to distraction with his philandering. But Warren at the time knew nothingabout Graham¡¯s personal life and was focused only on what he could learn fromthe brilliant teacher. On the first day of Graham¡¯s seminar in January 1951, Warren walked into a smallish classroom containinga longrectangular table. In the middle sat Graham, surrounded by eighteen or twenty men. Most of the other students were older, some of themwar veterans. Half were not Columbia students but businessmen who were auditingthe course. Once again, Warren was the youngest¡ªyet also the most knowledgeable. When Grahamasked a question, inevitably he ¡°would be the first one to have his hand up and immediately start talking,¡± recalls one 
of his classmates, Jack Alexander.14 The rest of the class became the audience to a duet. 
In 1951, many American businesses were still worth more dead than alive. Grahamencouraged his students to use real-life examples fromthe stock market to illustrate this, down-and-dirty companies such as Greif Bros. Cooperage, a barrel maker whose stock Warren owned. Its main business was slowly disappearingbut whose stock was tradingat a substantialdiscount to the cash that could be netted if its properties and inventory were simply sold off and its debts repaid. Eventually, Grahamreasoned, that ¡°intrinsic¡± value would surface the way a river-tossed barrel, trapped under winter ice, pops to the surface in a springthaw. You had only to interpret the balance sheet, decodingthe numbers that proved there was a barrel of money trapped under the ice. 
Graham said that a company is no different than a person, who might think that her net worth was $7,000, comprisingher house, worth $50,000, less her mortgage of $45,000, plus her other savings of $2,000. Just like people, companies have assets that they own, such as the products they make and sell, and debts¡ªor liabilities¡ªthat they owe. If you sold allthe assets to pay off the debts, what would be left was the company¡¯s equity, or net worth. If someone could buy the stock at a price that valued the company cheaper than its net worth, Grahamsaid, eventually¡ªa tricky word, ¡°eventually¡±¡ªthe stock¡¯s price would rise to 
15 
reflect this intrinsic value. 
It sounded simple, but the art of security analysis lay in the details¡ªplayingdetective, probingfor what assets were really worth, excavatinghidden assets and liabilities, consideringwhat the company could earn¡ªor not earn¡ªand strippingapart the fine print to lay bare the rights of shareholders. Graham¡¯s students learned that stocks were not abstract pieces of paper, and their value could be analyzed by figuringwhat the whole pie of a business was worth, then dividingit into slices. 
Complicatingmatters, however, was that issue of ¡°eventually.¡± Stocks often traded at odds with their intrinsic value for longperiods of time. An analyst could figure everythingright and still appear wrongin the eyes of the market for the investingequivalent of a lifetime. That was why, as wellas beinga detective, you had to build in what Grahamand Dodd called a MARGIN OF SAFETY¡ªthat is, plenty of room for error. 
Graham¡¯s method struck people who studied it in one of two ways. Some grasped it immediately as a fascinating, all-consumingtreasure hunt and others recoiled fromit as a dreary homework assignment. Warren¡¯s reaction was that of a man emergingfromthe cave in which he had been livingallhis life, blinking 
in the sunlight as he perceived reality for the first time.16 His former concept of a ¡°stock¡± was derived from the patterns formed by the prices at which pieces of paper traded. Now he saw that those pieces of paper were simply symbols of an underlyingtruth. He instantly grasped that the patterns formed by tradingthese pieces of paper did not signify a ¡°stock¡± any more than those childhood piles of bottle caps had signified the effervescent, sweet-sour-spicy taste of soda pop that made people crave it. His old notions dissolved in an instant, conquered by Graham¡¯s ideas and illuminated by the way he taught. 
Graham used allkinds of nifty, effective tricks in his class. He would ask paired questions, one at a time. His students thought they knew the answer to the first, but when the second came along, it made themrealize that maybe they didn¡¯t. He would put up descriptions of two companies, one in terrible shape, practically bankrupt, another in fine form. After askingthe class to analyze them, he would reveal that they were the same company at different times. Everyone was surprised. These were memorable lessons on thinking independently, typicalof how his mind worked. 
Alongwith his Company A and Company B teachingmethod, Graham used to talk about Class 1 and Class 2 truths. Class 1 truths were absolutes. Class 2 truths became truths by conviction. If enough people thought a company¡¯s stock was worth X, it became worth X untilenough people thought otherwise. Yet that did not affect the stock¡¯s intrinsic value¡ªwhich was a Class 1 truth. Thus, Graham¡¯s investingmethod was not simply about buyingstocks cheap. As much as anythingit was rooted in an understandingof psychology, enablingits followers to keep their emotions frominfluencingtheir decision-making. 
From Graham¡¯s class, Warren took away three main principles that required nothingmore than the stern discipline of mental independence: 
. 
A stock is the right to own a little piece of a business. A stock is worth a certain fraction of what you would be willingto pay for the whole business. 

. 
Use a margin of safety. Investingis built on estimates and uncertainty. A wide margin of safety ensures that the effects of good decisions are not wiped out by errors. The way to advance, above all, is by not retreating. 

. 
Mr. Market is your servant, not your master. Graham postulated a moody character called Mr. Market, who offers to buy and sell stocks every day, often at prices that don¡¯t make sense. Mr. Market¡¯s moods should not influence your view of price. However, fromtime to time he does offer the chance to buy low and sellhigh. 


Of these points, the margin of safety was most important. A stock might be the right to own a piece of a business, and the intrinsic value of the stock was somethingyou could estimate, but with a margin of safety, you could sleep at night. Grahambuilt in his margin of safety in various ways. As well as buyingthings for considerably less than he thought they were worth, he never forgot the danger of usingdebt. And although the 1950s had become one of the most prosperous eras in American history, his early experiences had scarred him and given himthe habit of assumingthe worst. He looked at business through the lens of his 1932 Forbes articles¡ªas worth more dead than alive¡ªthinkingof a stock¡¯s value mostly in terms of what the company would be worth if dead¡ªthat is, shut down and liquidated. Implicitly, Grahamwas always lookingover his shoulder at the 1930s, when so many businesses went into bankruptcy. He kept his firmsmallin part because he was so risk-averse. And he rarely bought more than a tiny position in any company¡¯s stock, no matter how 
sound the business.17 This meant the firmowned a large array of stocks that required much tending. While plenty of stocks did sell at prices below the businesses¡¯ liquidation value, which made Warren an enthusiastic follower of Graham, he disagreed with his teacher about the need to buy so many stocks. He had cast his lot with one stock: ¡°Ben would always tell me GEICO was too high. By his standards, it wasn¡¯t the right kind of stock to buy. Still, by the end of 1951, I had three-quarters of my net worth or close to it invested in GEICO.¡± And yet Warren ¡°worshipped¡± his teacher, even though he had strayed so far fromone of Graham¡¯s ideas. 
As the springsemester wore on, Warren¡¯s classmates gradually accepted the routine of the classroomduet. 
Warren ¡°was a very focused person. He could focus like a spotlight, twenty-four hours a day almost, seven days a week almost. I don¡¯t know when he slept,¡± says Jack Alexander.18 He could quote Graham¡¯s examples and come up with examples of his own. He haunted the Columbia library, readingold newspapers for hours on end. 
¡°I would get these papers from 1929. I couldn¡¯t get enough of it. I read everything¡ªnot just the business and stock-market stories. History is interesting, and there is something about history in a newspaper, just seeing a place, the stories, even the ads, everything. It takes you into a different world, told by somebody who was an eyewitness, and you are really living in that time.¡± 
Warren collected information, weedingout biases imposed by other people¡¯s way of thinking. He spent hours readingthe Moody¡¯s and Standard & Poor¡¯s manuals, lookingfor stocks. But it was the weekly Graham seminar that he looked forward to more than anythingelse he did. He even convinced his disciple Fred Stanback to come in and audit a class or two. 
While the chemistry between Warren and his teacher was obvious to everyone else in the class, one student in particular had taken note of him. BillRuane, a stockbroker at Kidder, Peabody, had found his way to Graham through his alma mater, Harvard Business School, after readingtwo important and memorable books¡ªWhere Are the Customers¡¯ Yachts? and Security Analysis. Ruane loved tellingtales about his stockbrokingjob, though he swore that his first choice of career was workingas an elevator boy at the Plaza 
Hotel, a future derailed by a lengthy wait for a uniform.19 He and Warren had connected immediately. But neither Ruane, nor any other of Graham¡¯s students, nor Warren himself, ever had the temerity to try to see Graham outside the seminar room. Warren did manage to find reasons, however, to drop in on his new 
acquaintance, Walter Schloss, down at the Graham-Newman Corporation.20 He got to know Schloss better 
and learned he was caringfor a wife who had been sufferingfrom depression throughout most of their marriage.21 Schloss, like David Dodd, appeared to be remarkably loyal and steadfast, qualities that Buffett sought out in people. He also envied Schloss his job; he would have cleaned the washrooms for free in exchange for one of those gray laboratory-style jackets, made of thin cotton, that everyone at Graham-Newman wore to keep fromdirtyingtheir shirtsleeves while they filled out the forms that Grahamused to test 
stocks against his investingcriteria.22 Above all, Warren wanted to work for Graham. 
As the semester neared an end, the rest of the class was busy findingtheir futures. Bob Dunn would be headingoff to U.S. Steel, possibly the most prestigious corporate job in the United States. Almost every youngbusinessman saw the route to success as workinghis way up the ladder in a great industrial corporation. In Eisenhower¡¯s postwar, post-Depression America, job security was all-important, and Americans believed that institutions¡ªfromthe government to large corporations¡ªwere essentially benevolent. Findingone¡¯s cell inside the institutionalbeehive and learninghow to fit in was the normaland expected thingto do. 
¡°I don¡¯t think there was one guy in the class that thought about whether U.S. Steel was a good business. I mean, it was a big business, but they weren¡¯t thinking about what kind of train they were getting on.¡± 
Warren had one goal in mind. He knew he would excelif Graham would hire him. While lacking self-confidence in many things, he had always felt sure-footed in the specialized area of stocks. He proposed himself to Grahamfor a job at Graham-Newman Corporation. It took audacity to even dreamof workingfor the great man himself, but Warren was audacious. He was, after all, Ben Graham¡¯s star student, the only one to earn an A+ in his class. If Walter Schloss could work there, why couldn¡¯t he? To clinch the deal, he offered to work for free. He went in and asked for the job with far more confidence than he had felt ridingup to Chicago for his interview with the Harvard Business School. 
Graham turned himdown. 
¡°He was terrific. He just said, ¡®Lookit, Warren. In Wall Street still, the ¡°white-shoe¡± firms, the big investment banks, they don¡¯t hire Jews. We only have the ability to hire a very few people here. And, therefore, we only hire Jews.¡¯ That was true of the two gals in the office and everybody. It was sort of like his version of affirmative action. And the truth is, there was a lot of prejudice against Jews in the fifties. I understood.¡± 
Buffett found it impossible to say anythingthat could be interpreted as critical of Graham, even decades 
later. Of course, it must have been incredibly disappointing. Couldn¡¯t Grahamhave made an exception for his star student? Someone it wouldn¡¯t cost himanythingto employ? 
Warren, who idolized his teacher, had to accept that Graham viewed himimpersonally, so much so that he would not overrule a principle even for the best student who had ever taken his class. There was no appeal¡ªat least for now. Chagrined, he stayed through graduation, then once again he pulled himself together and stepped aboard a train. 
He had two consolations. He would be back in Omaha, where he felt he belonged. And it would be much easier to pursue his love life there, for he had met an Omaha girl and was now smitten. As usual, the girl he wanted was not smitten with him. But this time, he was determined to change her mind. 
18 
MissNebraska 
New York City and Omaha . 1950¨C1952 
Warren had always been a washout with girls. He longed to have a girlfriend, but the very things that made him different hindered his quest. ¡°Nobody was more shy than I was with girls,¡± he says. ¡°But my reaction to that was probably to turn into a talking machine.¡± When he ran out of words about stocks or politics, he resorted to grunts. He was afraid to ask girls out. He summoned the nerve when a girloccasionally did somethingthat made him think he wouldn¡¯t get turned down, but in general his attitude was, ¡°Why would they want to go out with me?¡± Thus he didn¡¯t go on many dates duringhigh school or college. And when he did, somethingalways seemed to go wrong. 
On a date to a baseballgame with a girlnamed Jackie Gillian, the high point was hittinga cow with his car on the way home. He took another girlto hit golf balls at a drivingrange.1 That didn¡¯t fly. Drivinga hearse to pick up Barbara Weigand, he says, was ¡°sort of desperate,¡± not a stunt. It may have worked as an icebreaker, but after that, what was there to say? On a date with a shy girl like Ann Beck, he was struck mute; he was so insecure that he had no idea what to do. Girls didn¡¯t want to hear about Ben Grahamand the margin of safety. If he couldn¡¯t get to first base with Bobbie Worley, who had dated himallone summer, what hope did he have? Very little, he thought, and maybe the girls could sense it. 
Finally, the summer of 1950 before he went to Columbia, his sister Bertie set himup on a date with her 
roommate fromNorthwestern. A round-cheeked kewpie of a brunette named Susan Thompson,2 she had quickly impressed Bertie, who was a year and a half younger, as a special girl with a knack for understanding people.3 As soon as Warren met Susie, he was fascinated, but suspected she was too good to be true: ¡°I bet 
she was a fake at first. I was intrigued by her and I was pursuing her, but I was determined to find the hole in the dike. I just couldn¡¯t believe anybody was really like her.¡± Susie, however, was not interested in him. She was in love with somebody else. 
After Warren went off to Columbia, he read in Earl Wilson¡¯s gossip column4 in the New York Post that Miss Nebraska 1949, Vanita Mae Brown, was livingat the Webster women¡¯s residence5 and performingwith the singer and teen idol Eddie Fisher on a television show. 
Vanita had attended the University of Nebraska at the same time as Warren, although she had escaped his notice and aspirations untilnow. Somethingabout the situation overcame his shyness. Since the glamorous Miss Nebraska was livingin New York, he telephoned her at the Webster. 
Vanita took the bait. Before long, she and Mr. Omaha had a date. He learned that her upbringinghad been nothinglike his. She grew up in South Omaha near the stockyards, cleaningchickens at Omaha Cold Storage after school. Her pinup body and girl-next-door face had been her ticket out. She got a job in Omaha as an usherette at the Paramount Theater, then parlayed her love of puttingherself on display into victory in a local beauty pageant. ¡°I think her talent was bedazzling the judges,¡± Buffett says. After winningthe Miss Nebraska title, she represented the state as Princess Nebraska in the Washington, D.C., Cherry Blossom Festival. From there she moved to New York City, where she was now desperately tryingto make it in show business. 
Although Warren was not the kind of guy to take a girlto dinner at the Stork Club or a show at the Copacabana, she must have welcomed a hometown face. Soon the two of them were exploringthe streets of New York together. Lookingto upgrade themselves, they went to Marble Collegiate Church to hear Dr. Norman Vincent Peale, a famous self-improvement writer and speaker. Warren serenaded her with ¡°Sweet Georgia Brown¡± by ukulele on the bank of the Hudson, totingalongcheese sandwiches as riverside picnic fare. 
Even though Vanita hated cheese sandwiches,6 she seemed willingto keep seeinghim. He found her so entertainingand quick-witted that talkingto her was like playingverbal Ping-Pong.7 The aura of Technicolor that surrounded her made her magnetizing. Vanita¡¯s interest did not delude him, however, about his woefully lackingsocialskills. With each passingyear, he had become more desperate to improve them. He¡¯d seen an ad for a public-speakingcourse in the Dale Carnegie method. Warren trusted Dale Carnegie, who had already helped himto get alongbetter with people. He went to a Carnegie course in New York with a $100 check in his pocket. 
¡°I went to Dale Carnegie because I was painfully aware of being socially maladjusted. And I went and gave them a check, but then I stopped payment on it because I lost my nerve.¡± 
Nor did Warren¡¯s social deficiencies augur well for his prospects with Susan Thompson, to whom he had been writingall fall. She was not encouraging, but neither did she tell himoutright to stop botheringher. Warren quickly hit on the strategy of befriendingSusie¡¯s parents as a gateway to their daughter. Over Thanksgiving, he went to Evanston with themfor a Northwestern football game. Afterward, the three of them 
had dinner with Susie, but she ditched themearly to go out on a date.8 
Warren returned to New York after the holiday, discouraged but no less intrigued. He continued to see Vanita. ¡°She had one of the most imaginative minds I¡¯ve ever run into,¡± he says. 
In fact, datingher began to take on an edge of unpredictability and risk. At various times she threatened to go down to Washington when Howard was speakingon the floor of Congress and throw herself at his feet, shrieking, ¡°Your son is the father of my unborn child!¡± Warren thought she might actually do it. Another time, she created such a scene as they left a movie theater that, unable to listen to it any longer, he hoisted her up and stuffed her, jackknifed, into a wire-mesh trash basket on the street corner. She hungthere, 
suspended and screaming, as he stalked away. 9 
Vanita was beautiful, she was smart, and she was entertaining. She was also dangerous, and Warren knew it was risky to get more involved with her. But there must have been some sort of thrill to it. DatingVanita was like walkinga leopard on a leash to see if it would make a good pet. Yet, ¡°Vanita could handle herself fine. She had no problem carrying it off. The only question was whether she was going to want to carry it off. You didn¡¯t have to worry about her embarrassing you unless she wanted to.¡± 
Once Warren invited her to a dinner at the New York Athletic Club for Frank Matthews, a distinguished lawyer and Secretary of the Navy. Havingthe beautiful Miss Nebraska on his arm would be a plus. Matthews was Nebraskan, the crowd was full of people worth knowing, and Warren wanted to be known. Duringthe cocktail hour, Vanita made sure he would indeed be talked about. After he introduced her as his date, she corrected himand insisted she was his wife. ¡°I don¡¯t know why he does this,¡± she said. ¡°Is he ashamed of me? Would you be ashamed of me?Every time we go out, he pretends that I¡¯m just his date, and we¡¯ve been 
married.¡± 
Finally, Warren realized that even though Vanita could handle herself just fine when she wanted to, ¡°the truth was that she would always want to embarrass me. She preferred acting that way with me,¡± he says, and she did so regularly. Vanita had a fascination about her, however, and had he not had an alternative, 
there is no tellingwhat would have happened next.10 
Every time Warren went home to Nebraska, he saw Susan Thompson as much as she allowed, even though it wasn¡¯t much. To himshe seemed immensely sophisticated, even authoritative, and generous with her emotions. ¡°Susie was way, way, way more mature than I was,¡± he says. He started fallinghard for her and 
disentanglinghimself fromVanita, even though ¡°it was obvious I wasn¡¯t Number One¡±11 with Susie. ¡°My intentions were clear,¡± he says; ¡°they just weren¡¯t having any effect on her.¡± 
Susan Thompson¡¯s family was wellknown to the Buffetts¡ªin fact it was her father, ¡°Doc Thompson,¡± who had managed Howard¡¯s only failed reelection campaign¡ªbut in most respects they were as different as could be from Warren¡¯s. Susie¡¯s mother, Dorothy Thompson, a sweet, tiny woman, warm, genuine, and wise to the world, was known in the family as the ¡°wife who went along.¡± She made sure dinner was on the table at six 
p.m. sharp and supported the many lives her husband, Dr. William Thompson, led. A smallish, silver-haired peacock of a man who wore bow ties and dressed in three-piece wool suits in lavender or cotton-candy pink or chartreuse, he cut a strikingfigure and carried himself with the posture of someone who was confident that he was beingadmired. He came, he said, ¡°froma longline of teachers and preachers,¡± and seemed to want to 
replicate alltheir labors at once. 12 
As dean of the College of Arts and Sciences at the University of Omaha, he ran the college while at the same time teachingpsychology. As assistant athletic director, he controlled the university athletic programs and directed themwith all the gusto of a former football player and sports fanatic. This role made himso prominent that ¡°every cop in town knew him,¡± says Buffett, ¡°which was a good thing, because of the way he drove.¡± He also designed IQ tests and psychology tests, and supervised the testingof all the city¡¯s 
schoolchildren.13 Not content to enjoy a day of rest frombossingpeople around and testingtheir children, on 
Sundays he donned the vestments of an ordained minister and preached v-e-r-y s-l-o-w-l-y in a deep, boomingvoice at the tiny Irvington Christian Church, where his daughters made up the two-person choir.14 The rest of the time, he broadcast his political beliefs, which were similar to Howard Buffett¡¯s, to anyone who came within the sound of his voice. 
Doc Thompson expressed his wishes with a jovial smile while insistingthat they be obeyed at once. He talked of the importance of women while expectingthemto wait on him. His work revolved around the inner self, but he was noticeably vain. He clungto those he loved, growingnervous when they were out of his sight. A chronically anxious hypochondriac, he often predicted that some sort of disaster would befall anyone he cared about. He lavished affection on those who satisfied his demandingways. 
The Thompsons¡¯ older daughter, Dorothy, known as Dottie, was not one of those. Accordingto family lore, 
duringthe first few years of Dottie¡¯s life, when her father was especially displeased with her, he locked her in a closet.15 A charitable interpretation would be that the pressure of tryingto finish his PhD with a toddler underfoot unhinged him. 
Seven years after Dottie¡¯s arrival, their second daughter, Susie, was born. Dorothy Thompson, seeinghow badly Dottie was respondingto her husband¡¯s harsh child-rearingmethods, supposedly asserted herself to tell him ¡°that one was yours, I¡¯mraisingthe next.¡± 
Susie was sickly from birth. She had allergies and chronic ear infections and endured a dozen ear lancings duringher first eighteen months. She suffered through longbouts of rheumatic fever, and her illnesses confined her to the house for four to five months at a time fromkindergarten through second grade. She later recalled watchingher friends playingoutside her window duringthese periods, while she longed to join 
them.16 
Through her many illnesses, the Thompsons constantly comforted, cuddled, and rocked their daughter. Her father doted on her. ¡°There was nothing in his life remotely approaching her,¡± says Warren. ¡°Susie could do no wrong, but everything that Dottie did was wrong. They were always critical of her.¡± 
A family home movie shows Susie, about age four, shouting, ¡°No!¡± and orderingaround Dottie, age eleven, as they played with a tea set.17 
When at last Susie was well and no longer a prisoner of her bedroom, she never chose to play sports or games outdoors but was always eager to make friends.18 It was people she had missed duringthose longdays of illness. 
¡°When you¡¯ve had pain,¡± Susie later recalled, ¡°the release from it can be totally freeing. It¡¯s marvelous. To be free of pain is a great state of being. I learned that at a very youngage. Knowingthat, you can be very simpleminded about life. And then you get with people and think, boy, people are really fascinating.¡±19 
As Susie grew older, she retained her girlish round cheeks and a breathy, deceptively childlike voice. During her teens she went to Omaha¡¯s Central High, an integrated schoolwith a student body of different faiths and colors, unusual in the 1940s. Even though she was part of a crowd that some considered snobbish, her 
classmates recall her as havingfriends amongallthese groups. 20 Her exuberant warmth and her etherealway of speakingcould come across as ¡°a little phony,¡± even ¡°a little loopy,¡±21 but her friends said there wasn¡¯t anythingphony about her. Her interests ran to speech and performingarts rather than academics. She argued with passion and persuasiveness on the Central High debate team, where people noticed that her politics had 
strayed far fromher father¡¯s. She acted charmingly in school plays and sangin a smooth contralto in school operettas and as a mainstay of the choir. Her performance as the sweetly harebrained lead in Our Hearts Were Young and Gay so sparkled that her teachers recalled it for years afterward.22 Indeed, her charmand 
strength of personality made her ¡°Most Popular,¡± a ¡°lady in waiting¡± to the school sweetheart, Miss Central, and led her classmates to elect her senior class president. 
Susie¡¯s first boyfriend was John Gillmore, a quiet, bland boy whom she openly adored. By the time he became her steady at CentralHigh, Gillmore towered over her by almost a foot, but despite her ¡°kittenish¡± demeanor, she dominated him.23 
Duringthose years, she also began datinga friendly, intelligent boy she had met at a freshman debate competition. A student at Thomas Jefferson High School in CouncilBluffs, Iowa, across the Missouri River from Omaha, Milton Brown was a tall, dark-haired youngman with a warm, wide smile. They saw each other 
severaltimes a week throughout high school.24 While her close friends were aware of Milt, it was Gillmore who continued to be her steady date for parties and school events. 
Susie¡¯s father did not approve of Brown, who was the son of an unschooled Russian-Jewish immigrant worker on the Union Pacific Railroad. The three or four times that she dared to bringhimto the house, he was made to feel unwelcome by Doc Thompson, who lectured himabout FDR and Truman. Susie¡¯s father 
made no secret of his determination to pry his daughter loose from datinga Jew.25 Like the Buffetts, Doc Thompson had allthe prejudices typicalof Omaha, where different ethnic and religious groups kept to themselves, and life for a couple of mixed religion would be taxingat best. Yet Susie dared to cross these social lines¡ªwhile at the same time managingto maintain another life as a conventional, popular high school girl. 
Susie navigated these choppy waters untilshe went to college, when she and Milt headed off to freedom ¡ªtogether¡ªat Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois. There she roomed with Bertie Buffett, and both pledged sororities. Bertie coasted through her classes, and was immediately crowned as the PhiDelt 
¡°Pajama Queen.¡±26 Susie, a journalismmajor, had arranged her schedule so that she could see Milt nearly every day. 
The two joined the Wildcat Counciltogether and met at the library after he got off one of the several jobs he 
held after school to pay his tuition.27 Susie¡¯s unconventional choice to openly date a Jewish boy clashed with her life as a typical coed, and members of her sorority forbade her to bringBrown to a dance because he had pledged a Jewish fraternity. Susie, although hurt, did not depledge.28 But she and Milt began to study Zen Buddhism, lookingfor a faith that could reflect their common spiritualbeliefs.29 
Knowingnothingof this, Warren made his futile Thanksgivingtrip to Evanston, then visited Susie in Omaha over the winter holidays. By then he had made up his mind to pursue her seriously. She had the qualities he¡¯d always looked for in a woman. She described herself as ¡°one of those few fortunate people who grew up with 
the feelingthat I was unconditionally loved. That¡¯s the most wonderful gift you can give anyone.¡±30 But the person she wanted to give her unconditionallove to was Milt Brown. 
That springof 1951, Milt was elected sophomore class president and Bertie its vice president. Susie cried 
every time she opened a letter fromhome demandingthat she break off her relationship with Brown. Bertie could see what was goingon, but Susie never confided in her, even though they had grown to be friends.31 She seemed to have a way of never lettinganyone get inside her head. Then, one day as the semester neared an end, the two were sittingin their dormroom when the phone rang. It was Doc Thompson. ¡°Come home now,¡± he commanded. He wanted her away from Milt and he let her know she would not be goingback to Northwestern in the fall. Susie collapsed, sobbing, but there was never any appeal of her father¡¯s decisions. 
After graduatingfromColumbia that spring, Warren, too, returned to Omaha. He would be livingin his parents¡¯ home since they were away in Washington, but he would have to spend part of that first summer after his return fulfillinghis obligation to the National Guard. Though he wasn¡¯t particularly wellsuited to the Guard, it was better than the alternative¡ªgoingoff to fight in Korea. The Guard required himto attend trainingcamp in La Crosse, Wisconsin, for severalweeks every year, however. Trainingcamp did nothingto help himmature. 
¡°In the National Guard, at first, the guys were very suspicious of me because my dad was in Congress. They thought I was going to be some kind of prima donna or something. But that didn¡¯t last long. 
¡°It¡¯s a very democratic organization. I mean, what you do outside doesn¡¯t mean much. To fit in, all you had to do was be willing to read comic books. About an hour after I got there, I was reading comic books. Everybody else was reading comic books, why shouldn¡¯t I? My vocabulary shrank to about four words, and you can guess what they were. 
¡°I learned that it pays to hang around with people better than you are, because you will float upward a little bit. And if you hang around with people that behave worse than you, pretty soon you¡¯ll start sliding down the pole. It just works that way.¡± 
The experience gave Warren incentive to make good on another vow just as soon as he got back from National Guard camp. ¡°I was terrified of public speaking. You can¡¯t believe what I was like if I had to give a talk. I was so terrified that I just couldn¡¯t do it. I would throw up. In fact, I arranged my life so that I never had to get up in front of anybody. When I came out here to Omaha after graduating, I saw another ad. And I knew I was going to have to speak in public sometimes. The agony was such that just to get rid of the pain I signed up for the course again.¡± That was not his only mission:To win the heart of Susan Thompson, he knew he would have to be able to converse with her as well. The odds against succeedingwith Susie were long, but he would do anythingto improve them, and this summer might be his last chance. 
The Dale Carnegie class met down at the Rome Hotel, a favorite of the cattlemen. ¡°I took a hundred bucks in cash and gave it to Wally Keenan, the instructor, and said, ¡®Take it before I change my mind.¡¯ 
¡°There were about twenty-five or thirty of us in there. We were all just terrified. We couldn¡¯t say our own names. We all stood there and wouldn¡¯t talk to each other. Meanwhile, one thing that impressed me was that, after meeting all those people once, Wally could rattle off all our names from memory. He was a good teacher, and he tried to teach us the memory association trick, but I never learned that part. 
¡°They gave us this book of speeches¡ªkeynote speech, election speech, lieutenant governor¡¯s speech¡ªand we were supposed to deliver these things every week. The way it works is that you learn to get out of yourself. I mean, why should you be able to talk alone with somebody five minutes before and then freeze in front of a group? So they teach you the psychological tricks to overcome this. Some of it is just practice¡ªjust doing it and practicing. We really helped each other through. And it worked. That¡¯s the most important degree that I have.¡± 
Yet Warren could not try out his new skills on Susie, who made herself scarce. Mindfulof Doc Thompson¡¯s influence over his daughter, Warren showed up every night, ukulele in tow, to romance her father in her stead. ¡°She would go out with other guys,¡± says Buffett, ¡°and I didn¡¯t have anything to do when I would go over there. So I would flirt with him instead, and he and I would talk about things.¡± Doc Thompson, who loved the summer heat, sat outside on the screened porch on the boilingJuly nights, dressed in his three-piece pastel woolsuit, while Susie was secretly out with Milt. Doc Thompson played the mandolin while Warren sweated and sang, accompanyinghimon the ukulele. 
Warren felt comfortable with Doc Thompson, whose style reminded himof his father¡¯s way of holdingforth on how the world was goingto hell because of the Democrats. Whittaker Chambers¡¯s autobiography, Witness, describinghis conversion fromCommunist spy to ardent Cold War anti-Communist, had just been released. Warren had read this book with great interest, in part because of its description of the Alger Hiss case. Chambers had accused Hiss of beinga Communist spy, an accusation that had been pooh-poohed by people the Buffetts considered political enemies, the Truman crowd. Only Richard Nixon, a youngsenator on the House Un-American Activities Committee, had pursued Hiss, leadingto Hiss¡¯s conviction for perjury in January 1950. This was the kind of fodder that Doc Thompson could chew on endlessly. Unlike Howard, however, he also talked about sports. He had no sons, and he thought Warren was the best thingsince bubble 
gum. 32 Warren was smart, Warren was Protestant, Warren was Republican, and, above all, Warren was not Milt Brown. 
The support of Bill Thompson was not as much of a plus as it might have seemed. Warren was up against stiff odds in winningSusie¡¯s heart. She could overlook his baggy socks and cheap suits; it was the rest that worked against him. He came across to her as a Congressman¡¯s son, somebody considered ¡°special,¡± a boy who had every advantage¡ªa graduate degree and a good bit of money¡ªand who was obviously headed for success. He talked about stocks all the time, a subject she cared nothingabout. His way of entertaininga date was tellingrehearsed jokes, riddles, and brainteasers. That her father liked Warren so much made her think of 
Warren as an extension of her father¡¯s control. Doc Thompson ¡°practically threw Susie at Warren.¡±33 ¡°It was two against one,¡± says Buffett. 
Milt, who needed her, suffered the injustice of beinga Jew from literally the wrongside of the tracks. He was all the more attractive because he was the guy her father couldn¡¯t stand. 
That summer, Brown was workingin Council Bluffs. When he got a letter from Northwestern notifyinghim of a tuition increase, he realized he couldn¡¯t afford to go back to Evanston, so he went over to the Buffett house and handed Bertie, his class vice president, a letter sayingthat he was transferringto the University of 
Iowa.34 Susie was enrollingthat fallat the University of Omaha, and by then, she and Milt had to acknowledge that, because of her father, they were ¡°off and on.¡± She spent the summer in tears. 
Meanwhile, despite her initial lack of interest in Warren, Susie could never spend time with anyone without wantingto learn all about him. She soon started to realize that her first impression had been wrong. He was not the privileged, cocky, self-confident guy she thought. ¡°I was a wreck,¡± he recalls; he was jitteringon the brink of a nervous breakdown. ¡°I felt odd, I was socially inept, but beyond that, I hadn¡¯t found a cruising speed in life.¡± Even her friends noticed the vulnerability that lay beneath his veneer of self-assurance. Susie 
gradually recognized how worthless he felt inside.35 All that confident chatter about stocks, the aura of a prodigy, the tinny twangof the ukulele, were wrapped around a fragile, needy core: a boy who was stumbling through his days in a shroud of desolation. ¡°I was a mess,¡± he says. ¡°It was incredible the way Susie saw through to some of that.¡± Indeed, somebody who felt like a wreck and a mess was catnip to Susie. Warren would later say of her need to turn himinto a cause that he ¡°was Jewish enough for Susie, but not too Jewish¡± for her dad. And so she started comingaround. 
Warren, who was nearly blind to the way others dressed¡ªeven women¡ªwas so in love with Susie by now 
that he actually noticed her clothes. He would never forget the blue dress she wore on their dates or the black-and-white print outfit he called the ¡°newspaper dress.¡±36 Amid the summer fireflies at the Peony Park pavilion, they stumbled around the dance floor to the sounds of a Glenn Miller tune. Warren had still never learned to dance and tried as hard as he could. He was about as cozy on the dance floor as a sixth grader at a sorority social. But ¡°I would have done anything she asked,¡± he says. ¡°I would have let her put worms down the back of my shirt.¡± 
By Labor Day, when Warren took her to the state fair, they were a couple. Susie registered at the university as a sophomore majoringin journalism, signed up for the debate team,37 and enrolled in the Association for the Study of Group Dynamics, a psychology group.38 
Warren wrote his aunt Dorothy Stahl in October 1951 in his best smart-alecky style: ¡°Things in the girl department are at an all-time peak¡­the hooks have been sunk pretty deep into me by one of the localgals. As soon as I get the go-ahead from[my uncle] Fred and you, I may proceed further. This girl has only one drawback; she knows nothingabout stocks. Otherwise she is unbeatable and I guess I can overlook her 
Achilles¡¯ heel.¡±39 
Cautiously ¡°proceedingfurther¡± was puttingit right. Warren worked up his nerve. Instead of proposing marriage, he ¡°just sort of assumed it, and kept talking.¡± Susie, for her part, ¡°realized she had been chosen,¡± although ¡°she wasn¡¯t sure how.¡±40 
Triumphant, Warren went to his Dale Carnegie class on schedule. ¡°That¡¯s the week I won the pencil. They gave a pencil award for doing something difficult and doing the most with the training. The week I won the pencil was the week that I proposed.¡± 
Afterward, Susie wrote a long, sad letter to Milton Brown, tellinghimthe news. He was shocked. He knew she had been out on some dates with Warren but had no idea it was anythingserious.41 
Warren went to talk to Susie¡¯s father to get his blessing. This, he already knew, would be easily had. But Doc Thompson took a while¡ªquite a while¡ªto get to the point. He started by explainingthat Harry Truman and the Democrats were sendingthe country straight to hell. Pouringmoney into Europe after the war through 
the Marshall Plan and the Berlin airlift42 was just proof that the policies of that devil Roosevelt were stillin place, and that Truman was sendingthe country straight into bankruptcy. Look at how the Soviets got hold of the atomic bomb right after Truman had dismantled part of the military. Senator Joe McCarthy¡¯s House Un-American Activities Committee was provingwhat Doc Thompson had known all along, that the government was riddled with Communists. HUAC was findingCommies everywhere. The government was downright ineffectual¡ªor worse¡ªwhen it came to dealingwith Communism. Truman had lost China for democracy. He would never be forgiven for firingthe heroic General Douglas MacArthur for insubordination after he made repeated efforts to go around Truman and get approval to attack the Chinese Commies in Manchuria. But it was probably too late for even MacArthur to save the country now. The Communists were takingover the world, and stocks were goingto be nothingbut valueless bits of paper. So Warren¡¯s plan to work in the stock market was goingto fail. But Doc Thompson would never blame Warren when his daughter starved. He was a smart youngman. If not for the Democrats ruiningthe country, he would probably do all right. The miserable future that awaited Susie wouldn¡¯t be Warren¡¯s fault. 
Longused to this kind of talk, fromboth his own father and Susie¡¯s, Warren waited patiently for the crucial word ¡°yes.¡± Three hours later, Doc Thompson wound his way to a conclusion and gave his consent.43 
By Thanksgiving, Susie and Warren were planningtheir Aprilwedding. 
19 
StageFright 
Omaha . Summer 1951¨CSpring 1952 
Warren understood Doc Thompson¡¯s concern about how he would support a family, even though he had no such doubts himself. Since he couldn¡¯t work for Graham-Newman, he had decided to become a stockbroker, and to do it in Omaha, far fromthe canyons of Wall Street. If you wanted to make money in the stock market, went the common wisdom, the place to do it was New York, so his decision was an unusual one. But he felt free fromthe conventions of Wall Street; he wanted to work with his father; Susie was in Omaha; and he was never happy far fromhome. 
At almost twenty-one, Warren was supremely confident in his own investingabilities. By the end of 1951, he had already boosted his capitalfrom$9,804 to $19,738. He had earned seventy-five percent in a single year. 1 As a matter of course, however, he consulted his father and Ben Graham. To his surprise, both said, ¡°Maybe you should wait a few years.¡± Graham¡ªas always¡ªthought the market was too high. Howard, pessimistic, favored miningstocks and gold stocks and other investments designed to protect against inflation. He didn¡¯t think any other kind of business would be a good investment, and he worried about his son¡¯s future. 
That didn¡¯t make sense to Warren. Since 1929, the value of businesses had grown substantially. 
¡°It was absolutely the reverse effect of what you saw in other times, when the market was staggeringly overvalued. I had looked at companies. I just couldn¡¯t see why you wouldn¡¯t want to own them. It was on a micro level, not an assessment of the growth of the economy or anything like that, and I was working with micro money. But it just seemed to me that it was crazy not to own them. On the other hand, here¡¯s Ben, with his two hundred IQ and all experienced, telling me to wait. And my dad, who, if he told me to walk out a window, I would have done it.¡± Still, to make this decision to defy the advice of his two great authorities¡ªhis father and Ben Graham¡ªwas an enormous step for him. It required himto consider the possibility that his judgment might be superior to theirs, and that the two men whomhe most deeply respected were not thinkingrationally. Yet he was certain he was right. He might have walked out a window if his father told himto¡ªbut not if it meant leavinga Moody¡¯s Manual fullof cheap stocks behind. 
In fact, the opportunities he saw were so plentiful that they justified borrowingmoney for the first time. He was willingto take on debt equal to a quarter of his net worth. ¡°I was already running short of money to invest. If I was enthused about a stock I would have to sell something else to buy it. I had an aversion to borrowing money, but I got a loan for five thousand dollars or so from the Omaha National Bank. I was under twenty-one and my dad had to cosign the loan. Mr. Davis, the banker, conducted it as a rite of passage. He said something like, ¡®You¡¯re going into manhood now,¡¯ and referred to this five thousand dollars, saying, ¡®It¡¯s a solemn obligation, and we know you¡¯ve got the kind of character to pay it back.¡¯ This went on for half an hour while I was sitting there next to this big desk.¡± 
Howard probably felt both proud and a little silly cosigninga loan for his son, who had been a full-fledged businessman for at least a dozen years. Since Warren had made up his mind, Howard was also willingto take him on at his own firm, Buffett-Falk¡ªthough only after suggestingthat he interview at a prominent local firm, Kirkpatrick Pettis Co., to see what the best of Omaha stockbrokinghad to offer. 
¡°I went to see Stewart Kirkpatrick and said during the interview that I wanted intelligent customers. I was going to try to look for people who could understand things. And Kirkpatrick said, in effect, don¡¯t worry about whether they¡¯re intelligent, worry about whether they¡¯re rich. Which is okay, you can¡¯t knock him for that. But I wouldn¡¯t have wanted to work anyplace but at my dad¡¯s firm.¡± 
At Buffett-Falk, Warren was installed in one of its four private unair-conditioned offices, next to the ¡°cage,¡± a glassed-in area where a clerk handled the money and securities. He started out sellinghis favorite stock to the safest people he knew, his aunt and his college friends, includinghis first roommate at Wharton, Chuck Peterson, who was now in the real estate business in Omaha and with whomhe¡¯d reconnected. 
¡°My aunt Alice was the first call I made, and I sold her a hundred shares of GEICO. She made me feel good about myself. She was interested in me. And after that Fred Stanback, Chuck Peterson, and anybody I could get to buy it. But mostly I got myself to buy it, because when other people didn¡¯t buy it, I¡¯d just figure out a way to buy five more shares myself. I had this big ambition. I was going to own one-tenth of one percent of the company. It had 175,000 shares outstanding, and I figured if the company would become worth one billion dollars someday and I owned that much, I would be worth a million dollars. So I needed 175 
2
shares.¡± 
Yet in the meantime, his job was to sell on commission, and beyond this narrow circle, Warren found that almost insurmountably difficult. He got a taste of the obstacles his father had faced to build his brokerage business back when the grand old families of Omaha¡ªthe owners of the banks, stockyards, breweries, the bigdepartment stores¡ªpeered down their noses at the grandson of a grocer. Alone in Omaha now, with his parents back in Washington, Warren felt that he got no respect. 
These were the days when all stocks were sold by full-service stockbrokers, and most people bought individualstocks rather than mutualfunds. Everybody paid fixed commissions of six cents a share. Transactions took place in person or over the telephone, as part of a relationship. Every trade was preceded by a few minutes of chat with ¡°your broker,¡± part salesman, part adviser, part friend. Your broker might live in your neighborhood, and you saw himat parties, you golfed with him at your country club, and he came to your daughter¡¯s wedding. General Motors brought out new models of its cars every year, and a businessman might trade his car more often than his stocks. That is, if he owned any stocks. 
Important accounts didn¡¯t take Warren seriously. Nebraska Consolidated Mills, a client of his father¡¯s, once 
scheduled him to come out at five-thirty a.m. 3 ¡°I was twenty-one. And I¡¯d go around to all these people to sell them stocks, and when I¡¯d get all through they¡¯d say, ¡®What does your dad think?¡¯ I got that all the time.¡± Warren, who looked like a ¡°dork,¡± struggled to make sales.4 He didn¡¯t know how to read people, 
couldn¡¯t make smalltalk, and certainly wasn¡¯t a good listener. His mode of conversation was to broadcast rather than receive. When nervous, he sprayed forth information about his favorite stocks like a fire hose. Some potential clients listened to his pitch, checked with other sources, and used his ideas, but bought the stocks through other brokers, so he didn¡¯t get the commission. He was shocked at this perfidy from people he¡¯d spoken to face-to-face and would be seeingagain around town. He felt cheated. Other times he was simply baffled. Once he walked in on a guy who was in his seventies sittingwith a pile of dollar bills on his desk and a secretary in his lap. Every time she kissed him, the man gave her a dollar bill. 
¡°My dad hadn¡¯t taught me what to do in that sort of circumstance. Generally speaking, I was not getting reinforcement. When I first started selling GEICO to people, Buffett-Falk had this little office downtown, and the stock certificates would come in and Jerome Newman¡¯s name would be on those certificates. He was the seller I was buying from. And the guys at Buffett-Falk said, ¡®What the hell. If you think you¡¯re smarter than Jerry Newman¡­¡¯¡± 
In fact, Graham-Newman was forminga new partnership, and some of the investors had given the firm 
GEICO shares to fund money into the partnership. So in effect, it was they who were selling, not Graham-Newman. Warren didn¡¯t know that.5 But when it came to GEICO, he didn¡¯t care who was selling. It did not occur to himto ask anyone at the firm why they were selling. He was unshakeably certain of his own opinion. Nor did he hide that fact. 
¡°I was sort of a wise guy, with this graduate degree, among people who hadn¡¯t gone to college. One time an insurance agent, Ralph Campbell, came in to see Mr. Falk and said, ¡®What¡¯s this kid doing going around promoting this company?¡¯ GEICO was a company that didn¡¯t use insurance agents. And I said, like a wise guy, ¡®Mr. Campbell, you better buy this stock for unemployment insurance.¡¯¡± 
The fullimport of Dale Carnegie¡¯s first rule, don¡¯t criticize, hadn¡¯t sunk in. Warren used what would later become the trademark Buffett wit to show that he knew more than everybody else, but why would anyone have been willingto believe that of a twenty-one-year-old? And yet he did. It must have stunned people at Buffett-Falk to watch him, morningthrough night, rippingthrough the manuals, addingto his file cabinets of knowledge. 
¡°I went through the Moody¡¯s Manuals page by page. Ten thousand pages in the Moody¡¯s Industrial, Transportation, Banks and Finance Manuals¡ªtwice. I actually looked at every business¡ªalthough I didn¡¯t look very hard at some.¡± 
Even though endlessly fascinated by the game of findingstocks, Warren wanted to be more than an investor, more than a salesman. He wanted to be a teacher, to emulate Ben Graham. He signed up to teach a night course at the University of Omaha. 
At first he partnered with his stockbroker friend Bob Soener, who taught the first four weeks of ¡°Profitable Investingin Stocks.¡± While Soener explained to the class basics such as how to read the Wall Street Journal, Warren stood in the hallway listeningfor any good investment ideas. Then he took over for the next six 
weeks.6 Eventually he taught the whole course and gave it the more cautious name of ¡°Sound Investingin Stocks.¡± In front of his classroom, he lit up, pacingthe floor as if he couldn¡¯t get the words out fast enough, even though the students had to struggle not to drown in the flood of information he threw at them. But despite his deep vein of knowledge, he never promised the class they would get rich or that takinghis class would give them any particular result. Nor did he bragabout his own success at investing. 
His students ranged from stock-market professionals to people who had no head for business¡ªhousewives, doctors, retirees. They symbolized a subtle shift:Long-absent investors were startingto come back for the first time since the 1920s¡ªpart of why Grahamthought the market was overvalued. Warren adapted his teachingto the range of their knowledge and skills. He modeled his teachingstyle after Graham¡¯s, usingthe ¡°Company A, Company B¡± method and some of his mentor¡¯s other little teachingtricks. He handed out grades with the strictest fairness. His aunt Alice took the course and sat in the classroomgazingat him with 
adoringeyes.7 He gave her a C. 
People were always throwingout the names of stocks, askinghim whether to buy or sell. He could speak from memory for five or even ten minutes about any stock they named: its financial data, price/earnings ratio, the volume of shares that traded¡ªand fromall appearances, he could do this for hundreds of stocks, as if he 
were quotingbaseball statistics.8 Sometimes a woman in the front row would say, ¡°My late mother gave me ABC stock, and now it¡¯s up a little bit. What should I do?¡± Then he would say, ¡°Well, I think I would sell that, and maybe buy¡­,¡± givingthree or four options such as GEICO or one of a few stocks about which he 
was entirely confident (and already owned).9 The students remarked on his unusual conservatismwhen respondingto their questions about how to invest. 
Meanwhile, Warren was workinglike a woodpecker in April to make money for himself. He was goingto be takingcare of a family soon, which would divide his income into two streams. Part of what he made¡ªhis stream¡ªwould go back into the mill and continue to grow. And part he would spend for him and Susie to live, a significant change in his circumstances. Until now, he had been able to pare his expenses by livingin the maid¡¯s roomat Columbia, eatingcheese sandwiches, and takinghis dates to lectures or playingthe ukulele for theminstead of escortingthemto the posh ¡°21¡± Club. Now that he was back in Nebraska, he was able to cut his costs even further by livingin his parents¡¯ house, even though it meant occasional contact with Leila when they came back fromWashington. 
He had never needed motivation to try to work his capital as hard as possible, and now he sat in the office at 
Buffett-Falk with his feet on his desk, searchingsystematically through the Grahamand Dodd book for more ideas.10 He found a stock, Philadelphia and ReadingCoal & Iron Company, a company that mined anthracite coal. It looked cheap because it was sellingfor $19 and a fraction, but had about $8 a share worth of culm 
banks.*14 Warren would happily spend hours figuringout how much coal mines and culmbanks were worth in order to make a rationaldecision about a stock. He bought Philadelphia and ReadingCoal & Iron shares himself and sold themto his aunt Alice and Chuck Peterson. When the stock immediately dropped to $9 a share, he saw that as a reason to buy even more. 
He bought a textile company called Cleveland Worsted Mills. It had current assets.15 of $146 per share, and the stock was sellingfor less than that. He felt the price did not reflect the value of ¡°severalwell-equipped mills.¡± 
Warren wrote a short report on the stock. He liked the fact that the company was payingout a lot of what it 
earned to shareholders¡ªgivingthema bird in the hand. ¡°The $8 dividend provides a well-protected 7% yield on the current price of approximately $115,¡± the report noted.11 He wrote ¡°well-protected¡± because he thought Cleveland Worsted Mills had enough earnings to cover its dividend. That proved less than prescient. 
¡°I called it Cleveland¡¯s Worst Mill after they cut off paying the dividend.¡± Warren was so mad that he decided to spend some money to find out what was wrong. ¡°I went to an annual meeting of Cleveland¡¯s Worst Mill, and I flew all the way to Cleveland. I got there about five minutes late, and the meeting had been adjourned. And here I was, this kid from Omaha, twenty-two years old, with my own money in the stock. The chairman said, ¡®Sorry, too late.¡¯ But then their sales agent, who was on the board of directors, actually took pity on me, and so he got me off on the side and talked to me and answered some questions.¡± 
The answers, however, changed nothing. Warren felt awful; he had gotten other people to buy Cleveland¡¯s Worst Mill too. 
There was nothinghe hated more than sellingpeople investments that lost them money. He couldn¡¯t stand disappointingpeople. This was what it had been like back in the sixth grade when the Cities Service Preferred stock he¡¯d gotten Doris to invest in was clobbered. She hadn¡¯t hesitated to ¡°remind¡± himabout it, and he¡¯d felt responsible. Now, he would do anythingto avoid the feelingof lettingsomeone down. 
Warren began lookingfor any way to make himself less dependent on the job he was startingto hate. He had always enjoyed owningbusinesses, and decided to buy a gas station with a friend fromthe National Guard, Jim Schaeffer. They bought a Sinclair station that was next to a Texaco station ¡°that consistently out-sold us, which drove us crazy.¡± Warren and his brother-in-law Truman Wood, who had married Doris, even worked at the station themselves on weekends. They washed windshields ¡°with a smile¡±¡ªdespite Warren¡¯s aversion to manuallabor¡ªand did everythingthey could to attract new customers, but instead drivers continued to pull in to the Texaco station across the street. Its owner ¡°was very well established and very well liked. He beat us every month. That¡¯s when I learned the power of customer loyalty. The guy had been in business forever and had a clientele. Nothing we could do was going to change that. 
¡°My service station was the dumbest thing¡ªI lost two thousand dollars, and that was a lot of money for me at the time. I¡¯d never had real damage in a loss. It was painful.¡± 
It seemed to Warren that nearly everythinghe did in Omaha reinforced his sense of youth and inexperience. He was no longer a precocious boy who was actinglike a man, but a youngman¡ªabout to get married¡ªwho looked and sometimes acted like a boy. Kaiser-Frazer, the stock he had shorted two years before in Bob Soener¡¯s office, stillhungstubbornly around five dollars a share instead of goingto zero as he had expected. Carl Falk was always givinghimfunny looks and questioninghis judgment. And Warren felt more and more queasy about the very nature of his job. He started to think of himself as beinglike ¡°a prescriptionist.¡± ¡°I had to explain to people who didn¡¯t know enough about whether they should take aspirin or Anacin,¡± and people would do anythingthe ¡°guy in the white coat¡±¡ªthe stockbroker¡ªtold themto do. The stockbroker got paid based on turnover instead of advice. In other words, ¡°he¡¯s getting paid based on how many pills he sells. He gets paid more for some pills than others. You wouldn¡¯t go to a doctor whose pay was totally contingent on how many pills you took.¡± But that¡¯s how the business of beinga stockbroker worked at the time. 
Warren felt there was a conflict of interest inherent in the business. He¡¯d recommend a stock like GEICO to his friends and family, and tell themthat the best thingto do was to hold it for twenty years. That meant he 
didn¡¯t get any more commissions from them. ¡°You can¡¯t make a living that way. The system pits your interests against your clients.¡± 
Nevertheless, he had begun to develop a smallclientele of his own through his network of graduate school friends. In the springof 1952, he went to Salisbury, North Carolina, to spend Easter with Fred Stanback. He charmed and amused Fred¡¯s parents and entertained the family by talkingstocks, quotingBen Graham, and 
askingfor a Pepsi-Cola and a hamsandwich for breakfast.12 Soon afterward, back in Omaha, Fred Stanback¡¯s father gave himan order to sell some stock in a washing-machine company, Thor Corporation. Warren found a customer through another broker, Harris Upham, who wanted to buy it. Then he got another call fromStanback¡¯s bank about the sale and thought he had two orders. He sold the Thor Corporation stock twice, the second time unwittingly sellingstock he didn¡¯t have. Now he had to find additionalshares, and ended up buyingthemat a loss to cover the second sale. 
Mr. Stanback treated him graciously despite the mistake. He absorbed the entire loss even though it was Warren¡¯s fault. Warren was grateful and never forgot it. He had more reason for concern about the second buyer, a man known as ¡°Mad Dog¡± Baxter, who was a remnant of Omaha¡¯s days as a major gamblinglayoff 
center*16 and an associate in some of the city¡¯s many illegal bettingparlors. Baxter had arrived at Buffett-Falk in person, strolled up to the cashier¡¯s cage, and pulled out a wad of $100 bills, wavingit around ostentatiously. Once again, ¡°Carl Falk looked at me questioningly.¡± Was Buffett-Falk beingused to launder illegal gamblingmoney? Situations like this reinforced Warren¡¯s dislike for his job. Even when he wasn¡¯t sellingstocks, he felt conflicted. He had turned Buffett-Falk into a ¡°market maker,¡± a firmthat acted as a 
middleman, buyingand sellingstocks as a dealer.13 The firmmade a profit by sellinga stock to clients at a slightly higher price than it paid, and buyingstock from clients at a lower price than it sold the stock for. The difference, or ¡°spread,¡± was its profit. The spread was invisible to the customers. Actingas a market maker lifted a brokerage firmfrombeinga mere order taker to beinga player in the Wall Street game. While Warren was proud that he had the know-how to set Buffett-Falk up as a market maker, the conflict bothered him. 
¡°I don¡¯t want to be on the other side of the table from the customer. I never was selling anything I didn¡¯t believe in myself or own myself. On the other hand, there was a markup that was undisclosed. If anybody asked me about it, I told them. But I don¡¯t like anything like that. I want to be on the same side of the table with the people who are my partners, everybody knowing what¡¯s going on. And a promoter, by his nature, doesn¡¯t do that.¡± 
No matter how Warren thought about his job as a stockbroker, there was always a potentialconflict of interest, and always the possibility that he would lose money for his clients and open himself up to disappointingthem. He would much rather manage people¡¯s money instead of sellingthemstocks, with his interest on the same side as the customer¡¯s. The problem was, there were no such opportunities in Omaha. But in the springof 1952, he wrote an article about GEICO that attracted the attention of a powerfulman, and with that, his luck seemed about to change. The article, ¡°The Security I Like Best,¡± which appeared in the Commercial and Financial Chronicle, was not just an advertisement for Warren¡¯s favorite stock, but an explanation of his ideas about investing. It caught the attention of BillRosenwald, who was a son of Julius Rosenwald, a philanthropist and the longtime chairman of Sears, Roebuck & Co. The younger Rosenwald ran 
American Securities, a money management firmlaunched with family stock in Sears14 that sought high returns while minimizingrisk and preservingcapital. After contactingBen Graham, who gave Warren a strongrecommendation, Rosenwald offered Warren a job. Few jobs in money management were as prestigious, and Warren was dyingto accept it, even though that meant movingback to New York City. To do so, however, he had to get permission fromthe NationalGuard to leave Omaha. 
¡°I asked my commanding officer whether it would be possible to transfer to New York to take this job. He said, ¡®You¡¯ll have to go down and see the commanding general.¡¯ So I went down to Lincoln, sat there in the state capitol, waited awhile, went in to see General Henninger, and said, ¡®Corporal Buffett reporting.¡¯ I¡¯d written him ahead of time explaining and asking permission. 
¡°And right away he said, ¡®Permission denied.¡¯ 
¡°That was the end of it. That meant I was in Omaha as long as he wanted to keep me captive.¡± 
Thus Warren was stuck at Buffett-Falk, writingprescriptions for a living. The main comfort he had duringthe challenges of his first year back in Omaha was his fianc¨¦e. He had begun to lean on Susie. Allthe while, she was workingat figuringWarren out. She began to understand the damage Leila Buffett¡¯s rages had done to her son¡¯s self-worth, and she started tryingto repair it. She knew that the main thinghe needed was to feel loved and never criticized. He also needed to feel that he could succeed socially. ¡°People accepted me more when I was with her,¡± he says. Even though she was still at the University of Omaha while he had been working, he was like a toddler gazingup at a parent when it came to his relationship with his future wife. Both were still livingin their parents¡¯ homes. Over time, Warren had developed a way of dealingwith his mother, which was to avoid beingalone with her, while makinguse of her dutifulnature when in her presence by besiegingher with demands and requests. Yet the longstretches that he had spent away from her while attendingcollege had lowered his tolerance for Leila¡¯s company instead of raisingit. When she and Howard came back fromWashington for Warren and Susie¡¯s wedding, Susie noticed that her fianc¨¦ avoided his mother as much as he could. When forced to be in her company, he would turn his face away fromher and clench his teeth. 
It was time for Warren to move out. He called Chuck Peterson, saying¡°Chas-o, I haven¡¯t got a place for us to live,¡± and Chas-o rented hima tiny apartment a couple of miles fromdowntown. When Warren gave Susie, who had a strongsense of self-expression, an allowance of $1,500 to furnish their first apartment, she and her future sister-in-law Doris took off for Chicago to shop for furniture in the colorfulmodern style she 
liked.15 
As the weddingdate, April19, 1952, approached, the question arose whether the ceremony would take place at all. The week before, the Missouri River flooded upstream of Omaha. With the waters headingsouth, officials predicted they would crest above the riverbank and flood the city duringthe weekend. This made it likely that the NationalGuard would be called out. 
¡°The whole town turned out with sandbags. I had all these buddies coming in for the wedding¡ªFred Stanback was going to be best man, and various ushers and guests. They were all kidding me because I was in the National Guard. They said, ¡®Well, don¡¯t worry about it, because we¡¯ll substitute for you on the honeymoon.¡¯ Jokes like that. This was going on all week.¡± 
A few days beforehand, Howard drove Warren and Fred down to the river. Thousands of volunteers were 
buildingdouble walls of sandbags, six feet high and four feet deep. The earth sank under the wheels of the huge trucks haulingsand and dirt, as if they were drivingover rubber.16 Warren held his breath, hopingthat he would not be called for duty to sandbagand that the temporary levee would hold. 
¡°Saturday came, and we were getting married about three in the afternoon. Around noon, the phone rang. My mother said, ¡®It¡¯s for you.¡¯ I picked up the phone. The guy at the other end said, ¡®C-C-C-Corporal Buffett?¡¯ I had a commanding officer who had a really distinctive stutter. ¡®This is C-C-C-Captain Murphy,¡¯ he said. 
¡°If he hadn¡¯t stuttered, I¡¯d have said something that¡¯d probably have gotten me court-martialed, because I 
would have thought it was the guys pulling a trick on me. But as it was, he said, ¡®We¡¯ve been activated. What time c-c-c-can you show up at the Armory?¡¯¡± Warren almost had a heart attack.17 ¡°And I said, ¡®Well, I¡¯m getting married at three o¡¯clock.¡¯ I said, ¡®I could probably be there by five.¡¯ He said, ¡®Report for d-d-d-duty. We¡¯re going to be p-p-p-patrolling East Omaha d-d-down by the river.¡¯ I said, ¡®Yes, sir.¡¯ 
¡°I got off the phone totally depressed. Then I get a call an hour later. And this guy had a perfectly normal 
18 
voice. He says, ¡®Corporal Buffett?¡¯ I said, ¡®Yes, sir.¡¯ He said, ¡®This is General Wood.¡¯ That was the commanding general of the Thirty-fourth Division, who lived way out in west Nebraska. General Wood said, ¡®I¡¯m countermanding Captain Murphy¡¯s order. Have a good time.¡¯¡± 
He had two hours left before the biggest event of his life. Warren showed up at the soaringGothic sanctuary of Dundee Presbyterian Church well before three o¡¯clock. The weddingof a Congressman¡¯s son and Doc Thompson¡¯s daughter was a major event in Omaha. Severalhundred guests, includingmany of Omaha¡¯s 
top-drawer people, were expected.19 
¡°Doc Thompson was so proud, he was popping buttons all over the place. I was so nervous that I just figured¡ªwell, I didn¡¯t wear my glasses so that I wouldn¡¯t be able to see all those people out there.¡± Warren also asked the normally reserved Stanback to distract him by talkingso he wouldn¡¯t have to focus on what 
was happening.20 
Bertie stood up for Susie as maid of honor, Susie¡¯s sister Dottie as matron of honor. After the photographs, the guests drank nonalcoholic punch and ate weddingcake downstairs in the linoleum-floored church basement. That was the normalthingto do; the Thompsons and the Buffetts weren¡¯t club people. Susie smiled wide as an ivory fan. Warren glowed, incandescent, and wrapped his armaround her waist as if trying to keep themboth fromsailingoff into the air. After more photographs, they changed into their going-away clothes and ran through the crowd of cheeringguests to duck into Alice Buffett¡¯s car, which she had lent them for the honeymoon. Warren had already loaded the backseat with Moody¡¯s Manuals and ledgers. Allof 
a sudden, Susie saw the writingon the wall.21 And from Omaha, the newlyweds set off on their honeymoon¡ªa cross-country automobile trip. 
¡°On my wedding night, I had chicken fried steak at the Wigwam Caf¨¦ in Wahoo, Nebraska,¡± Buffett says. 22 The Wigwamwas a tiny hole-in-the-wall less than an hour from Omaha, with a few booths and cowboy decor. From there, Warren and Susie drove thirty miles to the Cornhusker Hotel in Lincoln to spend the night, ¡°and that¡¯s all I¡¯ll say on that subject,¡± Buffett says. 
¡°The next day I bought a copy of the Omaha World-Herald and it had run an article that said, ¡®Only love can stop the Guard.¡¯¡± 23 The 1952 flood was the worst in modern times in Omaha, the effort spent to avert it Herculean. ¡°The other guys were sandbagging for days, patrolling in the flood, with the snakes and rats. I was the only guy that didn¡¯t get called out.¡± 
The newlyweds traveled all over the western and southwestern United States. Warren had never been there, but Susie knew the West Coast well. They visited her family, took in the sights, went to the Grand Canyon, and had a wonderfultime. ¡°We did not stop to visit companies and look at investments, as has been reported,¡± Buffett insists. On the way back they stopped in Las Vegas, which was full of ex-Omaha people. The ¡°layoff bookies¡± Eddie Barrick and SamZiegman had moved there shortly before and bought into the 
Flamingo Hotel.24 They were soon followed by another associate, Jackie Gaughan, who had invested in casinos from the Flamingo to the Barbary Coast. All these characters had shopped at the Buffett grocery store, and Fred Buffett got alongwellwith them, even though he wasn¡¯t a gambler. For Warren, Vegas felt almost homey, carryingechoes of the racetrack and full of people who knew his family. So he was not afraid of the house. ¡°Susie won a jackpot on the slot machine. She was only nineteen. They wouldn¡¯t pay her because she was underage. I said, ¡®Lookit, you took her nickels.¡¯ And they paid her.¡± 
After Vegas, the Buffetts headed back to Omaha. Warren could not stop chortlingover his luckless colleagues in the Guard. ¡°Oh, the honeymoon was great. It was great. Three weeks. And all the time, these guys in the Guard were sloshing it up.¡± 
PARTTHREE 
TheRacetrack 

20 Graham-Newman 
Omaha and New York City . 1952¨C1955 
Afew months after the wedding, Susie went to Chicago with her parents and new in-laws for the Republican convention in July of 1952. The Thompsons and the Buffetts descended on Chicago, not as delegates but as part of an army. Politically speakingat least, they were now one united family, and this election year they were on a crusade to reclaimthe White House for the Republicans after twenty agonizingyears under the Democrats.1 Doris would be workingbehind the scenes alongside her father, while the much younger Bertie and Susie, innocents at the spectacle, spent their time gawkingat celebrities like John Wayne, who had shown up for the Grand Old Party.2 
Warren, of course, stayed in Omaha, grindingaway. Politics fascinated him, but not like money. He still hated workingas a ¡°prescriptionist,¡± and kept toilingat it while tryingto find a way out. His old teacher David Dodd tried to help himby referringhimto the Value Line Investment Survey, an investment adviser and research publisher, which was lookingfor ¡°new men.¡± The job would have paid well¡ª¡°at least $7,000 a 
year.¡±3 But Warren did not plan to be an anonymous researcher. So he carried on tryingto sell GEICO to uninterested clients while readingthe convention news that was beingreported under inch-high headlines in the newspapers. For the first time in history, a convention was also beingcovered on television, and Warren watched eagerly, struck by the power of this mediumto magnify and influence events. 
The front-runner goinginto the convention was Senator Robert Taft of Ohio.4 Known as ¡°Mr. Integrity,¡± Taft headed a minority wingof the Republican Party¡ªcentered around isolationist Midwesterners¡ªthat wanted the government to be small, to stay out of everybody¡¯s business, and above all to go after Communismmore 
aggressively than Truman had done.5 Taft made his friend Howard Buffett head of his Nebraska presidential 
campaign and also head of his speakers¡¯ bureau. To oppose Taft, the so-called Eastern Liberal Establishment6 that Howard so despised had drafted retired GeneralDwight D. Eisenhower¡ªa moderate who had served as the Supreme Commander of Allied Forces in Europe duringWorld War II and was the first Supreme Commander of NATO forces. Eisenhower, a politically adroit diplomat with excellent leadership skills, was a popular figure viewed by many as a war hero. As the convention approached, ¡°Ike¡± began to catch up in the polls. 
What would prove to be the most controversial Republican convention in history unfolded in Chicago as 
Eisenhower backers pushed through an amendment to the convention rules, passed on a contentious vote, that handed himthe delegates to win the nomination on the first ballot. Taft¡¯s outraged supporters felt robbed. But Eisenhower soon made peace with themby promisingto combat ¡°creepingsocialism,¡± and Taft insisted that his followers swallow their outrage and vote for Eisenhower for the sake of regainingthe White House. The Republicans united behind himand his runningmate, Richard Nixon; ¡°I Like Ike¡± buttons 
sprouted everywhere.7 Everywhere, that is, except on Howard Buffett¡¯s chest. He broke with the party by refusingto endorse Eisenhower.8 
This was an act of politicalsuicide. His support within the party evaporated overnight. He was left standing on principle¡ªalone. Warren recognized that his father had ¡°painted himself into a corner.¡±9 From his earliest childhood, Warren had always tried to avoid broken promises, burned bridges, and confrontation. Now Howard¡¯s struggles branded three principles even deeper into his son: that allies are essential; that commitments are so sacred that by nature they should be rare; and that grandstandingrarely gets anything done. 
Eisenhower defeated AdlaiStevenson in the November election, and in January Warren¡¯s parents dragged themselves back to Washington to finish out the rest of Howard¡¯s lame-duck term. Warren, who had for some time recognized obsessive qualities in Howard and Leila that disadvantaged themin various ways, had begun to absorb somethingof his in-laws¡¯ style. Dorothy Thompson was easygoing, and her husband, though autocratic, was more personable and astute at human relations than the rigorously idealistic Howard Buffett. The more time he spent with Susie and her family, the more they influenced him. 
¡°Warren,¡± said Doc Thompson, who handed down advice with the authority of the Sermon on the Mount, ¡°always surround yourself with women. They¡¯re more loyal and they work harder.¡±10 His son-in-law hardly needed to be told that. Indeed, Warren had always craved beingtaken care of by women, as longas they 
didn¡¯t try to order himaround. Susie could see that he was eager for her to assume a motherly role. So she wrapped herself around her husband as she worked on ¡°fixing¡± him, the wreck, the mess. ¡°Oh, my God,¡± she said, ¡°he was a case.¡±11 When they met, she recalled, ¡°I had never seen anyone in so much pain.¡± 
Warren may not have been aware of the depths or dimensions of his pain, but describes the powerful role she played in his life. ¡°Susie was as big an influence on me as my dad, or bigger probably, in a different way. I had all these defense mechanisms that she could explain, but I can¡¯t. She probably saw things in me that other people couldn¡¯t see. But she knew it would take time and a lot of nourishment to bring it out. She made me feel that I had somebody with a little sprinkling can who was going to make sure that the flowers grew.¡± 
Susie recognized Warren¡¯s vulnerability, how much he needed to be soothed and comforted and reassured. More and more, she could see the effect his mother had had on her children. Doris was the more badly damaged, but Leila had convinced both Warren and Doris that deep down they were worthless. In every area of life except business, Susie was discovering, her husband was riddled with self-doubt. He had never felt 
loved, and she saw that he did not feel lovable.12 
¡°I needed her like crazy,¡± he says. ¡°I was happy in my work, but I wasn¡¯t happy with myself. She literally 13 
saved my life. She resurrected me. She put me together. It was the same kind of unconditional love you would get from a parent.¡± 
Warren wanted a lot of things fromhis wife that you would ordinarily get froma parent. Not only that, he had grown up with a mother who did everythingfor him. Now Susie took over. Although their basic modelof wedded life was typical of the time¡ªhe made the money, she took care of himand covered the domestic front¡ªtheir arrangement was extreme. Everythingin the Buffett household revolved around Warren and his business. Susie understood her husband was special; she willingly became the cocoon for his embryonic ambitions. He spent his days workingand his nights hunched over the Moody¡¯s Manual. He also arranged his schedule to give himself leisure time to play golf and Ping-Pong, even signingup as a junior member of the Omaha Country Club. 
Susie, barely twenty years old, was no Betty Crocker, but she had taken up rudimentary cookingand basic housekeepinglike any 1950s wife¡ªat a time when Omaha women were auditioningto appear on the show Typical Housewife on local television station KTMV. She devoted herself to fulfillingher husband¡¯s few but specific requirements: Pepsi in the refrigerator, a lightbulb in his readinglamp, some indifferently cooked version of meat and potatoes for dinner, a shaker fullof salt, popcorn in the cupboard, ice cream in the freezer. He also needed help gettingdressed, assistance in dealingwith people, tenderness, head rubs, 
cuddling, and hugs. She even cut his hair, because he claimed he was afraid to go to the barber.14 
Warren was ¡°nuts about Susie, and she felt things¡± that were inside him, he says. He describes her role as the giver, his as the receiver. ¡°She was absorbing more about me and sensing much more about me than I was sensing about her.¡± They were always seen kissingand cuddling, Susie often in Warren¡¯s lap; she frequently said this reminded her of her father. 
Six months after the wedding, Susie was pregnant and had dropped out of the University of Omaha. Her sister, Dottie, was pregnant, too, with her second baby. She and Susie had remained particularly close. A dark-haired beauty, Dottie resembled her father in intelligence, and, accordingto family lore, she had possessed the highest IQ in the schoolwhen she attended Central High. But in both looks and domesticity, 
she was more like her mother.15 She had married Homer Rogers, a pilot and war hero with a bigbaritone voice whom everybody called Buck Rogers, although he was modest about his war exploits. Homer was a convivial, energetic cattleman, as beefy as the oversize steers he bought and sold. The Rogerses always had a crowd at their house, Dottie playingpiano while Homer sangsomethinglike ¡°Katie, Katie, get off the table, the money¡¯s for the beer.¡± Susie and Warren did not take part in the Rogerses¡¯ active sociallife, since they tended to be more serious-minded and they did not drink, but the sisters spent a lot of time together on their own. Dottie had always had difficulty makingdecisions, and since havingher first son, Billy, she seemed dazed at the demands of motherhood. Susie, naturally, took charge and helped her. 
Susie had also become close to her sister-in-law Doris, who was workingin Omaha as a schoolteacher now that she was married. Her husband, Truman Wood, was a handsome man with a pleasant personality who came froma prominent Omaha family, but Doris was startingto wonder if she was a racingfilly hitched to a Clydesdale. A girlof action, Doris told Truman to giddyup. He ambled alonga little faster, but not much. 
Susie¡¯s protectiveness toward Warren and his sister ticked up a notch in January 1953 after Eisenhower was sworn in, when Howard¡¯s finalcongressional termended and he and Leila returned to Nebraska for good. Doris and Warren felt the strain of havingLeila back in town. Warren could hardly bear to be in the same room with his mother, and she still turned on Doris periodically. 
Howard was at loose ends back in Omaha. Warren set up a partnership, Buffett & Buffett, that formalized the way they had occasionally bought stocks together. Howard contributed some capital, and Warren¡¯s contribution was a token amount of money, but mostly ideas and labor. But Howard looked at goingback into the stockbrokingbusiness for the third time with dismay. Warren had been tendinghis old accounts while he served in Congress, but Howard knew that Warren hated it, had never stopped tryingto get Ben Graham to hire him, and would leave in an instant if he could go to New York. For his part, Howard missed his true love, politics. He harbored a desire to enter the Senate, especially now that there was a Republican in the White House. Yet his ambitions conflicted with his extreme politicalviews. 
On July 30, 1953¡ªAlice Buffett¡¯s birthday¡ªSusie and Warren¡¯s first child, a daughter, was born. They named her Susan Alice and called her Little Susie, sometimes Little Sooz. And Susie became a passionate, playful, and devoted mother. 
Little Susie was Howard and Leila¡¯s first grandchild. A week later, Susie¡¯s sister, Dottie, gave birth to her second son, Tommy. Within months, Doris became pregnant with her first child, a daughter, Robin Wood. By the springof 1954, Susie was pregnant with her second child. Now the Buffetts and Thompsons had a new focus¡ªgrandchildren. 
*** 
A few months later, a moment came when it looked as though Howard¡¯s time might have arrived. On the morningof July 1, 1954, news came fromWashington that Nebraska¡¯s senior Senator, Hugh Butler, had been rushed to the hospital with a stroke and was not expected to live. The deadline for enteringthe primary election that would fillhis Senate seat was that very night. Howard¡¯s sense of propriety was such that he refused to file the papers to run until Butler had actually died, so the Buffetts waited anxiously all day for news. They knew that Howard¡¯s name recognition in Douglas County meant that if he ran in a special election without havingto go through the party nominatingprocess, even though the party bigwigs were disenchanted with him, the odds were excellent that he could win. 
Word of Butler¡¯s death came in the early evening, after Secretary of State Frank Marsh¡¯s office had closed at its usual five p.m. Howard threw his candidacy filingin the car and he and Leila drove to Lincoln, assuming that they had plenty of time because the deadline was midnight. They tried to file the papers at Marsh¡¯s home, but he refused them, even though Howard had paid the filingfee earlier in the day. Infuriated, they returned to Omaha. 
The state Republican convention was in session at the time, and on the news of Butler¡¯s death, delegates on the floor elected a temporary successor to serve out his term.16 Anyone servingwould more or less automatically be elected to Butler¡¯s job in November. As the rankingRepublican in the state, Howard was an obvious choice. But he was seen as a zealot, as a guy who tilted at windmills, unyieldingon trivial ethical matters and disloyalto his own party for not supportingEisenhower. Instead, the convention elected Roman Hruska, the well-liked Congressman who had taken Howard¡¯s seat when he retired. Howard and Leila sped back to Lincoln and quickly filed suit with the State Supreme Court to force the party to accept his nomination. But twenty-four hours later, they gave up the futile fight and dropped the lawsuit. 
Warren was furious when he heard the news about Hruska. ¡°They slit Daddy¡¯s throat fromear to ear,¡± he said. How dare the party repay Howard¡¯s decades of loyalty this way? 
At fifty-one years of age, Howard had just seen his future disappear. As his anger ebbed, his depression grew. Untilnow, a retired senior party politician like him would have had a role to play, but he had been shut out of the arena that was the center of his life, that made him feelusefulin the world. He tried to get a teaching position at the University of Omaha, which the family felt was reasonable given his business experience and tenure as a Congressman. But Howard was considered such an oddball locally that the schoolwould not hire him, even though his own son taught there and Doc Thompson was dean of the College of Arts and Sciences. He ended up goingback to work at Buffett-Falk. Eventually, he found a part-time teachingjob as a lecturer 
at Midland Lutheran College, thirty miles from Omaha.17 The family harbored bitter feelings toward the local establishment, which it felt had essentially run Howard out of town. 
Leila dissolved in a poolof misery. Through the reflected glory it bestowed on her, Howard¡¯s position in the world may have meant even more to her than it did to him. Her sister Edie was now livingin Brazil, Bertie lived in Chicago, and her relationships with Doris and Warren were unsettled at best, so she had only twenty-two-year-old Susie to lean on. But Susie was a busy, pregnant youngmother, who had her hands fullcaring for Warren as well. 
And soon, Susie would no longer be in Omaha. For two years, Warren had kept correspondingwith Ben Graham. He suggested stock ideas like Greif Bros. Cooperage, a company he and his father had bought for their partnership. He traveled to New York periodically and dropped in on Graham-Newman. 
¡°I would always try to see Mr. Graham.¡± 
Surely it wasn¡¯t typical for former students to hangabout at Graham-Newman. 
¡°No, well, I was persistent.¡± 
By the time the local Republican Party slammed the door to the Senate nomination in his father¡¯s face, Warren was already on his way to New York. ¡°Ben wrote and said, ¡®Come on back.¡¯ His partner, Jerry Newman, explained it by saying, ¡®You know, we just checked you out a little further.¡¯ I felt I¡¯d struck the mother lode.¡± Whether he would accept the position was never in question. And this time, the National Guard said yes. 
Warren was so excited about beinghired that he arrived in New York on August 1, 1954, and showed up at his new job at Graham-Newman on August 2, a month before his official startingdate. There, he discovered that a week earlier, tragedy had struck Ben Graham. Four weeks shy of his own twenty-fourth birthday, Warren wrote his father: ¡°Ben Graham¡¯s son Newton (26) who was in the Army in France committed suicide last week. He had always been a little unbalanced. However Graham didn¡¯t know it had been a suicide til he 
read it in the New York Times on an Army release, which of course is really tough.¡±18 When he went to France to collect his son¡¯s remains, Ben met Newton¡¯s girlfriend, Marie Louise Amingues, known as Malou, who was severalyears older than Newton. He returned a few weeks later but was never quite the same afterward. He also began to correspond with Malou and made periodic visits back to France. But in those days Warren knew nothingof his idol¡¯s personallife. 
Instead, he had to attend to his own, for one of his first tasks was to find his family a place to live. Susie and Little Susie had remained in Omaha duringhis first month in New York City. ¡°I tried to live at Peter Cooper Village first, one of two big projects built by Metropolitan Life immediately after World War Two. My friend Fred Kuhlken from Columbia lived in Peter Cooper. Walter Schloss lived in Peter Cooper. Everybody wanted to get into Peter Cooper. Under some kind of special section of the law, it was really reasonable, seventy or eighty bucks a month, and very nice. I applied before I went and got a postcard about two years later saying I¡¯d been accepted. If I had been accepted earlier I would have lived in the city.¡± 
Instead, Warren searched far and wide for a cheap apartment. Discountingthe impersonal location and long commute, he finally settled on a three-bedroomapartment in a white-brick buildingin the middle-class suburb of White Plains, about thirty miles away in Westchester County, New York. When Susie and Little Susie arrived a few weeks later, the apartment was stillnot ready, so the family moved into a room in a house in Westchester that was so cramped they had to devise a makeshift crib froma dresser drawer. The Buffetts stayed there only a day or two. 
But such were the tales that would later be told about Warren¡¯s frugalhabits that this story grew arms and legs and scuttled into the legend that he was too cheap to buy Little Susie a crib, and she therefore slept in a drawer throughout much of her White Plains infancy.19 
As the pregnant Susie unpacked and arranged her new household while takingcare of their baby and getting to know the neighbors, Warren rose every morningand took the New York Centraltrain to Grand Central. In that first month, he had parked himself in the file room at Graham-Newman and, eager to know everything about how the company worked, begun to read through every single piece of paper in every single drawer in an entire room filled with bigwooden files. 
Only eight people worked there: Ben Graham; Jerry Newman; his son Mickey Newman; Bernie Warner, who was the treasurer; Walter Schloss; two women secretaries; and now Warren. The thin gray laboratory-style jacket Warren had coveted was at last his. ¡°It was a big moment when they gave me my jacket. We all wore them. Ben wore it, Jerry Newman wore it. We were all equal in our jackets.¡± 
Well, not quite. Warren and Walter sat at desks in a windowless room that contained the ticker machine, the direct lines to the brokerage houses, some reference books and files. Walter sat next to the direct lines and made most of the calls to brokers. Ben, Mickey Newman, or, most commonly, Jerry Newman appeared periodically fromtheir private offices to check a quote on the ticker machine. ¡°We would look up stuff and read. We would go through Standard & Poor¡¯s or a Moody¡¯s Manual and look at companies sellingbelow workingcapital. There were a lot then,¡± recalls Schloss. 
These companies were what Grahamcalled ¡°cigar butts¡±: cheap and unloved stocks that had been cast aside 
like the sticky, mashed stub of a stogie one might find on the sidewalk. Graham specialized in spottingthese unappetizingremnants that everyone else overlooked. He coaxed themalight and sucked out one last free puff. 
Graham knew that a certain number of cigar butts would turn out foul, and thought it futile to spend time examiningany individual cigar butt¡¯s quality. The law of averages said most of themwere good for a puff. He was always thinkingin terms of how much companies would be worth dead¡ªwhat their assets would be worth if liquidated. Buyingat a discount to that value was his ¡°margin of safety¡±¡ªhis backstop against the percentage that presumably would go bankrupt. As a further backstop, he bought tiny positions in a huge number of stocks¡ªthe principle of diversification. Graham¡¯s idea of diversification was extreme; some of his positions were as smallas $1,000. 
Warren, who had such confidence in his own judgment, saw no reason to hedge his bets this way and inwardly rolled his eyes at diversification. He and Walter collected numbers from the Moody¡¯s Manuals and filled out hundreds of the simple forms that Graham-Newman used to make decisions. Warren wanted to know all the basic information about every company. Once he had looked over the field, he narrowed it down to a handfulof stocks worth even more carefulstudy, then concentrated his money on what he considered the best bets. He was willingto put most of his eggs in one basket, as he had done with GEICO. By that time, however, he had sold his GEICO shares, because he never seemed to have enough money to invest. Every decision had an opportunity cost¡ªhe had to compare each investingopportunity with the next best one. As much as he liked GEICO, he had made the wrenchingdecision to sell it after findinganother stock that he coveted even more, called Western Insurance. This company was earning$29 a share, and its stock was sellingfor as little as three bucks. 
This was like findinga slot machine that would come up cherries every time you played. If you put in 
twenty-five cents and pulled the handle, the Western Insurance machine was virtually guaranteed to pay at least two bucks.20 Anyone sane would play that slot as longas she could stay awake. It was the cheapest stock with the highest margin of safety he¡¯d ever seen in his life. He bought as much of it as he could, and he 
cut his friends in on the deal.21 
Warren was a bloodhound for anythingfree or cheap. With his prodigious ability to absorb numbers and to analyze them, he quickly became the fair-haired boy of Graham-Newman. It came so naturally to him; Ben Graham¡¯s cigar butts resembled his old hobby of stoopingat the racetrack for cast-off winningtickets. 
He paid close attention to what was goingon in the back where the partners¡ªBen, Jerry, and Mickey ¡ªworked. Ben Graham was on the board of Philadelphia and ReadingCoal & Iron Company, and Graham-Newman controlled the company. Warren had discovered this stock on his own, and by the end of 1954 he had put $35,000 into it. His boss would have been appalled, but Warren was confident¡ªand eavesdropped 
with fascination.22 Philadelphia and Reading¡ªwhich sold anthracite coal and owned the supposedly valuable culm banks¡ªactually wasn¡¯t worth much as a business. Over time, it was goingnowhere. But it was throwing off extra cash, which it could use to transformitself into a better business by buyinganother company. 
¡°I was just a peon sitting in the outer office. A guy named Jack Goldfarb came in to the office to see 
Graham-Newman. He negotiated with them and they bought the Union Underwear Company from him for Philadelphia and Reading Coal and Iron, creating what became Philadelphia and Reading Corporation. That was the beginning of the company¡¯s transformation into something more diversified. I was not in the inner circle, but I was terribly interested, knowing something was going on.¡± 
What Warren was learningabout by keepinghis ears open was the art of capital allocation¡ªplacingmoney where it would earn the highest return. In this case, Graham-Newman was usingmoney fromone business to buy a more profitable business. Over time, it could mean the difference between bankruptcy and success. 
Transactions like this made Warren feelthat he was sittingon the windowsilllookingin at high finance as it was takingplace. Yet, as he soon found, Graham did not behave like anyone else on WallStreet. He was always mentally recitingpoetry or quotingVirgiland was apt to lose packages on the subway. Like Warren, he was indifferent to how he looked. When someone observed, ¡°That¡¯s an interestingpair of shoes,¡± Graham 
looked down at the brown oxford on one foot and the black one on the other and said, without blinking, ¡°Yes, as a matter of fact, I¡¯ve got another pair just like themat home.¡±24 Unlike Warren, however, he cared nothingabout money for its own sake, nor was he interested in tradingas a competitive game. To him, stock-pickingwas an intellectualexercise. 
¡°One time, we were waiting for an elevator. We were going to eat in the cafeteria down at the bottom of the Chanin Building at Forty-second and Lex. And Ben said to me, ¡®Remember one thing, Warren: Money isn¡¯t making that much difference in how you and I live. We¡¯re both going down to the cafeteria for lunch and working every day and having a good time. So don¡¯t worry too much about money, because it won¡¯t make much difference in how you live.¡¯¡± 
Warren was in awe of Ben Graham, but nonetheless he was preoccupied with money. He wanted to amass a lot of it, and saw it as a competitive game. If asked to give up some of his money, Warren responded like a dogfiercely guardingits bone, or even as though he had been attacked. His struggle to let go of the smallest amounts of money was so apparent that it was as if the money possessed him, rather than the other way around. 
Susie had learned this only too well. Even within their apartment building, Warren had quickly earned a reputation for tightfistedness and eccentricity. It was only after he was embarrassed by the state of his shirts at work¡ªfor Susie never ironed more than the collar, front placket, and cuffs¡ªthat he allowed her to send 
the shirts to a laundry.25 He made a deal with a localnewsstand to buy week-old magazines at a discount as they were about to be thrown away. He had no car, and when he borrowed that of a neighbor, he never filled up the tank. (When he finally got a car, he washed it only when it was raining, so the rain could do the 
manuallabor of rinsing.)26 
For Warren, holdingon to every penny this way, since he had sold that first pack of chewinggum, was one of the two things that had made himcomparatively rich at age twenty-five. The other was collectingmore cash. Since Columbia, he had started makingmoney at an acceleratingrate. Now, much of his time Warren spent in a reverie, statistics about businesses and their stock prices swirlingin his head. When he wasn¡¯t studying something, he was teachingit. To keep his Dale Carnegie skills limber so he would not freeze in front of an audience, he got a gigteachinginvestingfor the Scarsdale Adult School at the high schoolin a nearby suburb. Meanwhile, the Buffetts¡¯ socialset consisted of couples whose breadwinners were mainly interested in stocks. 
Now and then he and Susie were invited to a country club or to dinner parties with other youngWallStreet couples. Bill Ruane had introduced himto several new acquaintances like Henry Brandt, a stockbroker who looked like a disheveled Jerry Lewis and had graduated at the top of his class fromHarvard Business School, and his wife, Roxanne. Amongthe WallStreet set, Warren struck people as the ¡°hickiest person you ever saw,¡± as one of them put it. But when he started holdingforth about stocks, the others sat transfixed at his 
feet, like ¡°Jesus and the apostles,¡± said Roxanne Brandt.27 
The wives sat by themselves and had their own conversations, and there Susie stood out as much as her husband did amongthe men. Warren wove his financial spells, and Susie charmed the wives with her engagingsimplicity. She wanted to know allabout their children, or their plans to have children. She knew how to get people to open up to her. She would ask about some biglife decision, then, with a soulfullook, say, ¡°Any regrets?¡± Out would come pouringthe other person¡¯s most intimate feelings. Soon someone she had met half an hour before felt she had a new best friend, even though Susie never confided intimacies in return. People loved her for beingso interested in them. 
But mostly Susie was on her own as she waited for their second child to be born, her days filled with laundry, shopping, cleaning, and cooking, as wellas feeding, changing, and playingwith Little Susie. All this felt right and normalto both of them. As Ricky Ricardo had said in the first season of I Love Lucy three years before, 
¡°I want a wife who¡¯s just a wife.¡±28 Lucy¡¯s ambitions and her fruitless efforts to fulfill themmade the show comical. So, as Susie fed Warren dinner, she supported himat his work as if it were a daily sacrament; she recognized the reverence he felt for Mr. Graham. But she also observed from a distance. Warren didn¡¯t share the details of his job, which in any case didn¡¯t interest her. She continued the patient work of bolsteringhis confidence, and of ¡°puttinghim together¡± by showeringhim with affection and teachinghimabout people. One thingshe was firm about at home was the importance of his bondingwith their daughter. Warren was not the type to play peekaboo or take over the diaper changing, but he would singto Little Susie every night. 
¡°I sang ¡®Over the Rainbow¡¯ all the time. It got to be hypnotic, almost like Pavlov¡¯s dogs. I don¡¯t know whether it was too boring or what¡ªbut she¡¯d fall asleep as soon as I started. I¡¯d put her up on my shoulder, and, basically, she would just sort of melt in my arms.¡± 
Havinghit on a reliable system, Warren never messed with it. While singing, he could easily be off rummagingaround in his mental files. So ¡°Over the Rainbow¡± it was, night after night. 
On her own, housekeeping, raisinga baby, and takingcare of Warren in a sterile suburb of New York, Susie may have welcomed anybody who showed up at the door. One day in late 1954, a salesman for Parents magazine dropped by the apartment. Whatever the salesman told Susie, when Warren got home he concluded that the paperwork she¡¯d signed committed them to less favorable terms than she had thought. He was incensed that his wife had been misled. He called severaltimes and talked to the magazine¡¯s representatives, but they apparently said ¡°nothingdoing¡± when he asked for his money back. 
Warren mounted a crusade. He wanted more than his $17 back; he wanted to right an injustice, to bringthe reprobate Parents magazine to its knees. He went around the apartment buildingand found a number of others willingto join the cause. He sued the magazine in small-claims court in Manhattan and looked forward to testifyingon behalf of all the allegedly swindled subscribers of Parents magazine. He clicked his heels with glee at the thought of the magazine¡¯s lawyers runningtheir meter. There was a bit of his father in this episode, but with a pecuniary slant and better odds of winning, so that his mother would have approved. 
But to his chagrin, before the trial took place he got a check in the mail. Parents magazine had settled. The crusade was foiled. 
On December 15, 1954, Warren had come home fromwork because Susie¡¯s labor was beginning, and then came a ringat the door. Susie answered it and found a door-to-door missionary who had come to call. She politely invited himto sit down in the livingroom. And she listened. 
So did Warren, who was thinkingto himself that only Susie would have let the man inside. Warren began to encourage the conversation to wind down. Agnostic for a number of years, he had no interest in being converted, and his wife was in labor. They needed to get to the hospital. 
Susie continued listening. ¡°Tellme more,¡± she said. Now and then she pulsed and moaned slightly as the missionary kept talking.29 She ignored Warren¡¯s signals, obviously feelingit more important to be polite to the visitor and make himfeelunderstood than to get to the hospital. The caller seemed oblivious to the fact that she was in labor. Warren sat there, helpless and increasingly agitated, untilthe preacher ran out of steam. ¡°I wanted to killthe guy,¡± he says. But they made it to the hospital in ample time, and Howard Graham Buffett arrived early the next morning. 
21 
TheSidetoPlay 
New York City . 1954¨C1956 
Howie was a ¡°difficult¡± baby. Whereas Little Sooz had been quiet and placid, Howie was like an alarm clock you couldn¡¯t turn off. His parents kept waitingfor the clamor to lessen, but it only increased. The apartment suddenly seemed full and noisy all the time. 
¡°He had some kind of digestive problem. We experimented with all these different kinds of milk bottles. I don¡¯t know whether he was getting air in or not, but he was up all the time. Compared to Little Sooz, Howie was a trial.¡± 
It was BigSusie who jumped to the sound of the alarm clock. Since Warren had grown up between a speechifyingfather and a mother who alternated grotesque rages with pitter-patter chatter, perhaps it was not surprisingthat he had learned to shut his ears to what was goingon around him. Not even Howie¡¯s howling nights distracted himmuch. In his little office in the apartment¡¯s third bedroom, he could lose himself for hours in his thoughts. 
At work he had become absorbed in a complicated new project that would become a seminal event in his career. Shortly after Warren joined Graham-Newman, the price of cocoa suddenly spiked froma nickel to more than fifty cents a pound. Over in Brooklyn, Rockwood & Co., a chocolate maker ¡°of limited 
profitability,¡±1 faced a dilemma. Its number one product was Rockwood chocolate bits, the kind of nuggets used in chocolate chip cookies, and the company couldn¡¯t raise its prices much on this grocery item, so it began runninga huge loss. However, with cocoa-bean prices so high, Rockwood also had a chance to unload the cocoa beans it already owned to reap a windfall profit. Unfortunately, the ensuingtax bill would eat up 
more than half those profits.2 
Rockwood¡¯s owners approached Graham-Newman as a possible buyer of the company, but Graham-
Newman wouldn¡¯t pay the askingprice. So they turned instead to the investor Jay Pritzker, who had spotted a way to avoid the huge tax bill.3 What he realized was that the 1954 U.S. Tax Code said that if a company was reducingthe scope of its business, it could pay no tax on such a ¡°partialliquidation¡± of its inventory. So Pritzker bought enough stock to take controlof Rockwood, choosingto keep the company goingas a maker of chocolate bits, and to get out of the cocoa-butter business. He attributed thirteen million pounds of cocoa beans to the cocoa-butter side of the business, the amount of beans that would be ¡°liquidated.¡± 
Rather than sellthe beans for cash, however, Pritzker offered themto the other shareholders in exchange for stock. He did so because he wanted their shares to increase his ownership of the company. So he offered them a good deal as an incentive¡ª$36 worth of beans4 for shares that were tradingat $34.5 
Graham spotted a way to make money fromthis offer¡ªGraham-Newman could buy Rockwood stock and swap it to Pritzker for cocoa beans it could sell to make a $2 profit on every share. This was arbitrage:two nearly identical things tradingat a different price, which enabled a canny trader to simultaneously buy one and sellthe other and profit on the difference, with virtually no risk. ¡°In Wall Street the old proverb has been reworded,¡± as Buffett wrote later. ¡°Give a man a fish and you feed himfor a day. Teach a man to arbitrage 
and you feed himforever.¡±6 Pritzker would give Graham-Newman a warehouse certificate, which is just what it sounds like: a piece of paper that says the holder owns so many cocoa beans. It could be traded like a stock. By sellingthe warehouse certificate, Graham-Newman would make its money. 
$34(G-N¡¯scostforashareofRockwood¡ªwhichitturnsintoPritzker) 
$36(PritzkergivesG-Nawarehousereceipt¡ªwhichitsellsatthisprice) 
$2(ProfitoneachshareofRockwoodstock) 
Virtually no risk, however, means there is at least some risk. What if the price of cocoa beans dropped, and the warehouse receipt was suddenly worth only $30?Instead of makingtwo dollars, Graham-Newman would lose four bucks for every share of stock. To lock in its profit and eliminate that risk, Graham-Newman sold cocoa ¡°futures.¡± It was a good thing, too¡ªfor cocoa prices were about to drop. 
The ¡°futures¡± market lets buyers and sellers agree to exchange commodities like cocoa or gold or bananas in the future at a price agreed upon today. In exchange for a smallfee, Graham-Newman could arrange to sell its cocoa beans at a known price for a specified period of time, thus eliminatingthe risk that the market price would drop. The person on the other side of the trade¡ªwho was acquiringthe risk that the price would 
drop¡ªwas speculating.7 If cocoa beans got cheaper, Graham-Newman was protected, because the speculator would have to buy Graham-Newman¡¯s cocoa beans for more than they were worth.8 The speculator¡¯s role, from Graham-Newman¡¯s perspective, was to sellwhat amounted to insurance against the risk of the price dropping. At the time, of course, neither knew which way cocoa prices would move. 
Thus, the goalof the arbitrage was to buy as many Rockwood shares as possible while at the same time sellingan equivalent amount of futures. 
Graham-Newman assigned Warren to the Rockwood deal. He was made for it; he had been arbitragingstocks 
for several years, buyingconvertible preferred stock and shortingcommon stock issued by the same company. 9 He had studied arbitrage returns over the precedingthirty years in detail and had discovered that these ¡°riskless¡± deals typically returned twenty cents for every dollar invested¡ªa lot more than the seven or eight cents profit fromthe average stock. For severalweeks, Warren spent his days shuttlingback and forth to Brooklyn on the subway, exchangingstock for warehouse certificates at Schroder Trust. He spent his evenings studyingthe situation, sunk in thought while singing ¡°Over the Rainbow¡± to Little Sooz and shutting out the screams as BigSusie struggled to give Howie a bottle. 
On the surface, Rockwood was a simple transaction for Graham-Newman:Its only cost was subway tokens, 
thought, and time. But Warren recognized the potentialfor even more ¡°financialfireworks¡± than Graham-Newman had.10 Unlike Ben Graham, he did not do the arbitrage. Thus he did not need to sell cocoa futures either. Instead, he bought 222 shares of Rockwood stock for himself and simply kept it. 
Warren had thought through Pritzker¡¯s offer carefully. When he divided all the beans Rockwood owned¡ªnot just the beans attributed to the cocoa-butter business¡ªby the number of Rockwood shares, it amounted to more than the eighty pounds per share that Pritzker was offering. So people who did not turn in their shares would end up with stock worth more cocoa beans per share. Not only that¡ªall the extra beans left on the table by those who did turn in their stock would bump the number of beans per share even more. 
Those who kept their stock would also profit because they wound up with a share of the company¡¯s plant, its equipment, money due fromcustomers, and the rest of the Rockwood business that was not beingshut down. 
Warren had inverted the situation, thinkingabout it from Pritzker¡¯s point of view. If Jay Pritzker was buying, he wondered, why did it make sense to sell? And after doingthe math, he could see that it didn¡¯t make sense. The side to play on was Jay Pritzker¡¯s. Warren had looked at the stock as a little slice of the business. 
With fewer shares outstanding, his slice was worth more. He was takingmore risk than had he simply done the arbitrage¡ªbut he was also makinga calculated bet with odds heavily in his favor. The $2 profit from the arbitrage was easy to earn, however, and riskless. When the price of cocoa beans dropped, the futures contracts protected Graham-Newman. They, and a significant percentage of other shareholders, accepted Pritzker¡¯s offer and left a lot of cocoa beans on the table. 
Hangingon to the stock, however, turned out to be a brilliant call. Those who played the arbitrage, like Graham-Newman, made their $2 a share. But Rockwood stock, which had traded for $15 before Pritzker¡¯s offer, shot up to $85 after it was over. So instead of making$444 from his 222 shares, as he would have from 
the arbitrage, Warren¡¯s calculated bet earned himan extraordinary sum¡ªaround $13,000.11 
In the process, he had also made a point of gettingto know Jay Pritzker. He figured anybody smart enough to 
have figured out that deal ¡°was goingto do more smart things later.¡± He went to a shareholders¡¯ meetingand asked some questions, and that was his introduction to Pritzker.12 Warren was then twenty-five, Pritzker thirty-two. 
Even workingwith a relatively small amount of capital¡ªless than $100,000¡ªWarren saw that by usingthis kind of thinkinghe could open up a world of possibilities for himself. His only constraints were the money, energy, and time he had available. It was lumberjack labor, but he loved doingit. This was nothinglike the way most people invested:sittingin an office and readingreports that described research performed by other people. Warren was a detective, and he naturally did his own research, just as he had collected bottle caps and thought about fingerprintingnuns. 
To do his detective work he used the Moody¡¯s Manuals¡ªIndustrial, Banks and Finance, and Public Utility. Often he went down in person to Moody¡¯s or Standard & Poor¡¯s. ¡°I was the only one who ever showed up at those places. They never even asked if I was a customer. I would get these files that dated back forty or fifty years. They didn¡¯t have copy machines, so I¡¯d sit there and scribble all these little notes, this figure and that figure. They had a library, but you couldn¡¯t select from it yourself. You had to request things. So I would name all these companies¡ªJersey Mortgage, Bankers Commercial, all these things that nobody¡¯d ever requested, ever. They¡¯d bring them out, and I¡¯d sit there taking notes. If you wanted to look at SEC documents, as I often did, I went down to the SEC. That was the only way to get them. Then, if the company was nearby, I might very well go see the management. I didn¡¯t make appointments ahead of time. But I got a lot done.¡± 
One of his favorite sources was the Pink Sheets, a weekly printed on pink paper, which gave information about the stocks of companies so small that they were not traded on a stock exchange. Another was the National Quotation book, which came out only every six months and described stocks of companies so minuscule that they never even made it into the Pink Sheets. No company was too small, no detailtoo obscure, to pass through his sieve. ¡°I would pore through volumes of businesses and I¡¯d find one or two that I could put ten or fifteen thousand dollars into that were just ridiculously cheap.¡± 
Warren was not proud; he also felt honored to borrow ideas from Graham, Pritzker, or any useful source. He 
called that ridingcoattails and did not care whether the idea was glamorous or mundane. One day he followed up on a lead of Graham¡¯s, the Union Street Railway.13 This was a bus company in New Bedford, Massachusetts, sellingat a bigdiscount to its net assets. 
¡°It had a hundred sixteen buses and a little amusement park at one time. I started buying the stock because they had eight hundred thousand dollars in treasury bonds, a couple of hundred thousand in cash, and outstanding bus tickets of ninety-six thousand dollars. Call it a million dollars, about sixty bucks a share. When I started buying it, the stock was selling around thirty or thirty-five bucks a share.¡± The whole company was sellingfor half the value of its cash in the bank. Buyingthe stock was playinga fifty-cent slot machine that was virtually guaranteed to pay off a buck. 
Under the circumstances, the company was, naturally, tryingto buy its own stock, runningan ad in the local New Bedford paper invitingshareholders to sell it to them. Warren, facingcompetition, began runninghis own ad: ¡°Write to Warren Buffett at such-and-such address if you want to sellyour stock.¡± ¡°Then, because it was a regulated utility, I got the list from the public-utility commission in Massachusetts that showed the largest shareholders. And I worked that to find more stock. And I wanted to see Mark Duff, who ran the company.¡± 
Visitingmanagement was part of Warren¡¯s way of doingbusiness. He used those meetings to learn as much as he could about a company. Gettingpersonal access to management played to his ability to charmand impress powerful people with his knowledge and wit. And he also felt that by becomingfriendly with the management of a company, he might be able to influence the company to do the right thing. 
Graham, on the other hand, did not visit managements, much less try to influence them. He called this ¡°self-help¡± and thought it was ¡°cheating¡± to get the inside dope, even though it was legal. He felt that by definition beingan investor meant beingan outsider, someone who confronted managements rather than rubbingshoulders with them. Grahamwanted to be on a levelplayingfield with the little guy, usingonly 
information that was available to everyone. 14 Followinghis own instincts, however, Warren decided to visit the Union Street Railway on a weekend. 
¡°I got up at about four a.m. and drove up to New Bedford. Mark Duff was very nice, polite. Just as I was about ready to leave, he said, ¡®By the way, we¡¯ve been thinking of having a ¡°return of capital¡± distribution to shareholders.¡¯¡± That meant they were goingto give back the extra money. ¡°And I said, ¡®Oh, that¡¯s nice.¡¯ And then he said, ¡®Yes, and there¡¯s a provision you may not be aware of in the Massachusetts statutes on public utilities that you have to do it in multiples of the par value of the stock.¡± The stock had a $25 par 
value, so that meant it would be payingout at least $25 per share.*17 ¡°And I said, ¡®Well. That¡¯s a good start.¡¯ Then he said, ¡®Bear in mind, we¡¯re thinking of using two units.¡¯ That meant they were going to declare a fifty-dollar dividend on a stock that was selling at thirty-five or forty dollars at that time.¡± So if you bought a share you got allyour money back right away, and then some. And afterward, you still owned the slice of the business represented by your share of stock. 
¡°I got fifty bucks a share, and I still owned stock in the place. And there was still value in it. The bus companies hid assets in these so-called special reserves and land and buildings and car barns where they kept the old streetcars. And I¡¯ll never know whether my trip up there precipitated that or not.¡± The conflict-wary Buffett by now had honed to a fine edge the skill of gettinghis way without askingfor it out loud. Thus, while he thought he might have influenced Duff, he could not be certain what had prompted Duff¡¯s decision. What mattered to himwas that he got the result he wanted without a fight. He had made 
about $20,000 on this trade. Who knew there was so much money in buses?15 
Nobody in the history of the Buffett family had ever made $20,000 on one idea. In 1955, that was several times more than the average person earned for a whole year¡¯s work. Doublingyour money and then some for a few weeks¡¯ work was spectacular. And yet, what was more important to himwas doingit without taking any significant risk. 
*** 
Susie and Warren did not talk about the details of cocoa-bean arbitrage and bus-company stocks. She wasn¡¯t interested in money, except as somethingto be spent. And what she knew was that even though waves of money were rollingin to the little apartment in White Plains, Warren gave her only a small household allowance. She hadn¡¯t grown up keepingtrack of every tiny expense, so beingmarried to a man who saved money by makingdeals with newsstands to buy week-old magazines meant a whole new way of life. She did her best to manage the household herself, but the disparity between what Warren was makingand what he gave his wife had become stunning. One day she telephoned her neighbor Madeline O¡¯Sullivan in a panic. 
¡°Madeline, somethingterrible has happened,¡± she said. ¡°You¡¯ve got to come down here!¡± Madeline rushed down to the Buffett apartment and found Susie distraught. She had accidentally thrown a batch of dividend checks that had been sittingon Warren¡¯s desk into the apartment¡¯s incinerator chute, which led straight down 
to the building¡¯s furnace.16 
¡°Maybe the incinerator isn¡¯t running,¡± Madeline said, so they called the buildingsuperintendent, who let them into the basement. Sure enough, the incinerator was cold. They rooted through the garbage lookingfor the checks, with Susie all the while wringingher hands and saying, ¡°I can¡¯t face Warren.¡± When they found the checks, Madeline¡¯s eyes grew wide. They were for as much as thousands of dollars, not $25 or $10 as she 
had assumed.17 The Buffetts, livingin the little apartment in White Plains, were gettingtruly rich. 
As Howie screamed and their money grew, Warren became slightly more accommodatingwith the checkbook. Despite his thriftiness, he was so enthralled with Susie that he ultimately gave her what she wanted. That June, they returned to Omaha for his sister Bertie¡¯s weddingto Charlie Snorf. By then, Warren had agreed that Susie could have some help with homemaking. So while they were in Omaha they started searchingin a hurry for an au pair to return to White Plains with them. 
By advertisingin the newspaper, they hired a youngwoman from a small town who ¡°seemed a very proper type¡±¡ªbut wasn¡¯t. Warren threw her on a bus back to Omaha; Susie looked for a replacement, because she needed the help¡ªraisingHowie was more than a two-person job¡ªand she knew they could afford it. 
*** 
Warren¡¯s brilliant performance at Graham-Newman had made himthe golden boy of the firm. Ben Graham took a personal interest in Warren, and in his warmly outgoingand beleaguered wife. Grahamhad given them a movie camera and projector as a baby gift when Howie was born, and even showed up at their apartment 
with a teddy bear for the little boy.18 On one or two occasions when he and his wife, Estey, had the Buffetts over for dinner, he noticed that Warren gazed googly-eyed at Susie, and that the two of themheld hands a lot. But he could also see that Warren did not woo his wife, and that Susie might have liked the occasional 
romantic gesture.19 When Susie mentioned with longingthat Warren did not dance, Graham dropped by Warren¡¯s desk with a gift certificate to the Arthur Murray dance studio in White Plains, where Graham clumped around the dance floor duringhis own lessons. Graham checked with the studio a little later and found that his prot¨¦g¨¦ had never used the gift certificate. He mentioned this to Warren and encouraged him to go ahead. Now on the hook, Warren stumbled through three lessons with Susie, then dropped out. He 
never did learn to dance.20 
This didn¡¯t get in the way of his rapid ascent at Graham-Newman. Within eighteen months of his starting there, both Ben Grahamand Jerry Newman seemed to be treatingWarren as a potential partner, which meant a certain amount of family socializing. In mid-1955, even the dyspeptic Jerry Newman extended an invitation to the Buffetts to what they thought was to be a ¡°picnic¡± at Meadowpond, the Newmans¡¯ mansion in Lewisboro, New York. Susie arrived wearingsomethingsuitable for a hayride, only to find the other women in dresses and pearls. Though they felt like a couple of hillbillies, the faux pas did nothingto hurt Warren¡¯s golden boy status. 
Walter Schloss was not invited to events like these. He had been pigeonholed as a journeyman employee who would never rise to partnership. Jerry Newman, who rarely bothered to be kind to anyone, treated Schloss with more than his usualcontempt, so Schloss, married with two youngchildren, decided to strike out on his 
own. It took him a while to get up the nerve to tellGraham,21 but by the end of 1955 he had started his own investment partnership, funded with $100,000 raised from a group of partners whose names, as Buffett later put it, ¡°were straight froma roll call at Ellis Island.¡±22 
Buffett was certain that Schloss could apply Graham¡¯s methods successfully and admired himfor havingthe 
guts to set up his own firm. Though he worried that ¡°BigWalter¡± was startingout with so little capital that he would not be able to feed his family,23 Buffett put not a dime of his own money into Schloss¡¯s partnership, just as he had not invested in Graham-Newman. It would be unthinkable for Warren Buffett to let someone else invest his money. 
He did find someone to replace Schloss, however. Buffett had met TomKnapp at a luncheon at Blythe and Company down on WallStreet.24 Ten years older than Warren, tall, handsome, dark-haired, blessed with a wicked sense of humor, Knapp had taken one of David Dodd¡¯s night courses and gotten hooked; he changed his major from chemistry to business on the spot. Graham hired Knapp as the second gentile in the firm. ¡°I told Jerry Newman, ¡®It¡¯s the old story¡ªyou hire one gentile, they take over the place,¡¯¡± Buffett says. 
By the time Knapp was sittingat Walter Schloss¡¯s old desk next to Buffett, Warren had begun to be aware of the private side of Graham¡¯s life. Knapp himself got initiated when Grahaminvited himto watch a speech at the New Schoolfor Social Research, where, he says, he found himself seated at a table with six women. ¡°As Ben spoke,¡± Knapp says, ¡°I became aware that each one of those women was in love with him. And they 
didn¡¯t seemto be jealous of each other, and they all seemed to know himvery, very well.¡±25 
Indeed, by early 1956, Grahamwas bored by investing: his outside interests¡ªwomen, the classics, and fine arts¡ªtugged at himso strongly that he had a foot out the door. One day when Knapp was out, the receptionist directed a gangly youngman into the windowless lair where Warren was fillingout forms. Loomingover himwas Ed Anderson, who explained that he was a chemist, like Knapp, not a professional investor. He worked at the Livermore Laboratory of the Atomic Energy Commission in California, but followed the market in his spare time. He had read The Intelligent Investor, with its copious examples of cheap stocks like Easy WashingMachine, and was wildly impressed. My God! he thought. That can¡¯t be true. 
How could you buy these companies for less money than they had cash in the bank?26 
Intrigued, Anderson had been ridingGraham¡¯s coattails. After buyinga single share of Graham-Newman, he used its quarterly statements to figure out what Graham was doing, then bought those stocks. Grahamnever discouraged this; he liked other people to learn from and emulate him. 
Anderson had come in because he was thinkingabout buyinganother share of Graham-Newman, but he had noticed an oddity and he wanted to ask about it. Graham had loaded up on shares of American Telephone & Telegraph. It was the least Graham-like stock imaginable¡ªowned, studied, and followed by all, valued fairly, with as little potential as it had risk. Was somethinggoingon?he asked Warren. 
Warren thought for a second. It was impressive that this man with no business background¡ªa chemist¡ªhad the perception to see that AT&T was out of pattern. Too many people thought that ¡°business¡± was some sort of priesthood practiced only by those with special training. He said to Anderson, ¡°This might not be the best 
time to buy another share.¡±27 They chatted a bit longer and then parted in a friendly way, intendingto keep up the acquaintance. Warren was very glad that his friend Schloss had gone out on his own. From watching the firm¡¯s tradingpatterns and keepinghis ears open, he had already figured out that Grahamwas goingto shut down his partnership. 
Ben Graham¡¯s career was comingto an end. He was sixty-two years old, and the market had surpassed the peak of 1929.28 Its priciness made himnervous. He had beaten the market by 2.5 percent for more than twenty years.29 He wanted to retire and move out to California to enjoy life. Jerry Newman was also retiring, 
but Jerry¡¯s son, Mickey, would stay on. In the springof 1956 Graham gave notice to his partners. But first he offered Warren the opportunity to become a generalpartner in the firm. That he would choose someone of Warren¡¯s age and experience shows how valuable he had made himself in such a short time. Nevertheless: 
¡°If I had stayed I would have been sort of the Ben Graham of it, and Mickey would have been the Jerry Newman of it¡ªbut Mickey would have been the senior partner by miles. It would have been called Newman-Buffett.¡± 
Even though Warren was flattered, he had gone to Graham-Newman to work for Ben. It wasn¡¯t worth it to him to stay, not even to be thought of as Graham¡¯s intellectual heir. Moreover, all the while that he was carryingout the bus bell-ringer and the cocoa-bean caper he was thinking, ¡°I don¡¯t like livingin New York. I¡¯m on the train back and forth all the time.¡± Above all, he was not cut out to work with a partner¡ªleast of all as someone¡¯s junior partner. He turned the offer down. 
22 
HiddenSplendor 
Omaha . 1956¨C1958 
Ihad about $174,000, and I was going to retire. I rented a house at 5202 Underwood in Omaha for $175 a month. We¡¯d live on $12,000 a year. My capital would grow.¡± 
In retrospect, it would strike people as odd that at the age of twenty-six, Warren used the term ¡°retire.¡± Maybe it was a way to downplay expectations. Or maybe it referred to his notion of capital as money that worked as a sort of servant to make you rich. The overseer of capital was not an employee. 
Mathematically speaking, Warren could theoretically ¡°retire¡± on his own money and still reach his goal of 
beinga millionaire by age thirty-five.*18 Since enteringColumbia with $9,800, he had grown his money by more than sixty-one percent a year. But he was in a hurry, and it would require a very aggressive compoundingrate to meet his goal.1 Therefore he had decided to start a partnership like Graham-Newman¡¯s sister hedge fund, Newman & Graham.2 It was possible that he did not think of this as havinga ¡°job.¡± In fact 
it was a near-perfect way of not havinga job. He would have no boss, could invest from his house, and could put friends and relatives into the same stocks that he would have bought for himself. If he took a quarter of every dollar he earned for these partners as a fee and then reinvested that in the partnership, he could be a millionaire much faster. Armed with Ben Graham¡¯s method of buyingstocks and a Graham-like hedge fund, he had every reason to think of himself as a rich man. 
There was only one problemwith his idea. He couldn¡¯t tolerate it if his partners criticized himbecause the stocks went down. But Warren had figured out a solution. He planned to invite only his family and friends ¡ªpeople he was sure trusted him¡ªinto the partnership. On May 1, 1956, he started Buffett Associates, Ltd., 
a partnership based on the Newman & Grahammodel,3 with seven partners. 
Doc Thompson invested $25,000. ¡°Doc Thompson was the kind of guy, he gave me every penny he had, basically. I was his boy.¡± Warren¡¯s sister Doris, with her husband, Truman Wood, put in $10,000. His aunt Alice Buffett put in $35,000. ¡°I had sold securities to other people before that, but now I became a fiduciary, and for people who were enormously important to me. These were the people who believed in me. There¡¯s no way in the world I would have taken my aunt Alice¡¯s or my sister¡¯s or my father-in-law¡¯s money if I had thought that I¡¯d lose it. At that point I didn¡¯t think I could lose money over time.¡± 
He already had a separate partnership with his father, and his sister Bertie and her husband had no money they could part with. So his Wharton roommate Chuck Peterson, who put in $5,000, became his fourth partner. Al Jolson aside, he knew all about Warren¡¯s brains and financial maturity fromhavingbeen his roommate. Chuck had been one of the first to let Warren dispense him scrips as a prescriptionist, buying stocks from him before he went to New York City. ¡°I learned realfast how bright he is and how honest he is 
and how capable,¡± he says. ¡°I would trust himuntil proven otherwise.¡±4 Warren¡¯s fifth partner was Peterson¡¯s mother, Elizabeth, who invested $25,000 of the money she had inherited when her husband died the year before. 
The sixth partner, Dan Monen, was a quiet, stocky, dark-haired youngman who used to play with Warren as a child, diggingup dandelions in Ernest Buffett¡¯s backyard. Now Warren¡¯s lawyer, he didn¡¯t have much money but put in what he could: $5,000. 
Warren was the seventh. He put in only $100. The rest of his share would come fromfuture fees he earned by managingthe partnership. ¡°In effect, I got my leverage from managing the partnership. I was brimming with ideas, but I was not brimming with capital.¡± Actually, by most of the country¡¯s standards, Warren was brimmingwith capital. But he viewed the partnership as a compoundingmachine¡ªonce money went into it, he did not intend to make withdrawals. So he needed to earn the $12,000 a year his family would live on from the rest of his funds. He invested that money separately. 
He devised a formula to charge his new partners. ¡°I got half the upside above a four percent threshold, and I took a quarter of the downside myself. So if I broke even, I lost money. And my obligation to pay back 
5
losses was not limited to my capital. It was unlimited.¡± 
At the time, Warren was already managingmoney for Anne Gottschaldt and Catherine Elberfeld, the mother and aunt of Fred Kuhlken, a friend fromColumbia. When Fred left for Europe the year before, he had asked 
Warren to look after part of his aunt¡¯s and mother¡¯s money. 6 Ever since, Warren had been investingit with utmost caution in government bonds under a different, more modest fee arrangement. 
He could have invited Gottschaldt and Elberfeld into the partnership, but he felt that it was unfair to charge them a higher fee than they were already paying. Of course, if the partnership was the sure thinghe thought it was, that meant he was deprivingthemof a golden opportunity. If somethingwent wrongwith the investments, however, his aunt and his sister and Doc Thompson would never condemn him. He wasn¡¯t so sure about anybody else. 
Actingas a ¡°fiduciary¡± meant to Warren that any responsibility he took on would be unlimited. To lay out the ground rules for his partners, he called the first official meetingof Buffett Associates on the very day he founded the partnership. Chuck got thema reservation for dinner at the Omaha Club, the best place in town if you wanted a private room. Warren meant to carefully define and limit his responsibilities; one responsibility he was not assumingwas pickingup the check for dinner. He told Chuck to pass the word that 
everyone was goingdutch.7 He then used the dinner as an opportunity to talk not just about the partnership¡¯s ground rules, but about the stock market. Already he viewed the partnership as a teachingexercise. 
The partners quickly split into two camps:the teetotalers and the rest. Fromhis end of the table, Doc Thompson suggested, in a paternal way, that the other faction was goingto hell. It was Warren, however, who was the preacher that night; they were there for him to hold forth. 
¡°I started with an agreement with the investors, which has not needed to be changed much as we¡¯ve evolved. All kinds of good things have flowed out of that, you know. It is the least complicated thing I can imagine. 
¡°I gave them a little summary of the ground rules: Here¡¯s what I can do. Here¡¯s what I can¡¯t do. And here are some things I don¡¯t know whether I can do or not. Here¡¯s how I¡¯ll judge myself. It was fairly short. If you don¡¯t feel this way you shouldn¡¯t join, because I don¡¯t want you unhappy while I¡¯m happy or vice 
8
versa.¡± 
After Warren launched the partnership, the Buffetts returned to New York for their final summer. Warren would be helpingBen Grahamand Jerry Newman as the partnership wound down. Mickey Newman was now the CEO of Philadelphia & Reading, a full-time job. With neither he nor Warren available to serve as general 
partner, Grahamhad decided to shut down the firm.9 Warren had rented a rustic seaside cottage on Long Island for his family from his friend TomKnapp. The house, part of a group built for people fleeingan influenza epidemic many years before, sat on West Meadow Beach, near Stony Brook on LongIsland¡¯s North Shore, and faced Connecticut, across LongIsland Sound. 
Duringthe week, Warren saved money by bunkingin the city with his stockbroker friend Henry Brandt, 
whose wife and children were also summeringon LongIsland. On the weekends he joined his family at the shore and worked in a tiny bedroom in the house. The neighbors told the Knapps they never saw him.10 While Warren worked, Susie, who was afraid of the water and never swam, beachcombed with the kids along the bluffs near the water¡¯s edge. Since the cottage had minimal plumbingfacilities, the Buffetts fetched drinkingwater froma springacross the street, and Susie bathed Little Susie, now almost three, Howie, eighteen months old, and herself in the unheated outdoor shower. 
That summer brought themtwo pieces of shockingnews. The father of Warren¡¯s boyhood friend Bob Russell had committed suicide. And Anne Gottschaldt and Catherine Elberfeld, the mother and aunt of Fred Kuhlken, Warren¡¯s friend fromColumbia, called to say that Fred had been killed in Portugal after his car 
skidded eighty feet and rammed into a cork tree.11 
*** 
As the summer ended, the Buffetts made their plans to return to Omaha. The extreme caution Warren displayed in tryingnever to disappoint anyone stood in sharp contrast with his risky decision to pursue an investingcareer workingon his own outside of New York City. The market was composed of relationships, people who lunched together at the Stock Exchange or played poker once a week. It hummed alongon tips and rumors, gossip passed on by personal contacts and connections made at investor luncheons, in bars, on squash courts, at chance meetings at university-club coat checks. While every small regional city had its little brokerage firmor two¡ªlike Buffett-Falk¡ªthese were not important players. The hinterlands were staffed by stockbrokers¡ªprescriptionists who survived or prospered by fillingthe scrips written by the Manhattan money doctors. At that time, no serious American money man worked anywhere but New York City. To leave all this, to go it alone, to think of gettingreally rich anywhere farther than a limo ride fromWall and Broad was a truly bold and venturesome stroke. 
Indeed, for a college graduate to become self-employed, to work at home, to work alone, was strikingly unusualin the 1950s. The Man in the Gray FlannelSuit was the guy who got ahead.12 Businessmen joined a bigorganization¡ªthe bigger the better¡ªthen competed with polished ferocity for the best-payingjob on the steady climb up the ladder of success, tryingnot to break a sweat or a golf club alongthe way. They competed to amass not riches but power¡ªor at the very least to buy the right kind of house in a good suburban neighborhood, to get a new-modelcar every year, and to pave the way for a lifetime of security. 
In his choice of occupation, therefore, Warren was as rare as a Buffett who voted for Democrats. Wellaware of her husband¡¯s unusualqualities¡ªif not of the apparent riskiness of the course he was charting¡ªSusie arranged for the movers to come, said good-bye to the neighbors, sent out the change-of-address cards, had the telephone service turned off, and packed up their belongings. She flew to Omaha with Little Susie and Howie and moved themallinto the house Warren had rented fromChuck Peterson on Underwood Avenue. He had chosen an invitinggray two-story Tudor with picturesque half-beams, a bigstone chimney, and a cathedralceiling. Even the decision to rent a home had been unconventional; owninga home was the quintessence of what most youngAmericans aspired to in the mid-1950s. The hopelessness of the Depression and the dreary wartime days of makingdo were fadinginto memory. Americans stocked their new houses with allthe excitingnew features and appliances that were suddenly available:washer-dryers, freezers, dishwashers, electric mixers. The Buffetts had plenty of money to buy all these things. But Warren had other plans for his capital, so they rented. And the house they were renting, while attractive, was just barely big enough for them. Howie at almost two would have to sleep in a largish closet. 
As Susie began to settle her family in Omaha, Warren closed out his own affairs in New York. He packed up his own desk and files, and sent out his own notices to the companies whose stocks he owned to ensure that the dividend checks followed himto Omaha. Then he got in his car and started drivingback to Nebraska, visitingcompanies alongthe way. 
¡°I did this zigzag across the country. I just thought it was a great time to hit these companies. I drove through Hazleton, Pennsylvania, and visited the Jeddo-Highland Coal Company. I went through Kalamazoo, and saw the Kalamazoo Stove and Furnace Company. This little odyssey went through Delaware, Ohio, and I visited Greif Bros. Cooperage. That was a company selling at a ridiculously cheap price¡±¡ªa company he had first discovered in 1951 by flippingthrough the Moody¡¯s Manuals. He and his father had each bought two hundred shares and put them in their little partnership. 
Warren arrived in Omaha toward the end of the summer and found that he was needed at home. Little Sooz, 
calmand timid, sat watchingwhile her brother¡¯s inexhaustible demands vacuumed up her mother¡¯s energies.13 But in the evenings she wanted her father; she was now afraid to go to bed. When they arrived at the house on Underwood, a moving-company man wearingglasses had spoken to her, and though she did not remember his sayinganythinguntoward, she had frozen in terror and was now convinced that the ¡°glasses man¡± lurked just outside her bedroom, next to a wrought-iron balcony that overlooked the livingroom. Warren had to inspect the balcony every night and reassure her that it was safe to go to sleep. 
After he had taken care of the ¡°glasses man,¡± he went down the hallto the tiny sunporch off his and Susie¡¯s bedroom and got down to business, either partnership work or preparinghis lessons¡ªfor the first thinghe had done when he returned to Omaha, besides forminga partnership, was to take on two classes for the fall semester at the University of Omaha: Investment Analysis for Men Only, and Intelligent Investing. Before longhe would add a third course, Investingfor Women. The terrified boy who so recently couldn¡¯t even strike up a conversation in a Dale Carnegie class had vanished. In his place was a still-awkward youngman who nonetheless made a strikingimpression as he moved restlessly around the room, exhortingthe students and spoutingan inexhaustible series of facts and figures. Dressed as usual in a cheap suit that looked a couple of sizes too large, he seemed more like a youngish preacher fromsome missionary sect than a college lecturer. 
Despite his brilliance, Warren was still very immature. For Susie, his helplessness at home meant that he was like havinga third child to care for. His personality and interests also shaped their social life. In Omaha, a midsize Midwestern city with relatively few important cultural institutions, weekends were filled with weddings, parties, teas, and charity events. The Buffetts lived a much quieter life than most youngmarried couples of their class and era. Although Susie began to climb the ladder of the Junior League and they joined a ¡°gourmet group¡±¡ªwhere Warren politely asked each month¡¯s hostess to make hima hamburger¡ªthey socialized with friends less in crowds than in ones and twos. Most of their social life took place at dinner with other couples, in smallgroups, or at occasionaldinner parties where Warren could talk about stocks. It was always the same: Warren entertained, either holdingforth to an audience on stocks or playingthe ukulele. Under Susie¡¯s tutelage, he could now exchange remarks about other subjects more easily than before, but his mind remained fixated on makingmoney. Duringmeals and parties at home, he often fled smalltalk by leavingthe table to go upstairs. But unlike Ben Graham, he was not upstairs readingProust; he was working. As for Susie, she knew little and cared less about what Warren did. ¡°I used to write ¡®security analyst¡¯ for his 
job, and people thought he checked burglar alarms,¡± she said.14 
AllWarren¡¯s recreations remained repetitive, competitive, or, better yet, both. He found playingbridge with Susie unendurable because she wanted the other side to win, and soon sought other partners.15 His mind was like a restless monkey; to relax, he needed an active form of concentration that could keep the monkey occupied. Ping-Pong, bridge, poker, golf all absorbed him and took his mind off money temporarily. But he never hosted backyard barbecues, lazed around a swimmingpool, stargazed, or simply went for a walk in the woods. A stargazingWarren would have looked at the BigDipper and seen a dollar sign. 
Allof this, plus his nonconformist streak, meant that Warren was not a ¡°joiner,¡± sittingthrough committee and board meetings. Still, family loyalty did lead him to say yes when his uncle Fred Buffett came over to the house and asked him to join the Rotary Club. He was fond of Fred, proprietor of the Buffett grocery; he and Fred went bowlingat the Rotary (repetitive, competitive)¡ªand besides, his grandfather had been president of the Rotary. 
On the other hand, when asked to join the Knights of Ak-Sar-Ben, a more important group of civic leaders that combined philanthropy, business, boosterism, and social activities, he said no. For a buddingmoney manager who needed to raise funds for his business, that was like thumbinghis nose in the faces of the men who ran Omaha¡ªan act of cocky self-assurance, even arrogance, which set himapart frommuch of his social set. His sister Doris had made her debut as a Princess of Ak-Sar-Ben. The sister of his brother-in-law and former roommate, Truman Wood, had been Queen of Ak-Sar-Ben. Friends like Chuck Peterson were regulars on its socialcircuit. As a Congressman, Howard had been obligated to join. But Warren found social hierarchy repugnant and he disdained the smoke-filled backroomclubbiness and conformity of the Ak-Sar-Ben crowd. These were the people who had looked down on his father as the ¡°son of a grocer man.¡± Warren reveled in the chance to spurn Ak-Sar-Ben, and disparaged it with witheringcomments. 
Susie had her own gentler brand of nonconformity. She began to bringWarren into her unusually diverse network of friends. Since high school, she had prided herself on her openness and her commitment to inclusiveness at a time when most people chose friends who were religious, cultural, ethnic, and economic clones. Unlike her own family, Susie did not think this way, and many of her friends¡ªand by this time many of Warren¡¯s¡ªwere Jewish. In segregated Omaha¡ªnot to mention within the Buffett and Thompson families ¡ªchoosingto cross these social lines was a bold, even defiant act. Susie was aware of this, just as she had been aware in high school and college that datinga Jew was considered shocking. Although she came from a prominent family, social status had value to her mostly as a way to make her friends feel more included. Warren, the anti-elitist, found this aspect of Susie highly attractive. And the Jewish friends he¡¯d made at Columbia and while workingfor Graham-Newman had opened his eyes to anti-Semitism. 
In contrast to Susie, Warren¡¯s mother had always been obsessed with fittingin. Leila had researched her ancestry and joined the Daughters of the American Revolution and the Huguenot Society, perhaps searching the past for a stability that she could not find in the present, and certainly not in her immediate family. She had recently received word fromNorfolk State Hospital that her sister Bernice had thrown herself into the river in an apparent suicide attempt. Leila, now responsible for Bernice and their mother, handled their affairs in businesslike fashion, strivingto be a dutifuldaughter while keepingsome distance from the family¡¯s problems. She and her sister Edie went to visit Bernice and their mother periodically, Leila with less enthusiasm. The Stahl family¡¯s history of mentalillness was a threateningand shamefultopic in the Buffett family, just as it was in society as a whole at the time. Ozzie and Harriet Nelson, Ward and June Cleaver, the prototypicalwhite Anglo-Saxon Protestant American families so ubiquitous on television that they seemed to define an idyllic sort of normality, did not have mentally illor suicidalfamily members. The Buffetts¡¯ perception of the family history was further muddied by uncertainty over Stella¡¯s and Bernice¡¯s diagnoses. The doctors could give only vague descriptions of what were clearly serious problems. Obviously, however, the mental illness was inherited, and it manifested in adulthood. Warren and Doris, who were close to their aunt Edie, knew that their mother had grown apart from her as Edie, too, had become more impulsive and moody. They had some suspicions that Leila¡¯s own behavior and personality might be at least partly related to the family lineage. The tickingclock hungover them, and they examined themselves for any signs of abnormality. 
Warren, who desperately wanted to be but had never felt ¡°normal,¡± assuaged his anxiety with statistics, reasoningthat the mysterious disorder seemed to affect only the family¡¯s women. He never dwelled on the unpleasant. He would later come to think of his memory as functioninglike a bathtub. The tub filled with ideas and experiences and matters that interested him. When he had no more use for information, whoosh¡ªthe plugpopped up, and the memory drained away. If new information about a subject appeared, it would replace the old version. If he didn¡¯t want to think about somethingat all, down the drain it went. Certain events, facts, memories, and even people appeared to vanish. Painful memories were the first to be flushed. The water went somewhere, and alongwith it might go context, nuance, and perspective, but what mattered was that it was gone. The bathtub memory¡¯s efficiency freed up enormous amounts of space for the new and the productive. At times, however, disturbingthoughts did bubble up fromsomewhere, as when he expressed concern for other people:for example, severalfriends who cared for mentally ill wives. Buffett thought of the bathtub memory as a helper that allowed him to ¡°look forward,¡± rather than ¡°looking backward¡± allthe time like his mother. And it allowed him, at the age of twenty-six, to ruminate in depth on business to the exclusion of almost everythingelse¡ªin pursuit of his goal of becominga millionaire. 
The fastest way to that goal was to raise more money to manage. In August, he went back to New York to attend the final shareholders¡¯ meetingof the Graham-Newman Corporation. Everyone important on Wall Street seemed to be present at Graham-Newman¡¯s wake. Investor Lou Green, his head wreathed in clouds of 
foul-smellingsmoke froman enormous stogie, towered over themfromhis six-foot-four height.16 He accused Graham of makinga bigmistake. Why had Grahamand Newman not developed talent?he asked. ¡°They¡¯d been workinghere for thirty years buildingup this business,¡± he declared to everyone standingnearby. ¡°And all they would have had to run it was this kid named Warren Buffett. He¡¯s the best they could come up with. 
And who¡¯d want to ride with him?¡±17 
Warren¡¯s long-ago mistake of tellingLou Green that he bought Marshall-Wells ¡°because Ben Grahambought it¡± had now come back to dilute Graham¡¯s endorsement of him in front of an important audience, with unknowable consequences. Yet Graham¡¯s imprimatur had already paid himone important dividend. Homer Dodge, a Harvard-educated physics professor who was the president of Norwich University in Northfield, Vermont, until 1951, and a long-time investor in Graham-Newman, had gone to Grahamand asked him what he should do with his money now that Graham-Newman was shuttingdown. ¡°And Ben said, ¡®Well, I¡¯ve got this fellow who used to work with us that might be a possibility.¡¯¡± 
So one hot Midwestern day that July, Dodge had stopped in Omaha on his way to a vacation out west, a blue canoe strapped to the roof of his woody wagon. ¡°He talked to me for a while and said, ¡®Would you handle my money?¡¯ And I set up a separate partnership for him.¡± 
Dodge gave him$120,000 to manage in the Buffett Fund, Ltd., on September 1, 1956.18 That was more 
money than the original Buffett Associates partnership¡ªan enormous step*19 that made Warren a professionalmoney manager, not just a former stockbroker runninga little money for his family and friends. Now he had invested for someone recommended by Ben Graham.19 
¡°Later in the year, a friend of mine, John Cleary, who used to be my dad¡¯s secretary in Congress, saw in a legal notice that I¡¯d formed this partnership and asked me what it was. I told him about it, and he said, ¡®Well, how about doing it with me?¡¯ So we formed something called B-C, Ltd. That was the third 
20 
partnership. He put in fifty-five thousand dollars.¡± 
With the formation of the B-C partnership on October 1, 1956, Warren was now managingmore than half a million dollars, includinghis own money, which was not in any of the partnerships. He operated out of a tiny study at home that could be entered only by passingthrough the bedroom. He worked odd hours, a night owl like Susie, readingannual reports in his pajamas, drinkingPepsi-Cola and eatingKitty Clover potato chips, enjoyingthe freedomand solitude. He pored over the Moody¡¯s Manuals lookingfor ideas, absorbingstatistics on company after company. Duringthe day, he went to the library and read newspapers and industry trade magazines. As with his boyhood paper route, he took care to handle everythingof value personally, a pleasure in and of itself. He typed his own letters on an IBM typewriter, carefully liningup his letterhead sheet on the carriage. To make copies he slid sheets of blue carbon paper and tissue-thin onionskin behind the first page. He did allhis own filing. He did the bookkeepinghimself and prepared his own tax returns. With its numbers, accuracy, and the measuringof results, the recordkeepingaspect of the job pleased him. 
Every stock certificate was delivered directly to him, made out in the partnerships¡¯ names, rather than left on deposit with a broker as was the usualpractice. When they arrived, he carried them¡ªsmooth cream-colored diplomas in investing, engraved with finely etched drawings of railroads and bald eagles, sea beasts and toga-clad women¡ªdown to the Omaha NationalBank in his own hands and placed themin a safety deposit box. Whenever he sold a stock, he went to the bank, riffled through the collection of certificates, and mailed off the correct ones fromthe post office on 38th Street. The bank would callto let himknow when a dividend check came in to be deposited, and he would go there, examine the check, and endorse it personally. 
He tied up the family¡¯s single telephone line with his daily calls to the handful of brokers he used. His 
expenses were as close to zero as he could get. He listed themby hand on a lined sheet of yellow paper: 31¡é for postage, $15.32 for a Moody¡¯s Manual, $4.00 for the Oil & Gas Journal, $3.08 for telephone calls.21 Except for more meticulous accountingand a great deal more thought, he ran the business much as though he were just anybody tradingstocks through a broker for a personal account. 
At the end of 1956, Warren wrote a letter to the partners outliningthe partnership¡¯s results at year-end. He 
reported that it had earned a totalincome of slightly more than $4,500, beatingthe market by about four percent.22 By then, Dan Monen, his lawyer, had withdrawn fromthe first partnership, with Doc Thompson buyingout his share. Monen had joined Warren on a personalside project that he had been pursuingfor some time:buyingthe stock of an Omaha-based insurer, NationalAmerican Fire Insurance. This company¡¯s worthless stock had been sold to farmers allover Nebraska in 1919 by unscrupulous promoters in exchange 
for the Liberty Bonds issued duringWorld War I.23 Since then, its certificates had lain crumblingin drawers, while their owners gradually lost hope of ever seeingtheir money again. 
Warren had discovered National American while workingat Buffett-Falk, flippingthrough the Moody¡¯s Manual.24 The company was headquartered only a block away from his father¡¯s office. WilliamAhmanson, a prominent Omaha insurance agent, had originally been sucked into it unawares, set up as a localfront man for what had started out as a fraud. But the Ahmanson family had gradually turned it into a legitimate 
company. Now, Howard Ahmanson, William¡¯s son, was feedingtop-drawer insurance business into National American through Home Savings of America, a company he had founded in California, which was becoming one of the largest and most successfulsavings-and-loan companies in the United States.25 
The defrauded farmers had no idea that their molderingpaper was now worth something. Howard had been quietly buyingthe stock back fromthem on the cheap for years through his younger brother Hayden, who ran National American. By now the Ahmansons owned seventy percent of the company. 
Warren admired Howard Ahmanson. ¡°Nobody else was quite as audacious at managing capital as Howard Ahmanson. He was very shrewd in a lot of ways. Formerly, a lot of people came in to Home Savings and paid their mortgages in person. Howard put the mortgage at the farthest branch away from where you lived so that you paid by mail and didn¡¯t spend half an hour of one of his guys¡¯ time telling them about your kids. Everybody else had been to see It¡¯s a Wonderful Life and felt that you should do this Jimmy Stewart stuff, but Howard didn¡¯t want to see his customers. His operating costs were way under anybody else¡¯s.¡± 
National American was earning$29 per share, and Howard¡¯s brother Hayden was buyingits stock for around $30 per share. Thus, as with the rarest and most attractive of the cheap stocks that Warren stalked, the Ahmansons could pay virtually the entire cost of buyinga share of stock out of one year¡¯s profits from that single share. National American was the cheapest stock Warren had ever seen¡ªexcept for Western Insurance. And it was a nice little company, too, not a soggy cigar butt. 
¡°I tried to buy the stock for a long time. But none of it was getting to me, because there was a security dealer in town and Hayden had given this guy the shareholders list. This stockbroker¡ªhe regarded me as a punk kid. But he had the list. And I didn¡¯t have the list. So he was buying the stock at thirty for Hayden¡¯s account.¡± 
Cash on the barrelfromHayden Ahmanson sounded good to some of the farmers compared to their worthless certificates. Though they had paid around $100 per share many years before and were only receiving$30, many of themhad gradually convinced themselves that they were better off without the stock. 
Warren was determined. ¡°I looked it up in some insurance book or something. If you went back to the twenties you could see who were the directors. They made some of these bigger stockholders the directors from the towns they worked the hardest for sales. There was a town called Ewing, Nebraska, which has got no population at all. But somebody sold a lot of stock out there. And that¡¯s how they probably got the local banker on the board thirty-five years earlier.¡± 
So Dan Monen, Warren¡¯s partner and proxy, went off to the countryside carryingwads of Warren¡¯s money 
and some of his own. He cruised around the state in a red-and-white Chevrolet, showingup in rural county courthouses and banks, casually askingwho might own shares of NationalAmerican.26 He sat on front porches, drinkingiced tea, eatingpie with farmers and their wives, and offeringcash for their stock 
certificates.27 
¡°I didn¡¯t want Howard to know because I was topping his price. He had been picking it off at thirty bucks, and I¡¯d had to raise the price some. The shareholders had been listening for probably ten years at thirty bucks, so it was the first time the price moved.¡± 
The first year Warren paid $35 each for five shares of the stock. The farmers¡¯ ears pricked up. Now they realized that buyers were competingfor the stock; they began to think maybe they weren¡¯t better off without it. The price had to keep movingup. ¡°Finally, toward the end, I paid a hundred. That was the magic number, because it was what they¡¯d paid in the first place. A hundred bucks, I knew, would bring out all the stock. And sure enough, one guy came in when Dan Monen was doing this and he said, ¡®We bought this like 
28 
sheep, and we¡¯re selling it like sheep.¡¯¡± 
That they were. Many had sold at less than three times the $29 a year the company was earning. Monen eventually accumulated two thousand shares, ten percent of National American¡¯s stock. Warren kept it in the originalshareholders¡¯ names, with a power of attorney attached that gave himcontrol, rather than transferringit into his name. ¡°That would have tipped Howard off to the fact that I was out there competing with him. He didn¡¯t know. Or, if he did, he had insufficient information. I just kept collecting shares. Then, the day I walked into Hayden¡¯s office, I plopped them all down and said I wanted to transfer them to my 
29 
name. And he said, ¡®My brother¡¯s going to kill me.¡¯ But in the end, he transferred the stock.¡± 
The brainstormbehind Warren¡¯s NationalAmerican coup had been more than just the price. He had learned the value of gatheringas much as possible of somethingscarce. Fromlicense plates to nuns¡¯ fingerprints to coins and stamps, to the Union Street Railway, and National American, he had always thought this way, a 
born collector.30 
Alas, this voracious instinct could steer himawry on occasion. TomKnapp, who had gone to work for a small broker, Tweedy, Browne and Reilly, after helpingJerry Newman close down the remnants of Graham-Newman, came out to visit Warren and to go hear Ben Graham give a speech in Beloit, Wisconsin. Driving through the Iowa cornfields on the way, Knapp mentioned that the U.S. government was about to take the four-cent Blue Eagle stamp out of circulation. The cash register dinged! in Warren¡¯s head. ¡°Let¡¯s stop at a few post offices and see if they have any four-cent stamps,¡± he said on the way back. Knapp went into the first post office and returned to say that it had twenty-eight stamps. ¡°Go buy them,¡± said Buffett. They talked about it some more and decided to write to post offices after they returned home, to offer to buy their stamp inventory. The stamps started comingin a few thousand at a time. Then Denver replied and said they had twenty pads. A pad is a hundred sheets of a hundred stamps. That meant Denver had two hundred thousand stamps. 
¡°We might as wellcontrol the issue,¡± Warren said. They spent $8,000 and bought the pads. 
¡°And that was our mistake,¡± says Knapp. ¡°We should have let the Denver post office send them back to Washington to reduce the supply.¡± 
Through expendingenormous effort to become virtual post offices themselves¡ªwith most of the work done by Knapp¡ªthey gathered more than six hundred thousand Blue Eagle stamps, collectively spendingroughly $25,000. For Warren that was a lot, consideringhis attitude about money and his net worth. They stored the piles of stamps in their basements. And then they realized what they had done. They had laboriously acquired basements full of stamps that would never be worth more than four cents apiece. ¡°When you have so many stamps,¡± Knapp explains, ¡°there are not many collectors.¡± 
So the next task became disposingof the stamps. Warren expertly delegated the problemof gettingrid of $25,000 worth of four-cent stamps to Tom. Then he simply put it out of his mind, except for the funny story, and instead turned back to what was actually important: raisingmoney for the partnerships. In June 1957, another one of the originalpartners, Elizabeth Peterson, Chuck¡¯s mother, asked Warren to set up a fourth 
partnership, to be called Underwood, investinganother $85,000.31 
A few months later, in the summer of 1957, ¡°I got a call from Mrs. Edwin Davis. They used to be customers of the Buffett grocery store. Her husband, Dr. Davis, was a very prominent urologist in town. They lived just a few blocks from here. She said, ¡®I understand you manage money. Would you come down and explain it to us?¡¯¡± 
Dr. Edwin Davis was nationally known. One of his patients, Arthur Wiesenberger of New York City, was one of the most famous money managers of the era. He had at some point come to Omaha to be treated for prostate problems, and Davis became his client. 
Wiesenberger published Investment Companies, an annual ¡°bible¡± on closed-end investment funds. These 
were like publicly traded mutual funds, except that they did not accept new investors. They nearly always sold at a discount to the value of their assets, which made Wiesenberger a proponent of buyingthem.32 In short, they were like mutual-fund cigar butts. The summer before graduate school, Warren had sat in a chair at Buffett-Falk¡¯s office, readingWiesenberger¡¯s bible while Howard worked. ¡°Before I went to Columbia,¡± he says, ¡°I used to spend hours and hours reading that book from cover to cover, religiously.¡± He bought two of Wiesenberger¡¯s cigar butts, United States & International Securities and Selected Industries, which in 
1950 had made up more than two-thirds of his assets.33 While at Graham-Newman, he also managed to meet Wiesenberger and had impressed him, ¡°even though I wasn¡¯t very impressive in those days.¡± 
In 1957, Wiesenberger called Dr. Davis out of the blue and explained that, although it was not necessarily in 
his own interest to do so, he was recommendinga youngman to him. ¡°I tried to hire himmyself,¡± said Wiesenberger, ¡°but he was forminga partnership and so I couldn¡¯t.¡±34 He urged Davis to consider investing with Buffett. 
Shortly afterward, Warren scheduled a meetingwith the Davis family on a Sunday afternoon. ¡°I went down to their place and sat in their living room and talked to them for about an hour. I said, ¡®Here¡¯s how I manage money and the arrangement I have.¡¯ I was probably twenty-six. I looked about twenty years old at the time.¡± Actually, he looked more like eighteen, accordingto Eddie Davis: ¡°His collar was open; his coat was too big. He talked so very fast.¡± At the time, Warren went around Omaha wearinga mangy sweater ¡ªwhich one person observed probably should have been given to Goodwill¡ªan old pair of pants, and scuffed shoes. ¡°I acted immature for my age,¡± Buffett recalls. ¡°The kind of things I talked about were what you would expect from a much younger person.¡± In fact, there was still more than a trace of the hand-drumming, ¡°Mammy¡±-singingboy fromPenn. ¡°You had to overlook a lot back then.¡± 
Yet not when he was talkingabout the partnerships. Warren was not there to sellthe Davises. He laid out his ground rules. He wanted absolute control over the money and would tellhis partners nothingabout how it was invested. That was the stickingpoint. Not for him was Ben Graham¡¯s handicap of people ridingon his coattails. And his solution to the problemof people beingdisappointed was that he wasn¡¯t goingto give them the score after every hole, only once a year after playingeighteen holes. They would get an annual summary of his performance, and they could put money in or withdraw it only on December 31. The rest of the year, their money would be locked into the partnership. 
¡°All the while, Eddie paid no attention to me. Dorothy Davis listened very intently, asking good questions. Eddie was over in the corner doing nothing. He seemed like a very old guy to me, but he was not yet seventy. When we got all the way through, Dorothy turned to Eddie and said, ¡®What do you think?¡¯ Eddie said, ¡®Let¡¯s give him a hundred thousand dollars.¡¯ In a much more polite way, I said, ¡®Dr. Davis, you know, I¡¯m delighted to get this money. But you weren¡¯t really paying a lot of attention to me while I was talking. How come you¡¯re doing it?¡¯ 
35 
¡°And he said, ¡®Well, you remind me of Charlie Munger.¡¯ 
¡°I said, ¡®Well, I don¡¯t know who Charlie Munger is, but I really like him.¡¯¡± 
But the other reason the Davises were so willingto invest with Warren was because, to their surprise, he ¡°knew more about Arthur Wiesenberger than they did.¡±36 They also liked the way he laid out his terms¡ªclear and transparent, so they knew whose side he was on. He would win or lose alongwith them. As 
Dorothy Davis put it, ¡°He¡¯s smart, he¡¯s bright, and I can tell he¡¯s honest. I like everythingabout this young man.¡± On August 5, 1957, the money fromthe Davises and their three children seeded the fifth partnership with $100,000. It was called Dacee.37 
With Dacee, Warren¡¯s business jumped another legupward. He could now land bigger positions in larger 
stocks. In his personalportfolio, he still played with things like the ¡°penny¡± uraniumstocks that had been in vogue a few years earlier when the government was buyinguranium. These were now fantastically cheap.38 Warren bought companies like Hidden Splendor, Stanrock, Northspan. ¡°There were some attractive issues¡ªit was shooting fish in a barrel. They weren¡¯t huge fish, but you were shooting them in a barrel. You knew you were going to make good money. It was minor. The bigger stuff I was putting in the partnerships.¡± 
Havingnew partners meant more money, of course, but it also meant that the number of stock certificates and amount of paperwork managingthe five partnerships plus Buffett & Buffett increased substantially. He had to hustle, but it felt good. The shortfall, as always, was money¡ªhe never seemed to have enough. The kind of companies he was researchingoften had market values of one to ten million dollars, so he wanted as much as $100,000 to get a significant position in their stocks. Gettingmore money to manage was key. 
By this time Dan Monen was ready to get back into the partnership, and he and his wife, Mary Ellen, formed the nucleus of Warren¡¯s sixth partnership, Mo-Buff, on May 5, 1958. Thanks mostly to NationalAmerican, the Monens, who had had only $5,000 to invest two years earlier, were now able to put in $70,000.39 
At the time, Warren Buffett probably understood the potential of money management to beget more money 
better than anyone on Wall Street. Every dollar added to a partnership would net hima share of what he earned for his partners.40 Each of those dollars, reinvested, would generate earnings of its own. 41 Those earnings, reinvested, would beget stillmore earnings. The better his performance, the more he would earn, and the larger his share of the partnerships would grow, enablinghimto earn even more. His talent for investingcould exploit that potential of managingmoney to the hilt. And despite Warren¡¯s apparent awkwardness, he was indisputably successful at merchandisinghimself. Even though he was nearly invisible in the investingworld, the snowballwas startingto roll. 
With momentumbehind him, Warren realized it was time to leave a house where there was barely roomfor a family with two youngchildren¡ªone an unusually energetic three-and-a-half-year-old¡ªand a third on the way. The Buffetts bought their first house. It stood on Farnam Street, a Dutch Cape set back on a large corner lot overlooked by evergreens, next to one of Omaha¡¯s busiest thoroughfares. While the largest house on the block, it had an unpretentious and charmingair, with dormers set into the slopingshingled roof and an 
eyebrow window.42 Warren paid $31,500 to SamReynolds, a local businessman, and promptly named it ¡°Buffett¡¯s Folly.¡±43 In his mind $31,500 was a million dollars after compoundingfor a dozen years or so, because he could invest it at such an impressive rate of return. Thus, he felt as though he were spendingan outrageous million dollars on the house. 
Just before the movingvan left the house on Underwood Avenue, Warren took five-year-old Little Susie back up the stairs to the wrought-iron balcony. ¡°The glasses man is stayinghere,¡± he said. ¡°You need to say good-bye to him.¡± Susie Jr. said good-bye, and, indeed, the glasses man remained behind.44 
BigSusie¡¯s job was to oversee the move, get themsettled into the house, and lasso Howie while more than eight months pregnant with her third child. As longtime friends observed, Howie was a ¡°hell-raiser.¡± The inexhaustible Buffett energy poured fromhimin such a whirlwind that he was nicknamed the Tornado, a cousin to Warren¡¯s childhood nickname, Firebolt¡ªbut with a very different connotation. As soon as Howie could walk, says Buffett, he became peripatetic. He dugup the garden with his Tonka toys, and Susie took them away, then he tore the house apart to find them. Once he did, he dugthe garden up again. Susie 
snatched away the front-loader, and the battle repeated itself.45 
A week after arrivingat FarnamStreet and just a day before the Mo-Buff partnership was born, the Buffetts¡¯ 
second son, Peter, arrived. Fromthe start he was a quiet, easy baby. But shortly after his birth, Susie came down with a kidney infection.46 Since her rheumatic fever and ear infections as a child, she had always considered herself healthy. The kidney infection did not concern her as much as shieldingWarren from dealingwith it; his discomfort around illness was so great that she had trained the family to pay attention to him whenever somebody got sick, as if he, too, were illand required care. Her real focus was on havinga home of her own at last. Even illness and the demands of caringfor a new baby and two smallchildren could not suppress her urge to decorate. As it sprangto life, she redid the house in cheery contemporary style, with chrome-and-leather furniture and huge, bright modern paintings coveringthe white walls. The $15,000 decoratingbilltotaled almost half of what the house itself had cost, which ¡°just about killed Warren,¡± 
accordingto Bob Billig, a golfingpal.47 He didn¡¯t notice colors or respond to visualaesthetics and so was indifferent to the result, seeingonly the outrageous bill. 
¡°Do I really want to spend $300,000 for this haircut?¡± was his attitude. If Susie wanted to spend some trifling sum of money, he would say, ¡°I¡¯mnot sure I want to blow $500,000 that way.¡±48 But since Susie wanted to spend money that he wanted to withhold, and since he wanted Susie to be happy and she wanted to please him, their personalities were gradually meshinginto a system of bargainingand trades. 
The outrageous bill included the cost of a device that became an object of wonderment amongtheir friends 
and neighbors¡ªone of the first color television sets in Omaha.49 Susie liked havingher house as the hub of the neighborhood, so before long, on Saturday mornings, allthe kids fromthe block would pile onto the black 50 
leather sofa in the little TVroomand watch cartoons. 
Willa Johnson, a large, capable black housekeeper who quietly became Susie¡¯s extra set of hands, eyes, and ears, joined the household, freeingSusie to find an outlet for her creativity. She and a friend, Thama Friedman, decided to set up a contemporary art gallery. As with everythinginvolvingmoney, the decision had to be cleared with Warren. Before forkingover Susie¡¯s share, he ¡°interviewed¡± themin his sittingroom and asked, ¡°Do you expect to make money?¡± Friedman answered, ¡°No,¡± whereupon Buffett replied, ¡°Okay, 
Susie can come in as an ¡®investor.¡¯¡±51 He liked the idea of her doingsomethingof her own and, accordingto Friedman, wanted themto step back and think about the gallery in a businesslike way while beingrealistic that it was a hobby. Warren always thought of money in terms of the return on capital laid out, and since the gallery wasn¡¯t goingto make a profit, he wanted them to limit their spending. Susie¡¯s involvement in the gallery was truly a hobby, says Friedman, who managed it day to day. 
Susie was considered a flexible, easygoing, but attentive mother by her friends and relatives. Now that the Buffetts lived closer to both their parents, the children spent more time with their grandparents. The atmosphere at the Thompsons¡¯, a block and a half away, was relaxed and enjoyable; they didn¡¯t care if Howie broke a window or the kids made a mess. Dorothy Thompson got into the spirit of things, playing games, organizingEaster egghunts, and makingelaborate multilayered ice-cream cones. The children loved Doc Thompson, despite his sober self-importance and the way he pontificated. Once he sat Howie on his knee. ¡°Don¡¯t drink alcohol,¡± he said, over and over. ¡°It will killyour brain cells, and you don¡¯t have any to 
waste.¡±52 
On Sundays, Doc Thompson sometimes came over and preached in a jelly-bean-colored suit right in Warren and Susie¡¯s livingroom. Otherwise, Howie and Susie Jr. went to the Buffetts¡¯, where Leila towed themoff to church. Compared to the Thompsons, she and Howard seemed stiff and straitlaced. Howard remained such a Victorian throwback that when he called Doris and Warren with news about their sister Bertie, he could only choke out, ¡°All hell¡¯s broken loose!¡± They finally managed to discover, fromsomeone else, that she had lost her baby. Howard couldn¡¯t bringhimself to say the word ¡°miscarriage.¡± 
With their large new house, Warren and Susie began to play host for the families. At her first family Thanksgivingdinner, Susie prepared the turkey herself, thinkingthe easy way would be to cook it overnight at 100 degrees. After the turkey fellapart, she called on Mrs. Hegman, a cook inherited fromLeila, to come and help. Someone other than Warren had to carve, however, since he was useless with a knife. And at family gatherings when his mother was present, as soon as he could get away with it, he disappeared upstairs to work. 
Susie had covered Warren¡¯s new little office off the master bedroom with greenback-patterned wallpaper. Comfortably surrounded by money, he now set about buyingcheap stocks as fast as his fingers could fly through the Moody¡¯s Manuals:businesses that sold basic items or commodities that could be easily valued, like Davenport Hosiery, Meadow River Coal & Land, Westpan Hydrocarbon, and Maracaibo Oil Exploration. For the partnership, for himself, for Susie, or for all of these whenever he had money, he put it to work as fast as he could bringit through the door. 
Often he needed secrecy to execute his ideas and he used intelligent, willingpeople like Dan Monen to act as his proxies. Another of these proxies was DanielCowin, a value hunter who worked for the small brokerage firm Hettleman & Co. in New York. Warren had met Dan through their late friend fromColumbia, Fred 
Kuhlken.53 Hettleman made investments in little stocks with capitalizations of a few million, often the kind of obscure bargains that Warren liked. 
¡°Fred had written and described Dan as a young star on Wall Street and said we were made for each other. I immediately decided that Fred was one hundred percent right on both counts. In the next few years, Dan 
54 
and I were constantly together whenever I visited New York.¡± 
Cowin was nine years older, with deep-set eyes and a penetratinggaze. When the two of them were together, it seemed, on the surface, like a grown man hobnobbingwith a college boy, but they had much in common. Cowin had grown up poor duringthe Depression after his father lost the family¡¯s money, and as a teenager he 
had supported his family. He put the money he got for a thirteenth-birthday gift into stocks.55 He gravitated toward a career in investingafter his Navy service, workingindependently even at an investment house, keepinghis ideas to himself. Unlike Buffett, however, he had a strongappreciation for cutting-edge art, was creative around the house¡ªsprayingpinecones silver for the Christmas dinner table¡ªand collected photography and antiques. What attracted Buffett to him was that Cowin traded welland worked his own 
ideas.56 Cowin had also endeared himself to Warren early on, when he was at Graham-Newman, by lending 
him $50,000 for a week so that Warren could buy some mutual-fund shares to achieve a thousand-dollar tax saving.57 Over time, they collaborated, with Dan the baldingsenior partner: more experienced and with more money to invest, but sharinginformation and ideas. 
Buffett and Cowin used to call each other weekly when the Pink Sheets that listed small stocks came out, and 
compare notes. ¡°Did you get that one?¡± ¡°Yes! I bought that, that¡¯s mine!¡±¡ªboth feelinglike winners when they had picked the same ones. ¡°It was like pickinga horse,¡± says Dan¡¯s wife, Joyce.58 They thought about takingover the National Casket Company, code-namingit the Container Company. ¡°Dan was a digger,¡± Buffett says, ¡°which I guess makes sense.¡± 
Once, Buffett says, they had even tried to buy a Maryland ¡°town¡± that the FederalHousingAuthority was auctioningoff for peanuts:it consisted of the post office, the town hall, and a large number of rental properties that were chargingbelow-market rents. The town had been built duringthe Depression. Buffett recalls that the ad for the town made themsalivate with Snidely Whiplash dreams of quickly raisingthe rents to a market rate. But even for ¡°peanuts,¡± the town was expensive and they couldn¡¯t get together enough 
cash.59 
Warren could never get enough cash. He was always tryingto raise money. The Grahamconnection was about to pay off again. Bernie Sarnat¡ªa pioneer in plastic and reconstructive surgery¡ªwent to have a chat one day with Ben Graham, his wife¡¯s first cousin. Ben had moved across the street from the Sarnats when he and Estey retired to California. Sarnat says he asked Graham what he should do with his money now, ¡°what little money he had in his partnership. Well,¡± recalls Sarnat, ¡°he said, ¡®Oh, buy AT&T,¡¯ and he handed me shares in three closed-end funds and some stock. And then he very casually mentioned, ¡®One of my former students is doingsome investing. Warren Buffett.¡¯ And that was it. So casually that I didn¡¯t even pick it up.¡± 
Hardly anybody knew Warren Buffett. He might as well have been a patch of moss hidden under a rock in Omaha. Sarnat¡¯s wife, Rhoda, a social worker, took a walk every day with her cousin-in-law Estey. ¡°One day not longafter,¡± she recalls, ¡°Estey said to me, ¡®Listen, Rhoda, people are always approachingus to invest in their partnerships, because if they can tellpeople that Ben Grahaminvests in them, they have it made. We say no to everybody. But that Warren Buffett¡ªhe has potential. We¡¯re investingwith him, and you¡¯d better do it too.¡¯ 
¡°My only question was,¡± says Rhoda, ¡°¡®Estey, I know you think he¡¯s bright, but I¡¯mmore interested in whether he¡¯s honest.¡¯ Estey said, ¡®Absolutely. Totally. I trust hima hundred percent.¡¯¡± The Sarnats and Estey Graham put $10,000 and $15,000, respectively, into Mo-Buff. By then, the Monens¡¯ investment had grown to $100,000. 
Some of the students in Warren¡¯s investingclasses had also joined the partnerships, as had Wally Keenan, his former Dale Carnegie instructor. In fact, by 1959, he was gettingsomewhat of a name around town, in part through his teaching. No longer hidden, his qualities¡ªgood and bad¡ªhad begun to be recognized in Omaha. The side of himthat had taken the counterposition in the teenage radio show American School of the Air came across in Omaha as brash, a know-it-all. ¡°I used to love to take the opposite side of any argument,¡± he says, ¡°no matter what. I could turn in a second.¡± People thought it was nervy of himto ask for money to invest without tellingthemwhat he would be buying. ¡°There were people in Omaha who thought what I was doing was some sort of Ponzi scheme,¡± he recalls. It had repercussions. When Warren had reapplied for full membership in the Omaha Country Club, he was blackballed. To be blackballed fromthe country club was a serious matter; someone disliked himenough to show it in a tangible and embarrassingway. It was one thing to identify with outsiders, but he also wanted to belong. Besides, Warren liked to play golf, and the club had a good course. Through connections, he worked at it until he got off the blacklist. 
But his talents shone through to many more people now, and brought him partners of increasingprominence. In February 1959, Casper Offutt and his son, Cap Jr., members of one of Omaha¡¯s most prominent families, approached himabout a partnership of their own. When Warren explained that they would not know what he was buying, Cap Sr. said, ¡°Well, I¡¯mnot goingto put any money in if I don¡¯t know what it is, if you¡¯ve got 
complete control and I don¡¯t have any voice in it.¡±60 But Cap Jr., together with his brother John and William Glenn, a businessman for whom Chuck Peterson managed real estate properties, invested anyway. They put $50,000 into Glenoff, the seventh partnership. 
And allthe while that Warren was investingduringthese early years of the partnerships, he never deviated from the principles of Ben Graham. Everythinghe bought was extraordinarily cheap, cigar butts all, soggy stogies containingone free puff. But that was before he met Charlie Munger. 
23 
TheOmahaClub 
Omaha . 1959 
Like a steel bank vault door, the arched portals of the Omaha Club swungclosed behind the bankers and insurance men and railroad executives of the city as George, the black doorman, welcomed theminside. Come from playingsquash in the basement or from their offices downtown, the men loitered by the tiled fireplace in the front hall, chattinguntil the women entered through a separate side door in the building¡¯s Italian Renaissance facade to join them. The assembled parties ascended the curvingmahogany staircase to the second floor, passingon the way the life-size paintingof a Scotsman catchinga trout in a stream. The Omaha Club was where the town came to dance, to raise money, to get married, and to celebrate anniversaries. But above all, it was where the town came to do business, for at its tables you were left to talk in peace. 
One summer Friday in 1959, Buffett strode through the club¡¯s entrance to have lunch with two of his partners, NealDavis and his brother-in-law Lee Seeman, who had arranged for himto meet Davis¡¯s best friend since childhood. It was Neal¡¯s father, Dr. Eddie Davis, who had said to Warren, ¡°You remind me of Charlie Munger¡± when the Davises had joined the partnership. Now Munger was in town to settle his father¡¯s 
1
estate. 
Munger knew only a few facts about the crew-cut Buffett kid, six years his junior. But, consistent with his expectations of life in general, his expectations of this meetingwere not high.2 He had developed the habit of expectinglittle so as never to be disappointed. And rarely did Charles T. Munger meet anyone to whomhe enjoyed listeningas much as himself. 
The Mungers had started in poverty, but by the latter part of the nineteenth century, T. C. Munger, Charlie¡¯s grandfather, a federal judge, had brought the family to prominence, welcome in every drawingroomin Omaha¡ªrather than only at the back door, deliveringgroceries, like the Buffetts. Judge Munger, an iron disciplinarian, had forced the whole family to read Robinson Crusoe to absorb the book¡¯s portrayal of the conquest of nature through discipline. He was known for givinglonger jury instructions than any judge in the 
middle west.3 He liked to lecture his relatives on the virtue of savingand the vices of gamblingand saloons. Charlie¡¯s straitlaced aunt Ufie, who listened, had ¡°kept hard at two separate careers until past eighty, 
dominated her church, saved her money, and, duty-ridden, attended as a matter of course her beloved husband¡¯s autopsy.¡±4 
Judge Munger¡¯s son Al followed his father into the law, becominga respectable but not rich attorney who counted amonghis clients the Omaha World-Herald and other important localinstitutions. Lighthearted, unlike his father, he was often seen enjoyinga pipe, hunting, or catchinga fish. His son later said of him that Al Munger ¡°achieved exactly what he wished to achieve, no more or less¡­with less fuss than either his 
father or his son, each of whomspent considerable time foreseeingtroubles that never happened.¡±5 
Al¡¯s wife, the beautiful, witty Florence ¡°Toody¡± Russell, came fromanother clan raised on duty and moral rectitude, an enterprisingfamily of New England intellectuals known for what Charlie referred to as ¡°plenty of plain livingand high thinking.¡± When she announced she was marryingAlMunger, her elderly grandmother observed his thick spectacles and five-foot, five-and-a-half-inch frame and was flabbergasted. ¡°Whoever would have thought she had the sense?¡± she supposedly exclaimed. 
Al and Toody Munger had three children:Charles, Carol, and Mary. A photograph of Charlie as an infant shows him already wearingthe petulant expression so typicalof himlater in life. At Dundee Elementary School, his most prominent features were a pair of huge elfin ears and, when he chose to reveal it, a broad smile. He was recognized as intelligent, ¡°lively,¡± and ¡°too independent-minded to bow down to meet certain 
teachers¡¯ expectations,¡± accordingto his sister CarolEstabrook.6 ¡°Smart, and a smarty,¡± is how the Mungers¡¯ neighbor Dorothy Davis recalls Charlie from his earliest childhood.7 Mrs. Davis tried to control Charlie¡¯s influence on her son, Neal, but nothingtamed Charlie¡¯s mouth, not even the sight of her with a switch in her hand, comingafter the boys to lash their bare calves. 
Warren had borne the indignities of childhood with only brief rebellion before learningto hide his misery and adopt artfulstrategies to cope. Too proud to submit, Charlie suffered through the woes of youth by employinghis talent for woundingsarcasm. Matched as a dance partner every single Friday at Addie Fogg¡¯s dance class with Mary McArthur, the only girlshorter than he, Charlie made no secret of his irritation at the 
routine that emphasized his status as the second-shortest child in the class.8 At Central High School, he gained the nickname ¡°Brains¡± and a reputation for hyperactiveness¡ªand for beingaloof.9 
From a family that treasured learning, he grew up intellectually ambitious and enrolled in the University of Michigan at seventeen, majoringin mathematics. He enlisted in the Army a year after PearlHarbor, halfway through his sophomore year. While in the service he attended the University of New Mexico and California Institute of Technology for credits in meteorology, though he never actually graduated. After more coursework he worked in Nome, Alaska, as an Army meteorologist. Later, Munger would make a point of sayingthat he never saw active duty and would emphasize his luck in havingbeen stationed out of harm¡¯s way. The main risk that he took was financial:He augmented his army pay by playingpoker. He found he was good at it. It turned out to be his version of the racetrack. He said he learned to fold fast when odds were bad and bet heavily when they were good, lessons he would use to advantage later in life. 
With the help of well-oiled family connections, he brazened his way into Harvard Law Schoolafter the war without ever havingfinished his undergraduate degree.10 By then he was married to Nancy Huggins, an impulsive match entered into when he was twenty-one and she nineteen. He had sprouted into a medium-
height, well-dressed youngman whose close-cut dark hair and alert eyes gave hima polished look. But his most prominent feature¡ªapart fromhis ears, now only slightly winged fromhis skull¡ªwas a hallmark skeptical expression. He wore it often while racingthrough Harvard¡ªwithout learninganything, he says. 11 
Then, he later told his friends, he looked at a map and asked himself, ¡°What city is growingand full of 
opportunity, so that I could make a lot of money, but not so bigand welldeveloped that it would be hard to rise into the ranks of the city¡¯s prominent men?¡± He chose Los Angeles.12 Pasadena¡ªthe gracious old Spanish-flavored Los Angeles suburb where he had attended Caltech¡ªhad impressed him. It was there that he had met his wife, the daughter of a locally prominent family. Nancy was ¡°willful, indulged,¡± says her 
daughter Molly, not exactly idealtraits given her new husband¡¯s temperament.13 Within a few years their marriage was in trouble. Nonetheless, after Harvard they hightailed it back to her hometown, with their son, Teddy, and settled in Pasadena, where Charlie became a successful lawyer. 
By 1953, after three children and eight years of incompatibility, fighting, and misery, Munger found himself divorcingat a time when divorce was a disgrace. Despite their problems, he and Nancy worked out a civilized arrangement regardingtheir son and two daughters. Munger moved into a room at the University Club, bought a dented yellow Pontiac with a bad paint job ¡°to discourage gold diggers,¡± and became a devoted 
Saturday father.14 Then, within a year of the separation, Teddy, now eight years old, was diagnosed with leukemia. Munger and his ex-wife scoured the medicalcommunity but quickly discovered the disease was incurable. They sat in the leukemia ward with the other parents and grandparents in different stages of 
watchingtheir children waste away. 15 
Teddy was in and out of the hospital often. Charlie would visit, hold himin his arms, then walk the streets of Pasadena, cryingfor his son. He found the combination of his failed marriage and his son¡¯s terminal illness almost unbearable. The loneliness of livingas a divorced single father in the 1950s also chafed at him. He felt a failure without an intact family, and wanted to live surrounded by children. 
When things went wrong, Munger would set out toward new goals rather than let himself dwell on the 
negative.16 That could come across as pragmatic, or even callous, but he viewed it as keepingthe horizon in sight. ¡°You should never, when facingsome unbelievable tragedy, let one tragedy increase into two or three through your failure of will,¡± he would later say. 17 
So even as he cared for his dyingson, Munger decided to marry again. His method of analyzingthe odds of a successful match made him pessimistic, however. 
¡°Charlie was despairing over whether he would ever meet anyone else. ¡®How can I find somebody? Out of twenty million people in California, half are women. Of these ten million, only two million are of an appropriate age. From that group, a million and a half would be married, leaving five hundred thousand. Three hundred thousand of them are too dumb, fifty thousand are too smart, and of the remaining hundred fifty thousand, the number I would want to marry would fit on a basketball court. I¡¯ve got to find one of those. And then I¡¯ve got to be on her basketball court.¡¯¡± 
Munger¡¯s mental habit of settinglow expectations was wellestablished. He equated this with the route to happiness, since he felt that high expectations led to fault-finding. Low expectations made it harder to be disappointed. Paradoxically, however, they could also confound success. 
Out of desperation, Munger started reviewingdivorce and death notices to find newly single women. That got his friends¡¯ attention. Thinkingthis pathetic, they began to intervene. One of his law partners came up with another Nancy, a divorc¨¦e with two youngboys. Nancy Barry Borthwick, a petite brunette, played tennis avidly, skied, and golfed. She was also a PhiBeta Kappa economics graduate of Stanford. 
On their first date he warned her, ¡°I¡¯mdidactic.¡± The thought of a man infected by the urge to preach failed to put Nancy off, which augured wellfor their relationship. They started takingtheir children on outings. At first Teddy went alongwith them, but he soon became too ill. Later, thirty-one-year-old Charlie spent much of his son¡¯s finalweeks sittingby Teddy¡¯s bedside. By the time Teddy died in 1955 at age nine, Charlie had lost between ten and fifteen pounds. ¡°I can¡¯t imagine any experience in life worse than losinga child inch by 
inch,¡± he said later.18 
Charlie married Nancy Borthwick in January 1956. She quickly became his ballast. He desperately needed someone to arrange his life. Nancy had moxie, prickingCharlie¡¯s balloon without hesitation when it inflated with too much hot air. She was an excellent manager, observant, calm, reasonable, and practical. Nancy curbed his caprices when Charlie took off on occasional bolts of impulsiveness. In time, they added three sons and a daughter to his two girls and her two boys. She set about raisingeight children while keeping 
house and takingcare of Charlie.19 He became known to his children as a ¡°book with legs,¡± constantly studyingscience and the achievements of great men. Meanwhile, he continued seekinghis fortune at the law firm of Musick, Peeler & Garrett, but realized that the law would not make him rich. He began to develop 
some profitable sidelines. ¡°Charlie, as a very young lawyer, was probably getting $20 an hour. He thought to himself, ¡®Who¡¯s my most valuable client?¡¯ And he decided it was himself. So he decided to sell himself an hour each day. He did it early in the morning, working on these construction projects and real estate deals. Everybody should do this, be the client, and then work for other people, too, and sell yourself an hour a day.¡± 
¡°I had a considerable passion to get rich,¡± Munger said. ¡°Not because I wanted Ferraris¡ªI wanted the 
independence. I desperately wanted it. I thought it was undignified to have to send invoices to other people. I don¡¯t know where I got that notion from, but I had it.¡±20 He saw himself as the gentleman squire. Money wasn¡¯t a competition to him. He wanted to join the right clubs but he didn¡¯t care whether the other members were richer than him. Beneath the surface arrogance, his deep respect for authentic achievement gave him a genuine humility that would be crucial in forminga relationship with the man he was about to meet. 
That man who sat across fromhimin a private roomof the Omaha Club and started to talk was dressed like a youngish salesman come to sellinsurance to the gentleman squire. The worldly Munger by now was well ensconced in Los Angeles business and society, and looked the part. As soon as the Davises and Seemans had made the introductions, however, the two fell into a t¨ºte-¨¤-t¨ºte. Charlie allowed that he had actually ¡°slaved¡± a short stint at the Buffett grocery store, where ¡°you were just goddamn busy from the first hour of 
morninguntil night.¡±21 Ernest had let the sons of favored customers like Toody Munger loaf, however, at least compared to the rest of the beleaguered clerks.22 After the pleasantries, the conversation picked up speed and the rest of the party listened, rapt, as Warren began to talk about investingand Ben Graham. Charlie grasped the concepts right away. ¡°He had spent plenty of time thinking about investing and business by then,¡± Buffett says. 
He told Charlie the story of National American insurance. Munger had gone to Central High with Howard and Hayden Ahmanson. He was amazed that someone like Buffett, who was not from California, could know so much about the Ahmansons and their savings and loan. Before long, the two men were talking 
simultaneously, yet they seemed to understand each other perfectly.23 After a while, Charlie asked, ¡°Warren, what do you do specifically?¡± 
Well, I¡¯ve got these partnerships, Buffett explained, and I do this, and this, and that. In 1957, he said, his 
partnerships had earned over ten percent in a year when the market had declined over eight percent. The next year the partnerships¡¯ investments had risen more than forty percent in value.24 Buffett¡¯s fees so far from managingthe partnerships, reinvested, came to $83,085. These fees had mushroomed his initial 
contribution of only $700¡ª$100 contributed to each of the seven partnerships25¡ªinto a stake worth 9.5 percent of the combined value of all the partnerships. Moreover, his performance was well on its way to beatingthe Dow again in 1959, which would make himricher stilland raise his stake again. Meanwhile, his investors were thrilled; new partners kept joining. Charlie listened. Eventually he asked, ¡°Do you think that I could do somethinglike that out in California?¡± Warren paused for a moment and looked at him. This was an unconventional question comingfroma successfulLos Angeles lawyer. ¡°Yeah,¡± he said, ¡°I¡¯mquite sure you 
could do it.¡±26 As the luncheon wound its way to an end, the Seemans and the Davises decided it was time to go. When they got on the elevator, their last sight was of Buffett and Munger, still sittingat the table, engrossed.27 
A few nights later, the two men took their wives to Johnny¡¯s Caf¨¦, a red-velvet steak joint, where Munger became so self-intoxicated at one of his own jokes that he slipped out of the booth and began rollingon the floor with laughter. When the Mungers returned to Los Angeles, the conversation continued in installments, the two men talkingon the phone for an hour or two with increasingfrequency. Buffett, once obsessed with Ping-Pong, had found something far more interesting. 
¡°Why are you payingso much attention to him?¡± Nancy asked her husband. 
¡°You don¡¯t understand,¡± said Charlie. ¡°That is no ordinary human being.¡±28 
24 
TheLocomotive 
New York City and Omaha . 1958¨C1962 
Warren and Susie seemed like ordinary people. They kept a low profile. Their house was large but not ostentatious. It had a logcabin in the backyard for the kids. The back door was never locked; neighborhood children wandered in and out. Inside the house, the Buffetts clickety-clacked on their different tracks at gatheringspeed. As Susie added stop after stop to her localschedule, Warren headed out on a nonstop trip to Dollar Mountain. 
Until1958, his straightforward route was to buy a stock and wait for the cigar butt to light. Then he usually sold the stock, sometimes with regret, to buy another he wanted more, his ambitions limited by his partnerships¡¯ capital. 
Now, however, he was managingmore than $1 million in seven partnerships plus Buffett & Buffett and his personal money, 1 which let him operate on a different scale. His network of business pals like Stanback, Knapp, Brandt, Cowin, Schloss, and Ruane had grown by the addition of Munger; the two of themran up outrageous¡ªby their standards¡ªphone bills every month. Munger had introduced himto his friend Roy Tolles, a lanky former Marine fighter pilot who wore a constant placid smile and kept the thoughts inside his quick mind to himself¡ªexcept for the occasional barbed zingers he had a way of throwingout, which made people ¡°want to keep a few Band-Aids around,¡± as one friend put it. Buffett, like Munger, could parry and riposte with the best, and added Tolles to his collection. This knack for signingup volunteers to his cause had created a large, if loosely organized, support structure. Warren more or less automatically Tom-Sawyered these supporters, hived off into several cells, into helpinghis interests, which had grown so fast that he could no longer carry out every detailof themby himself. 
The days when Warren simply sat in his study at home, pickingstocks out of Security Analysis or the Moody¡¯s Manuals, were gone. Increasingly, he began to work on large-scale, lucrative projects that required time and planningto execute¡ªeven more so than buyingup the shares of NationalAmerican insurance. These projects would sometimes evolve into complicated, even dramatic episodes that would absorb his attention for months, or occasionally years, at a stretch. Sometimes severalof these investingprojects operated simultaneously. Already preoccupied to the point that he was barely present to his family much of the time, this expansion of scale would exacerbate that tendency, while bindinghim more tightly to his friends. 
The first of these complicated episodes involved a company called Sanborn Map. It published minutely 
detailed maps of power lines, water mains, driveways, buildingengineering, roof composition, and emergency stairwells for allthe cities of the United States, maps that were mainly bought by insurance companies.2 The business was no winner, its customer base slowly shrinkingas insurers merged. But its stock was cheap at $45 per share, since Sanborn¡¯s investment portfolio alone was worth $65 per share. To get hold of that investment portfolio, however, Warren needed not just money from his partnerships but also help fromother people. 
Beginningin November 1958, he put more than one-third of the partnerships¡¯ assets into Sanborn. He bought the stock for himself and for Susie. He had his aunt Alice, his father, his mother, his sisters, allbuy it. He passed the Sanborn idea alongto Cowin, to Stanback, to Knapp, and to Schloss. Some people got in on it as a favor from him. He took an override¡ªa percentage of the profits¡ªfromothers as a way of leveraginghis capital. To get more shares under his control, he added Don Danly, his pinball-and-pilferage palfrom high school; his father¡¯s best friend, Vic Spittler; Dottie¡¯s husband, Homer Rogers; and Howard Browne, the head of Tweedy, Browne and Reilly, the brokerage firmwhere TomKnapp worked. He also put Catherine Elberfeld and Anne Gottschaldt, the aunt and mother of his friend Fred Kuhlken, into the stock. Since he had still not brought Gottschaldt and Elberfeld into a partnership, this strongly suggested that he thought Sanborn was a sure thing. Eventually he controlled enough of Sanborn¡¯s shares to be elected to the board. 
In March 1959, Warren took one of his regular trips to New York, stayingout on LongIsland at Anne Gottschaldt¡¯s little white colonialhouse. By now she and her sister had adopted himas a sort of surrogate son, as if to replace the long-dead Fred. Warren kept spare sets of underwear and pajamas at her house, and Gottschaldt made himhamburgers for breakfast. On these journeys, he always set out with a list of between ten and thirty things he wanted to accomplish. He would go to the Standard & Poor¡¯s library to look up some information. He would visit some companies, visit some brokers, and always spend time with Brandt, Cowin, Schloss, Knapp, and Ruane, his New York City network. 
This particular trip was lengthy, about ten days. He had sit-downs with prospects for the partnership and another important appointment: his first meetingas a board member at Sanborn Map. 
Sanborn¡¯s board consisted almost entirely of insurance-company representatives¡ªits biggest customers¡ªso 
it operated more like a club than a business, except that the board meetingwasn¡¯t followed by a round of golf. None of the board members owned more than token amounts of stock.3 At the meeting, Warren proposed that the company distribute the investments to the shareholders. But since the Depression and World War II, American businesses treated money as a scarce commodity to be hoarded and husbanded. This way of thinkinghad become automatic, its underlyingpremise unexamined, even though the economic justification for it had longdisappeared. The board responded to the idea of separatingthe investment portfolio fromthe map business as preposterous. Then, toward the end of the meeting, the board broke out the humidor and passed around cigars. While they smoked, Warren sat fuming. ¡°That¡¯s my money payingfor those cigars,¡± he thought. On the way back to the airport, he took pictures of his children out of his wallet and looked at themto bringhis blood pressure down. 
Frustrated, Warren decided that he would take the company away fromSanborn¡¯s undeservingboard on behalf of the other shareholders. They deserved it more. Therefore, Buffett¡¯s group¡ªFred Stanback, Walter Schloss, Alice Buffett, Dan Cowin, Henry Brandt, Catherine Elberfeld, Anne Gottschaldt, and some of the others¡ªkept buying. Warren also used new money cominginto the partnerships. He had Howard put a number of his brokerage clients into Sanborn. Warren was probably doinghis father a financial favor, even as he tightened his grip on the company. 
Before long, people friendly to Warren, includingthe famous money manager Phil Carret, who had bought Greif Bros. and Cleveland¡¯s Worst Millafter hearingof these stocks through Warren, had corralled about 24,000 shares. Once they had effective control, Warren decided it was time to act. The stock market was high, and he wanted Sanborn to unload its investments at an opportune time. Booz Allen Hamilton, the 
company¡¯s strategic consultants, had already submitted a plan to do this,4 but the stickingpoint was taxes. If Sanborn sold the investments, it would have to pay a tax bill of about $2 million. Warren offered a solution similar to the Rockwood & Co. tax trick of swappingthe investments, tax-free, for stock. 
Another board meetingtook place at which nothinghappened except for more of the investors¡¯ money going up in cigar smoke. For a second time Buffett rode back to the airport lookingat pictures of his kids to calm himself down. Three days later, he threatened to calla specialmeetingand take controlof the company 
unless the directors took action by October 31.5 His patience had run out. 
Now the board had no choice. It agreed to split the two businesses. Even so, the issue remained of how to deal with the tax. One of the insurance men said, ¡°Let¡¯s just swallow the tax.¡± 
¡°And I said, ¡®Wait a minute. Let¡¯s¡ª¡°Let¡¯s¡± is a contraction. It means ¡°let us.¡± Who is this us? If everyone around the table wants to do it per capita, that¡¯s fine, but if you want to do it in a ratio of shares owned, and you get ten shares¡¯ worth of tax and I get twenty-four thousand shares¡¯ worth, forget it.¡¯ He was talking about swallowing two million dollars¡¯ worth of tax just because he didn¡¯t want to go to the trouble of doing 
6
the share buyback. I remember the cigars getting passed around. I was paying for thirty percent of every one of those cigars. I was the only guy not smoking cigars. They should have paid for a third of my bubble gum.¡± 
In the end, however, the board capitulated. Thus, through force of energy, organization, and will, early in 1960 Warren won the fight. Sanborn made a Rockwood-type offer to shareholders, exchanginga portion of the investment portfolio for stock.7 
The Sanborn deal set a new high-water mark: Buffett could use his brains and his partnerships¡¯ money to alter the course of even a stubborn and unwillingcompany. 
*** 
Duringthis episode, as Buffett traveled back and forth to New York and worked on the Sanborn project, figuringout where to get the stock he needed for control, how to make the board fall in line, and how not to swallow the tax, all the while lookingfor other investment ideas, his mind whirled with the thousands of numbers that clicked and spun inside his head. At home, he would disappear upstairs to do his readingand thinking. 
Susie understood his work as a sort of holy mission. Still, she tried to get himout of his study and into the 
family¡¯s world: scheduled outings, vacations, dinners in restaurants. She had a saying: ¡°Anyone can be a father, but you have to be a daddy too.¡±8 Yet she was talkingto someone who¡¯d never had the kind of daddy to which she was referring. ¡°Let¡¯s go to Bronco¡¯s,¡± she would say, and stuff a gangof neighborhood kids into the car for a burger run. At the table, Warren would laugh when somethingfunny happened and would 
appear engaged, but he rarely spoke. His mind could have been anywhere.9 On vacation once in California, he took a bunch of kids to Disneyland one night and sat on a bench readingwhile the kids ran wild and had a grand time.10 
Peter was now almost two, Howie five, and Little Sooz¡ªwho occupied her own pink checked-gingham kingdom with a canopy bed up a separate flight of stairs¡ªsix and a half. Howie tested his parents with destruction to see how much it took to get a reaction from them. He picked on Peter, who was slow to start 
talking, proddinghimas if he were a science experiment to see how he would respond.11 Little Susie policed them both to keep things under control. She started figuringout ways to get back at Howie, once tellinghim to stick holes with a fork around the bottomof a milk carton. While Howie was enjoyingthe sight of milk 
spurtingall over the kitchen table, she ran upstairs, crying, ¡°Mommmmmm, Howie¡¯s beingbad again!¡±12 Warren simply turned to Susie to cope with their son¡¯s explosive energy. And Howie remembers that his mother almost ¡°never got angry, and was always supportive.¡±13 
Susie juggled allthis while playingthe part of the standard-issue upper-middle-class wife circa 1960: appearingevery day in her trademark look, a tailored dress or pantsuit, often in sunshine yellow, and a lacquered bouffant wig; takingperfect care of her husband and family; becominga community leader; and gracefully entertainingher husband¡¯s business associates as if this required no more effort than tossinga Swanson TVDinner into the oven. Warren let her hire help, and soon a series of au pairs took up residence in an airy, light-filled roomwith its own bath on the second floor. Letha Clark, the new housekeeper, assumed some of the burden. Susie often started her day around noon by hostinga charity luncheon. After school, she shuttled Little Susie to Blue Birds. She would always describe herself as a simple person, but she steadily 
added layers of complexity to her life. She was settingup a group called the Volunteer Bureau14 to do office work and teach swimmingat the University of Omaha. ¡°You, too, can be a Paul Revere¡± was its motto, invokingan image of one individualsavingan entire nation through his (or her) daringand self-sacrificing deeds. 
Susie¡ªlike PaulRevere¡ªwas impatient to mount and ride;15 she dashed back and forth between family obligations and the growingnumber of people who wanted her attention. Many of these were disadvantaged 
or traumatized in some way. 
Her closest friend, Bella Eisenberg, was an Auschwitz survivor who had made her way to America and 
Omaha after the camp was liberated. She thought of Susie as someone you could callat four o¡¯clock in the morningwhen the demons got hold of you.16 Another, Eunice Denenberg, was only a child when she found her father after he hanged himself. Rarest of all amongwell-off white families, the Buffetts had black friends, includingthe most intimidatingpitcher in baseball, Bob Gibson, and his wife, Charlene. Beinga star athlete meant little in 1960 if you were black. ¡°Those were the days when white people wouldn¡¯t be seen with black 
people in Omaha,¡± says Buffett¡¯s childhood friend Byron Swanson.17 
Susie reached out to everyone; in fact, the more troubled the person, the more willingly she helped. She took a deep interest in the personal lives of people she barely knew. Warren recalls an incident when he left her on line at a concession stand duringa football game. By the time he returned fromthe men¡¯s rooma few minutes later, the woman standingon line next to Susie was sayingto her, ¡°Now, I¡¯ve never told anybody this before in my life¡­¡± as Susie listened, appearingfascinated. Almost everyone she met glowed under this kind of attention and felt touched by the encounter. But even with her closest friends, Susie nearly always took care not to share her own problems. 
She played the same role of ministeringangel with her own family, above allwith her sister. Dottie, who was musicallike Susie, had founded the Opera Guild, and remained the beauty of the family, but seemed vacant and, as one person put it, ¡°valiantly unhappy.¡± She maintained a pleasant surface but told Susie that she never cried because if she ever started, she would never stop. Homer, her husband, appeared frustrated that he could not penetrate his wife¡¯s cocoon. Still, the Rogerses kept up their vigorous social schedule, and at night, amid the drinks and merriment, their two youngsons roamed underfoot. At times, Homer punished them harshly or Dottie teased Billy cruelly¡ªso Susie mothered her nephews alongwith her own children. 
She also helped the senior Buffetts, who were saddled with both Howard¡¯s health issues and his ideology. Just as the rest of America had caught up to his levelof paranoia about Communism, Howard leapfrogged ahead. By the late Eisenhower years, Americans felt their country, grown soft and fat in its prosperity, was losingthe arms race and were haunted by the frighteningimage of Premier Nikita Khrushchev banginghis shoe on a table at the United Nations and thundering ¡°We will bury you.¡± All 180 million Americans ducked-and-covered in air-raid drills, the youngest crouched under their elementary-schooldesks. More than one billion people were now livingunder Communismin almost twenty countries around the globe. The rapid advance of Communismover such a broad swath of the world stunned much of the nation. Howard joined a newly formed group, the John Birch Society, which combined paranoia about Communismwith what he described as concern for the ¡°moraland spiritualproblem of America, which would be with us even if 
Communism were stopped tomorrow.¡±18 He covered his office walls with maps showingthe menacingred advance of Communism. He and Doris helped bringthe Christian Anti-Communist Crusade to Omaha19 and threw themselves behind a movement of ideological conservatives that was coalescingaround Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater. Howard was respected as a philosophicalpurist amongthe libertarian-leaningwing of the Republican Party, but anyone associated with the Birchers attracted both alarm and ridicule. After he went to the local press to defend his Birch membership, people increasingly wrote himoff as an eccentric. That Omaha snickered at his revered father was painful to Warren. 
But his anxiety on Howard¡¯s behalf had even more to do with eighteen months of mysterious symptoms that doctors could not seem to diagnose despite a trip to the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota.20 Finally, in May of 1958, Howard had been told he had colon cancer that required immediate surgery. 21 Warren had 
been upset by the diagnosis, but angered by what he considered its inexcusable tardiness. Since then, Susie had shielded himfromthe details of his father¡¯s illness.22 She gave himhead rubs and kept up the household schedule. She also devoted herself to proppingup Leila duringHoward¡¯s surgery and longrecuperation. She did all of this cheerfully; not only that, she seemed to thrive as the calm, soothingpresence on whom everyone could depend in this crisis. She helped her older children understand the illness and saw that allof them, includinglittle Peter, visited their grandfather regularly. Howie watched college footballin the afternoons with Howard, who would sit in his recliner and switch sides repeatedly duringgames, cheeringfor whichever teamwas losing. When Howie asked himwhy, he said, ¡°They¡¯re the underdogs now.¡± 23 
Throughout his father¡¯s ordeal, Warren used business as a distraction. He kept his head buried in American Banker or the Oil & Gas Journal except for brief interludes when he wandered into the kitchen for some popcorn or a Pepsi from the wooden crates that only he was allowed to touch. 
Yet somehow, despite Howard¡¯s distress and illness, the quiet, withdrawn man who was the Warren Buffett his family saw became a presence in public no matter what was goingon at home. He displayed an authority, an almost electric charge of energy, that radiated to an audience. ¡°He just used to ooze that stuff wherever he 
went,¡± says Chuck Peterson.24 The man who had so impressed Charlie Munger talked constantly and convincingly about investingand the partnerships; he raised money as fast as he could talk¡ªbut not as fast as he could invest. 
Munger listened to Buffett¡¯s investingand money-raisingexploits on their almost-daily phone calls, wonderingat the naturalsalesmanship that enabled Buffett to promote himself so well. His trips to New York became more frequent now that Henry Brandt prospected for him. Cash poured into the partnerships¡¯ coffers, 1960 a watershed year. Warren¡¯s aunt Katie and uncle Fred put nearly $8,000 into Buffett Associates early in the year. Another $51,000 came into Underwood, partly through Chuck Peterson¡¯s connections. Then, ¡°Chuck said to me, ¡®I¡¯d like you and Susie to come to dinner and meet the Angles.¡¯ Well, I didn¡¯t know them. He said they¡¯re both doctors, and real smart people.¡± 
Caroland BillAngle lived across the street fromPeterson. Bill Angle, a cardiologist, was a whimsical man who would stay up all night in the winter, sprayingwater around his front yard and makingimpeccably glazed snowmen, frosty replicas of his chubby self, standingnext to frozen ¡°ponds.¡± His wife specialized in pediatric research. 
¡°We picked them up and there were six of us in the car. We headed over to the Omaha Country Club. Carol Angle was a very good-looking woman, and smart. All during dinner, she couldn¡¯t take her eyes off me. I mean, she was just fascinated. I was going crazy, talking about everything in the world and trying desperately to impress her. And she was just taking in every word.¡± 
After the presentation, which Peterson recalls as typically persuasive, ¡°we left the country club and drove back. All the way in the car she still couldn¡¯t take her eyes off me. We dropped the Angles off. And I said to Chuck, ¡®I made quite an impression tonight.¡¯ He said, ¡®No, dummy. She¡¯s deaf. She¡¯s reading your lips.¡¯ 
25 
Since I couldn¡¯t stop talking, she couldn¡¯t stop looking at me.¡± 
But he certainly had made an impression, for afterward the Angles hosted a dinner at the Hilltop House for a dozen doctors they knew, at which Bill Angle suggested that they form a partnership and each chip in $10,000. One doctor asked, ¡°What happens if we lose allour money?¡± ¡°Bill Angle gave him this disgusted look. And he said, ¡®Well, then we form another partnership.¡¯¡± 
The Emdee partnership, Buffett¡¯s eighth, was launched on August 15, 1960, with $110,000. The twelfth doctor, the one who worried about losingallhis money, did not join. 
There were other skeptics. Not everyone in Omaha liked what they heard about Warren Buffett. His secretiveness put people off. Some thought the younghotshot wouldn¡¯t amount to anything, and believed the authority he radiated was unearned arrogance. Some resisted the idea of a nobody succeedingwithout kowtowinghis way to the top. One member of a prominent Omaha family was lunchingwith half a dozen people at the Blackstone Hotelwhen Buffett¡¯s name came up. ¡°He¡¯ll be broke in a year,¡± the man said. ¡°Just 
give hima year and he¡¯s gone.¡±26 A partner at Kirkpatrick Pettis, which Howard¡¯s firm had merged with in 1957, said time after time, ¡°The jury¡¯s still out on him.¡±27 
That fall, the already frothy stock market took off on a tear. The economy had been sloggingalongin a mild recession, and the country¡¯s mood was dark because the Soviets seemed to be winningthe arms and space races. But when John F. Kennedy won the presidency in a squeaker of an election, the pendingchange in administrations to a man froma vigorous younggeneration uplifted the nation. In one of his early speeches, Kennedy set out a goal: sendinga man to the moon and back. The market shot up, and once again comparisons were made to 1929. Warren had never ridden out a speculative market, yet he remained unruffled. It was as if he had been waitingfor this moment. Instead of pullingback, as Grahammight have done, he did somethingremarkable. He went into overdrive raisingmoney for the partnerships. 
He put Bertie and her husband, his uncle George from Albuquerque, and his cousin Billinto Buffett Associates, the original partnership. Wayne Eves, his friend John Cleary¡¯s partner, got on board too. And he finally put Fred Kulhken¡¯s mother and aunt, Anne Gottschaldt and Catherine Elberfeld, into the partnership. Their presence suggested that he felt the timingwas not just highly propitious but also safe. 
Three more people went into Underwood. Waitingfor a cab in the rain after attendingone of Ben Graham¡¯s 
lectures in New York, Warren met Frank Matthews Jr., son of the former Secretary of the Navy before whom Vanita Mae Brown had once claimed to be married to Warren¡ªMatthews became a partner.28 Warren set up Ann Investments, his ninth partnership, for a member of another prominent Omaha family, Elizabeth Storz. He put Mattie Topp, who owned the fanciest dress shop in town, alongwith her two daughters and sons-in-law and $250,000, into the tenth, Buffett-TD. 
Legally, he could take on only a hundred partners without havingto register with the SEC as an investment 
adviser. As the partnerships burgeoned, he started encouragingpeople to teamup informally and come in as a single partner. Eventually he would put people into pools, combiningtheir money himself.29 He later described the tactic as questionable¡ªbut it worked. His compulsion to get more money, to make more money, drove himon. Warren was on fire, shuttlingback and forth to New York at a frantic pace. He began to suffer from stress-related back pain. It often worsened when he was on an airplane, and he tried all sorts of things to alleviate it¡ªeverythingbut stayinghome. 
By now his name was passed alonglike a secret. Invest with Warren Buffett to get rich. But the routine had changed. By 1960 it took at least $8,000 to get in the door. And he no longer asked people to invest with him. They had to bringit up. It had to be their idea. People not only would have no inklingwhat he was doing, 
they had to put themselves in this position.*20 It converted them into enthusiasts for Buffett, and reduced the odds of their complainingabout anythinghe did. Instead of askinga favor, he was grantingone; people felt indebted to himfor takingtheir money. Makingpeople ask put himpsychologically in charge. He would come to use this technique often, in many contexts, for the rest of his life. Alongwith gettinghimwhat he wanted, it seemed to soothe his persistingfears of beingresponsible for other people¡¯s fates. 
Though his insecurity was rampant as ever, his success and Susie¡¯s care and tutoringhad given hima bit of polish and flair. He was startingto appear powerful, not vulnerable. Plenty of people were happy to ask him to invest for them. Buffett formed the eleventh and last of his partnerships, Buffett-Holland, on May 16, 1961, for Dick and Mary Holland, friends he had met through his lawyer and partner Dan Monen. When Dick Holland decided to invest in the partnership, members of his family pressured himnot to do it. Buffett¡¯s abilities were apparent to him, Holland says, even though in Omaha people were still ¡°laughingup their 
sleeves¡± at Warren¡¯s ambitions.30 Yet in 1959 the partnerships had outperformed the market by six percent. In 1960 they leaped to nearly $1.9 million in assets by beatingthe market by twenty-nine percent. Even more impressive than any single year¡¯s profits was the compoundingpower of repeated growth. A thousand dollars invested in Buffett Fund, the second partnership, was now worth $2,407 four years later. Invested in the Dow 
Jones IndustrialAverage, it would have been worth just $1,426.31 More important, he accomplished this higher return while takingless risk than the market as a whole. 
And Buffett¡¯s fees, reinvested, had by the end of 1960 earned him $243,494. More than thirteen percent of the partnerships¡¯ assets now belonged to him alone. Yet even as his share of the partnerships increased, he had made the partners so much money that they were no longer simply happy; many regarded himwith awe. 
Bill Angle, his partner in Emdee, was foremost amongthem. He Tom-Sawyered himself into becoming Warren¡¯s ¡°partner¡± in buildinga gigantic model train set with an HO gauge track on the third floor of the Buffetts¡¯ house, which had been a ballroomin a former life and was now the family attic. Warreny, the boy who had lingered at the Brandeis store every Christmas, longingfor the huge, magical model train that he couldn¡¯t have, awoke inside the grown man. He ¡°supervised¡± as Angle did all the work to create Warren¡¯s childhood fantasy. 
Warren also tried to Tom-Sawyer Chuck Peterson into investingin it. ¡°Warren, you must be out of your mind,¡± Peterson said. ¡°Why would I want to go fifty-fifty with you on a train that you possess?¡± But Warren didn¡¯t get this, so carried away was he by enthusiasm for the train and its accoutrements. ¡°You can come 
over and use it,¡± he said. 32 
The train filled much of the former ballroom¡¯s space. It stood on pilings, with passageways underneath so that the diorama could be viewed frominside. Three locomotives carryinglongchains of cars raced alongan enormous spiralingtrack. They rocketed past villages and dove through forests, disappeared into tunnels, climbed mountains and dipped through valleys, stoppingand startingat signals, and derailingjust often 
enough to add a thrill when Buffett switched on the engines.33 
Shiningwith the reflected glow of a delayed childhood, burnished with the patina of Omaha¡¯s railroading history, the train was Warren¡¯s totem. His children were forbidden to go near it. By now, his relentless obsession with money and obliviousness to his family were a runningjoke amonghis friends. ¡°Warren, those 
are your children¡ªyou recognize them, don¡¯t you?¡± people said.34 When he was not traveling, he could be found wanderingthrough the house, nose buried in an annualreport. The family swirled around himand his holy pursuit¡ªthe disengaged, silent presence, feet up in his stringy bathrobe, eyes fixed on the Wall Street Journal at the breakfast table. 
The bookkeepingand bankingand safety-depositingand post-officingrequired for his complicated empire, which had grown to almost four million dollars, eleven partnerships, and wellover a hundred investors, now became almost overwhelming. Amazingly, Warren was stillhandlingall the money and doingallthe clerical work himself:filingthe tax returns, typingthe letters, depositingthe dividend and capital checks, stoppingfor a meal at the Spare Time Caf¨¦ alongthe way, stuffingthe stock certificates in the safety deposit box. 
On January 1, 1962, Buffett dissolved all of the partnerships into a single entity, Buffett Partnership, Ltd.¡ªor BPL. The partnerships had produced a stellar forty-six percent return in 1961, compared with the Dow¡¯s twenty-two percent. After the partners invested more money that January 1, the new Buffett Partnership, Ltd., started the year with net assets of $7.2 million. In just six years, his partnerships had grown bigger than Graham-Newman. Yet when Peat, Marwick, Mitchellaudited it, the auditor, Verne McKenzie, pored over the BPL files not in a conference roomon WallStreet but in the alcove off Warren¡¯s bedroom upstairs, where the two of themworked side by side. 
Even Buffett realized by now that his growingcollection of files, phone bills, and stock trades had reached the limits of what he could handle workingin a home office. He disliked takingon overhead, but he could afford it. 
Includinghis outside investments¡ªwhich totaled well over half a million dollars by now¡ªWarren had become a millionaire at age thirty.35 So he rented office space in Kiewit Plaza, a new white granite buildinga straight shot down FarnamStreet about twenty blocks from his house and less than two miles from downtown. He and his father now shared space, a longtime goalof Warren¡¯s, as well as a secretary. But Howard was clearly very ill. He soldiered gamely into the office with a stiff gait, makingthe effort. Warren¡¯s face would shadow when he learned some new piece of ominous news about his father¡¯s health, but mostly he tried to avoid knowingthe details. 
The new secretary tried to tell Warren what to do. ¡°She thought she was a little motherly,¡± he says, ¡°in the sense of trying to steer me.¡± 
Nobody steered Warren Buffett. He fired her on the spot. 
But he did need help. Just before movinginto Kiewit Plaza he had also hired BillScott, a trust officer from 
the U.S. National Bank who had read an article in the Commercial & Financial Chronicle that Warren had written about an obscure insurance company. Scott signed up for Buffett¡¯s investingcourse, and then, he says, ¡°I set out to suck up to himuntilI got a job.¡± Buffett started goingover to the Scotts¡¯ house on Sunday 
mornings after he dropped his kids off at church to talk about stocks, and eventually offered him a job.36 
Scott began to help Buffett as he herded money into the partnership as fast as the two of themcould open the mail. Buffett had his mother join for the first time, alongwith Scott, Don Danly, and Marge Loring, the widow of Warren¡¯s bridge partner Russ Loring, and even Fred Stanback, who had a family business and 
heretofore had worked with Warren only on specific ideas.37 And for the first time, Warren put his own money¡ªallof it, almost $450,000¡ªinto the partnership.38 With that, his and Susie¡¯s share of the partnership rose to more than a million dollars after his six years of work; together they owned fourteen percent of BPL. 
The timingwas stupendous. In mid-March 1962, the market finally broke. It continued its slide until the end of June. Stocks were suddenly cheaper than they had been in many years. Buffett was now sittingon a single partnership with a huge pile of cash to invest. Its portfolio was relatively unscathed in the downturn ¡ª¡°Compared to more conventional (often termed conservative, which is not synonymous) methods of common stock investing, it would appear that our method involved considerably less risk,¡± he wrote in a 
letter to his partners.39 He went racingthrough the stock tables. He often paraphrased Graham, saying: ¡°Be fearful when others are greedy, and greedy when others are fearful.¡± This was the time to be greedy.40 
25 
TheWindmillWar 
Omaha and Beatrice, Nebraska . 1960¨C1963 
In the late 1950s and the early 1960s, while Buffett wrestled with Sanborn, consolidated the partnerships, and moved into the office with his father, he embarked on another project, again some distance fromOmaha. The second major orchestration of his supportinggroup, this was the first in which he actually took controlof a company. And it would consume far more of his time and energy than had Sanborn Map. 
Dempster Mill Manufacturing, a family-run company in the worst sense of the word, made windmills and water irrigation systems in Beatrice,*21 Nebraska. This episode of Buffett¡¯s career had started like puttinga quarter in yet another slot machine to get a dollar back¡ªor so it seemed. The stock sold for $18 a share and the company had a steadily growingbook value of $72 a share. (¡°Book value¡± is the stated value of a company¡¯s assets less what it owes¡ªlike a house less the mortgage, or cash in the bank less a credit card balance.) In the case of Dempster, the assets were windmills, irrigation equipment, and its own manufacturing plant. 
In 1958, Warren had driven out to Beatrice, a windswept prairie town that depended on Dempster as its sole important employer. He was armed with a list of nineteen questions, such as: ¡°How many dealers does the company have?¡± and ¡°Duringthe Depression, how bad did the bad debt experience ever get?¡±1 After the visit he decided that the company was ¡°well-heeled financially but not makingdough.¡±2 Its president, Clyde Dempster, was runningit into the ground.3 
Since Dempster was just another cigar butt, Warren applied his cigar-butt technique, which was to keep buyinga stock as longas it continued to sellbelow book value. If the price rose for any reason, he could sell out at a profit. If it didn¡¯t, and he ended up buyinguntil he owned so much stock that he controlled the 
company, he could selloff¡ªthat is, liquidate¡ªits assets at a profit.4 
As with Sanborn, Buffett couldn¡¯t afford as much of Dempster as he wanted. He called Walter Schloss and Tom Knapp, and said, ¡°I want you to go thirds with me.¡±5 Over several years, the trio got hold of eleven 
percent of the stock¡ªsecond only to the Dempster family¡ªand Warren joined the board. In early 1960, the board hired Lee Dimon, formerly purchasingmanager of Minneapolis MoldingCo., as Dempster¡¯s general manager, over Buffett¡¯s reservations.6 Buffett maneuvered Clyde Dempster into a figurehead role and continued buyingstock.7 He wanted every share that he could lay his hands on. He rangup Schloss in New 
York and said, ¡°Walter, I want to buy your stock.¡± 
¡°Gee, I don¡¯t want to sell it to you,¡± said Schloss. ¡°You know, it¡¯s a nice little company.¡± 
¡°Look, I¡¯m doingallthe work on this idea. I¡¯d like your stock,¡± said Buffett. 
¡°Warren, you¡¯re a friend of mine. If you want it¡ªtake it,¡± said Schloss.8 
In the adult version of abscondingwith Doris¡¯s bicycle, Buffett took it. He had a weakness:If he felt he needed something, he needed it, and that need must be satisfied. He did this, however, without any apparent malice or arrogance. If anything, it was the opposite; he was just so terribly needy. People like Schloss generally gave in to himbecause they liked him, and besides, whatever it was he wanted, he obviously seemed to feel he needed it more than they did. 
As he gained more stock, Buffett also bought out the Dempster family. With that transaction, he achieved control, eased out Clyde Dempster, and made an offer to all other shareholders on the same terms.9 
Here Buffett was treadingon tricky ground. As chairman, he felt he could not rightly urge other investors to sellwhen he was buying. He even bent over backward to warn themthat he thought Dempster stock would do well. Nevertheless, money and human nature could be counted on to do their job. People convinced themselves that they would rather have the cash than a thinly traded stock of dubious value. Soon, therefore, Dempster made up twenty-one percent of the partnership¡¯s assets. 
In July 1961, Warren wrote his partners that the partnership had invested in a nameless company that might prove to be ¡°a deterrent to short-range performance, but it gives strong promise of superior results over a 
several-year period.¡±10 He named Dempster, which the partnership now controlled, and wrote a little sermon about it in his January 1962 letter, explainingBen Graham¡¯s philosophy of cigar butts.11 The ¡°deterrent to short-range performance¡± part would prove more prescient than he expected. 
During1962, Buffett coached Lee Dimon and tried to explain to himhow to manage inventory. But Dimon seemed to think he could just keep buyingwindmill parts no matter how many windmills Dempster sold. As a former purchasingmanager, he knew how to purchase¡ªso he did. The warehouse bulged with windmill 
parts12 as Dempster sucked up cash. By early 1962, the company¡¯s bank prepared to seize the inventory as security for its loan, then grew alarmed enough to make noises about shuttingDempster down. 
Buffett was lookingat only a few months before it all caved in and he would have to report to the partners that a business into which he had sunk a million dollars of their money was broke. He tried to recruit his old Columbia friend Bob Dunn to leave his job at U.S. Steel, move to Beatrice, and run Dempster. Dunn actually made a trip out to Beatrice but in the end wasn¡¯t interested. Buffett rarely asked advice, but finally that April he took the situation up with his friend Munger while he and Susie were visitingLos Angeles. 
¡°We were going to dinner with the Grahams and the Mungers, Susie and I. We met them at the Captain¡¯s Table on El Segundo in L.A. During the dinner, I¡¯m telling Charlie, ¡®I¡¯m in this mess with this company; I¡¯ve got this jerk running Dempster, and the inventories keep going up and up.¡¯¡± Munger, who dissected his law clients¡¯ businesses and thought like a manager, said immediately, ¡°Well, I know this guy that used to bringaround tough situations out here. Harry Bottle.¡± He knew of Bottle through an acquaintance who specialized in business turnarounds. 
Six days later, lured by a $50,000 sign-on bonus, Harry Bottle was in Beatrice. This meant that for the second time¡ªcountingthe motherly secretary¡ªBuffett had to fire someone. He already knew fromthat experience that he hated firingpeople. Not only that, Dempster was the only major business in town, and he had heard through the board that, upon Dimon¡¯s appointment to generalmanager, his wife had crowned herself queen of Beatrice. 
Buffett dreaded confrontation. His first instinct was to avoid it, and he ran like a singed cat if anyone threatened to explode at himthe way his mother had. But he had also learned to shut down emotionally in the face of a possible eruption. The trick, he felt, was ¡°to create a shell around yourself with respect to that, without creating a shell that extends beyond¡± the situation, to keep frombecominga hardened person. 
Whatever happened when he fired Lee Dimon, Harriett Dimon afterward wrote Warren a letter in which she accused him of being ¡°abrupt and unethical,¡± and, through his coldness, of destroyingher husband¡¯s confidence. Buffett, at almost thirty-two, had not yet learned to fire people with empathy. 
Within days he sent his new employee Bill Scott over to Beatrice to help Harry Bottle rummage around the parts department and decide what to toss out and what to reprice.13 They swept through the place like a swarm of bollweevils and slashed inventory, sold off equipment, closed five branches, raised prices for repair parts, and shut down unprofitable product lines. They laid off a hundred people. This extensive shrinkage of the business by its new out-of-town management on the heels of the firingprompted the townspeople of Beatrice to eye Buffett with increasingdistrust, suspectingthat he was a ruthless liquidator. 
By year-end 1962, Bottle had pulled Dempster into the black. In his January 1963 letter to partners, Buffett called Dempster the high point of the year, and named Harry Bottle the man of the year. 14 He estimated the value of the company, worth $35 per share a year earlier, at $51 per share. The bank was happy. As the assets were sold and the inventory whittled, Dempster piled up about $2 million in cash, worth $15 per share. Meanwhile, Buffett had borrowed¡ªanother $20 against each share to have funds to invest. With that, Dempster¡¯s investment portfolio was as large as the rest of the partnership¡¯s. 
Now Buffett was faced with a Sanborn-type problem. Ironically, he had become one of those executives with a cash hoard. The market had rebounded smartly fromits lows of June 1962. Tryingto use Dempster¡¯s extra money, he sent Bottle and Scott to upstate New York to see a manufacturingplant of the Oval Wood Dish 
Company, which made Popsicle sticks, wooden spoons, and the like, but didn¡¯t buy it.15 Buffett tried to sell Dempster privately but found no takers at his price, so in August he notified the shareholders that the company was for sale, and ran an ad in the Wall Street Journal: 
ProfitableManufacturingCompanyforSale 
¡­Company is a leadingfarmequipment, fertilizer applicatingequipment and water systems manufacturer. [Dempster] willbe sold as a goingconcern at a public sale on September 30, 1963, subject to a negotiated sale until Sept. 13, 1963¡­. Contact, Mr. Harry T. Bottle, President. 
He gave buyers a month to get their bids in before the public auction. He had already been talkingto most of the obvious candidates. 
Beatrice went berserk at the thought of another new owner that might impose layoffs or a plant closingon its biggest and virtually only employer. In the postwar boom, plants opened, they didn¡¯t close. Less than a quarter century after the end of the Great Depression, the prospect of mass unemployment brought back hauntingmemories of gray-faced men in soup lines, drifters wearingpatched coats, a quarter of the nation unemployed, hunger and malnutrition, demeaninggovernment make-work jobs. 
The people of Beatrice pulled out the pitchforks.16 Buffett was shocked. He had saved a dyingcompany. 
Didn¡¯t they understand that? Without him, Dempster would have gone under.17 He had not expected the ferocity, the personal vitriol. He had no idea that they would hate him. 
The townspeople launched a crusade to foil Buffett by raisingnearly $3 million to keep the ownership in Beatrice.18 Day by day the Beatrice Daily Sun breathlessly counted down to the deadline as the town fought 
to save its only factory. The day of the deadline, fire sirens sounded and bells rangout as the mayor stepped to a microphone and announced that Buffett had been defeated; Charles B. Dempster, grandson of the company¡¯s founder, headed an investor group that pledged to keep the plant open. 19 Cash in hand, Buffett handed out more than $2 million to his shareholders.20 But the experience scarred him. Instead of becoming 
toughened against animosity, he vowed never to let it happen again. He couldn¡¯t take a whole town hating him. 
One day not longafter, Buffett called Walter Schloss, saying, ¡°You know, Walter, I have these small positions in five different companies, and I¡¯ll sellthemto you.¡± These were Jeddo-Highland Coal, Merchants National Property, Vermont Marble, Genesee & WyomingRailroad, and another whose name is lost in time. ¡°Well, what price would you want, Warren?¡± Schloss asked. ¡°I¡¯llsell them to you at the price that I¡¯m carryingthemat,¡± Buffett said. ¡°Okay, I¡¯ll buy them from you,¡± said Schloss immediately. 
¡°I didn¡¯t say, ¡®Well, you know, you have to look up each one and check what it¡¯s worth,¡¯¡± Schloss says. ¡°I trusted Warren. If I had said, ¡®Well, I can buy it for ninety percent of what you¡¯re carryingit at,¡¯ Warren would have said¡ª¡®Forget it!¡¯ I did hima favor, so he wanted to do me one too. If he had also made a profit, then that was fine. And they allworked out brilliantly. I felt that it was his way of sayingthank you for selling me your Dempster stock. I don¡¯t say that¡¯s the reason, but that¡¯s what I mean by beingan honest guy.¡± 
26 
HaystacksofGold 
Omaha and California . 1963¨C1964 
Warren may have said he wanted to become a millionaire, but he never said that he would stop there. Later he would describe himself duringthis period as ¡°a lousy sport at doinganythingI didn¡¯t want to do.¡± What he wanted to do was invest. His children now ranged from five to ten years old, and one friend described Susie as ¡°sort of a single mother.¡± Warren would show up at schoolevents or toss around a footballif asked, but he never initiated a game. He seemed too preoccupied to notice his children¡¯s longingfor attention. Susie taught the children that his special mission must be respected; she told them, ¡°He can only be so much, so don¡¯t expect any more fromhim.¡± That applied to her, too; Warren was obviously devoted to his wife, and showed that in public, caressing ¡°Susan-o¡± affectionately and recountingtender, funny variations of how she, the gentle angel, had stooped to marry him, the ukulele-playingfinancial prodigy who was a secret wreck. At the same time he was so used to her attention and remained so undomesticated that once, when she was nauseous and asked himto bringher a basin, he came back with a colander. She pointed out the holes; he rattled around in the kitchen and returned triumphantly bearingthe colander on a cookie sheet. After that, she knew it was hopeless. 
Yet the predictability of Warren¡¯s habits gave a certain stability to the Buffett household, as Susie¡¯s come-on-in, take-a-number atmosphere unfolded around them. In the evenings he reenacted his own father¡¯s routine, arrivingat the same time every night, slammingthe door fromthe garage, and yelling, ¡°I¡¯mhome!¡± before headingto the livingroomto read the newspaper. He wasn¡¯t uncaring, and he was often available. But in conversation his words often had a subtly prepared, even rehearsed quality. He was always one step ahead. Whatever went on inside his mind took place between the lines; it came through in the silences, the flashes of wit, the tremulous flight fromcertain topics of conversation. His feelings danced behind so many veils that even he seemed unaware of themmost of the time. 
Susie herself was less available these days. Like her father, she stayed busy and surrounded by people; she avoided beingalone and unoccupied. She was vice president of the theater guild and involved with United Community Services. She shopped and dined with her large group of women friends, spendingfar more time with those in the Jewish and black communities than amongwhite socialites. 
Susie was becomingprominent amonga group of Omaha women who were passionate civil-rights supporters. The battle to end segregation in employment and public facilities, and to remove obstacles to votingrights, was acceleratingaround the country. She helped organize the Omaha branch of the Panelof Americans, a speakers¡¯ bureau that sent one Jew, one Catholic, one white Protestant, and one black Protestant to talk to civic groups, churches, and other organizations about their experiences. The panel was a way of tryingto bringpeople together; one of Susie¡¯s friends satirized her role on it as ¡°to apologize for beinga WASP.¡± The panelmembers answered audience questions such as: Why would a Negro want to move to a different part of town? Are any of you prejudiced against one another? Do Jews believe that Christ has been or that He is still coming? Don¡¯t you think that sit-ins are just stirringup trouble? At a time when ¡°Negroes¡± could not use public ¡°white only¡± restrooms throughout much of the South, the sight of a black woman sittingas an equal 
on the same stage as white women stirred the audiences.1 
In the afternoons, often with Susie Jr. in tow, Susie shot back and forth to meetings and committees on the 
north side of town, tryingto tackle the city¡¯s worst problem: dilapidated housingand abysmalliving conditions in the ghetto.2 The police stopped her several times. ¡°Why are you in this neighborhood?¡± they¡¯d ask. 
¡°Honey,¡± the fretfulDoc Thompson told Susie Jr., ¡°your mother is goingto get killed.¡± He made her carry a police whistle when she rode with her mother. ¡°Honey, you¡¯re goingto get kidnapped,¡± he said.3 
Susie¡¯s role as problem-solver and emotional carpet-sweeper meant that people thought of callingher whenever there was trouble, of any kind. She had referred to Warren as her ¡°first patient,¡±4 and there were others. She stepped in more often now to manage Dottie¡¯s life as her sister¡¯s ability to cope declined and her 
drinkingincreased. She counseled Doris through her divorce fromTruman and gave her a copy of a book, Viktor Frankl¡¯s Man¡¯s Search for Meaning, that Doris turned to again and again lookingfor hope amid misery.5 For severaldays, Susie housed an Ethiopian student whom her friend Sue Brownlee was sponsoring 
in Omaha because Brownlee¡¯s father was visiting, and he would have been horrified at a ¡°black woman sleepingin his bed.¡±6 As a cultural experience for the family, Susie arranged for an Egyptian exchange student who was attendingthe University of Omaha to move in with themfor a semester.7 Outside of 
Warren¡¯s study, the Buffetts¡¯ home was never a refuge from the world, and opportunities for solitude were rare. Yet despite the freewheelingatmosphere, the children were growingup with a balance of freedomand discipline, strongethical principles instilled by both parents, an excellent education, and an emphasis on enrichingexperiences. Warren and Susie had many longconversations about how to bringup children in a rich family so that they became self-sufficient rather than feelingentitled. 
What the children lacked was attention. Their father was almost exclusively focused on work. Their mother was like a gardener with too many tomato plants, runningwith her wateringcan toward whoever was neediest at any given time. The children responded to this upbringingin their different ways. The older Little Susie got, the fewer overtures she made for her mother¡¯s attention and the more authority she assumed over her brothers. She also worked as a crossingguard on the busy street outside their house, and spent much of 
her time with her own friends.8 
Howie, the tornado, tunneled through the backyard, leaped off the banisters, hungfromthe curtains, and tore through the house. Every day was AprilFool¡¯s Day. He dumped a bucket of water from the roof onto Phyllis the babysitter. Everybody knew it wasn¡¯t safe to drink a glass of anythinghe handed them. But he was also easily wounded, tenderhearted like his mother, and burdened by a need for attention that outstripped her supply. When Susie reached her limit, she sometimes locked Howie in his room. 9 
Peter, who was naturally quiet, felt rewarded for stayingin the background as his siblings ruled through 
squabbles, with bossy Little Susie strivingto contain Howie¡¯s whirlwind.10 Placid by nature, Peter retreated inside his head when the energy around himgrew too intense. He played ¡°Yankee Doodle¡± on the piano in a minor key whenever he was unhappy, rather than express his feelings in words.11 
*** 
Warren approved of his wife¡¯s sprawlinginterests, was proud of her generosity and her leadership role in Omaha, and appreciated her attentiveness to the children, which freed himto focus on his work. He, too, was always addingone more thingto his list, but unlike her he never overextended himself. When somethingnew came into his life, somethingelse went out. The two exceptions were money and friends. 
Thanks to both, by 1963 a number of professional investors had figured out that this Buffett fellow out in Omaha knew what he was doing. Even some who normally would never have heard of Warren Buffett were startingto seek himout. He no longer had to charm, much less prospect; he simply laid down the terms on which he would take people¡¯s money. 
Those outside Omaha often knew more about himthan his own neighbors. A friend of Little Susie¡¯s was in the family car on the way to the 1964 New York World¡¯s Fair when her parents stopped for gas. They struck up a conversation with the woman at the next pump, who turned out to be the mother¡¯s former high school teacher. The woman was travelingfromElmira, New York, to Omaha, carryingwith her $10,000 to invest with Warren Buffett. Do you know him? she asked. Should I invest with him? He¡¯s our neighbor, the family said. Yes, you should. They got back in the car and headed onward to the World¡¯s Fair, thinkingno more of 
it. With five kids and a new house, it didn¡¯t occur to them to invest for themselves.12 
Another would-be partner, Laurence Tisch, one of two brothers who were buildinga New York hotel empire, sent in a check for $30,000 made out to Charlie Munger. Buffett called himand said he was glad to have Tisch join the partnership, but next time, ¡°make the check out to me.¡± 
Munger could have used the money. Whatever Laurence Tisch may have thought, in 1963 he and Buffett were not partners. Munger had just opened a partnership of his own after waitinguntil he had accumulated a fair amount of money¡ªaround $300,000¡ªby investingin real estate. But this was peanuts by Buffett¡¯s standards, a fraction of Warren and Susie¡¯s wealth. 
¡°Charlie had a lot of children early on. That hindered him a lot in getting independent. Starting early with no encumbrances is a big advantage. Even when I came back from Graham-Newman, I mean, I had my 174,000 bucks, I felt like I could do what I wanted to do. I could take courses with my father-in-law the psychologist. I could go out there to the university and sit in the library and read all day.¡± 
In fact, Buffett had been encouragingMunger to think seriously about investingas a career ever since they 
first met. He would say to him, It¡¯s nice to be a lawyer and to do real estate on the side, but if you want to make some realmoney, you ought to start somethinglike my partnerships.13 In 1962, Munger had gone into partnership with his poker buddy Jack Wheeler. Wheeler was a trader on the Pacific Coast Stock Exchange, the Wild West version in miniature of what was goingon back east:a floor fullof screamingtraders, aggressive men lookingto make a killingthe fastest way they could. He owned an investingpartnership, Wheeler, Cruttenden & Company, which included two ¡°specialist posts¡± on the exchange, where traders took orders from brokers to trade stocks on the floor. They renamed the business Wheeler, Munger & Co., and sold the tradingoperation. 
Munger continued his law practice but bolted fromhis old firm together with several other lawyers, among them Roy Tolles and Rod Hills. They founded a new firm, Munger, Tolles, Hills & Wood, that suited their 
ideals of how a law firmshould be managed.14 Allalong, Munger had naturally resisted followingthe rules of a law firm run by anyone but himself. 
¡°It¡¯s no coincidence that the year he started his partnership was the same year he started his new law firm. The partners at the old firm found it abhorrent that a young lawyer in their firm would want to be a member of that gambling den, the Pacific Coast Stock Exchange. When Charlie and Roy left the firm, they sat down with the senior partners and said that they wanted these senior partners to understand that the day would come when every first-rate law firm had a member of the Pacific Coast Stock Exchange. This is probably apocryphal, but you can easily picture Charlie delivering that message to them as a parting shot.¡± 
At their new firm, Munger and Hills imposed an elitist, Darwinian ethos designed to attract the brightest and most ambitious. The partners all voted on one another¡¯s pay, which was circulated for everyone to know. Even as the firmlaunched, however, Munger was already spendinga significant amount of time at the Pacific Coast Stock Exchange. Within three years, when he was forty-one, he abandoned the law altogether to work full-time at investing. But he still consulted to the firm and kept an office there, where he remained an important, almost spiritual presence. Tolles, too, shifted most of his attention to investing. Hills, by far the most ambitious and dedicated to law of the three, ran the firmand kept it going. 
In his new role as a money manager, Munger had to raise money to manage. Buffett had always hustled for investors in an understated way, often usingothers as his promoters¡ªpeople like BillAngle and Henry Brandt, who found and prepared prospects¡ªso that he could show off his impressive track record with a pleasingmodesty. But however gracefully he¡¯d hustled, he¡¯d still done it. Munger felt this was demeaning. ¡°I didn¡¯t really like raisingmoney,¡± he says. ¡°I always felt that a gentleman should have his money.¡± Now, however, he managed to parlay his law practice into an investingpartnership by raisingfunds fromhis powerful Los Angeles business connections. While his partnership was of course much smaller than Buffett¡¯s, the money would be enough. 
Jack Wheeler had explained to himthat, as a member of the exchange, under its rules he could borrow an 
additionalninety-five cents for every dollar invested.15 Thus, if he put up $500, he could borrow another $475 and invest a totalof $975. If the investment earned a profit of twenty-five percent, the profit on Munger¡¯s $500 of capital would be nearly double that.16 While havingthe potential to nearly double his 
returns, this borrowinglikewise nearly doubled his risk. If he lost twenty-five percent, he would lose nearly half his capital. But Munger, more than Buffett¡ªfar more than Buffett¡ªwas willingto take on some debt if he was positive the odds were right. 
He and Wheeler set themselves up at the exchange in a ¡°crude, cheap¡± office festooned with radiator pipes 

and stuck their secretary, Vivian, in the tiny private back office overlookingan alley.17 Wheeler, a big spender who liked to live large, had just had a hip replacement and soon started showingup for work on the golf course most mornings.18 Munger fell into a routine, arrivingat five a.m., before the market opened on the East Coast, and checkingthe quotation board.19 Buffett had connected him with Ed Anderson, the 
Graham-Newman investor who had worked for the Atomic Energy Commission and seemed so smart; Munger hired himas his assistant. 
Most of the traders at the stock exchange had ignored Munger¡¯s arrival on the scene, but one of them, J. Patrick Guerin, took note. Guerin had bought the tradingpart of Wheeler¡¯s partnership when Wheeler had spun it off and gone into business with Munger. A rough-and-tumble guy who was scramblinglike mad to better himself, Guerin had grown up with a ¡°divorced father,¡± says Munger, ¡°and his mother was a drunk, so 
he raised himself on the streets. He was high IQ, rebellious, and maladjusted.¡±20 After a stint in the Air Force, Guerin had worked as a salesman for IBM, then became a stockbroker at a couple of small firms that peddled third-class stocks because they carried the highest profit, or ¡°spread,¡± for the firm. This was a part of stockbrokingBuffett had detested; Guerin, too, found it a relief to escape life as a ¡°prescriptionist.¡± 
By the time Munger met him, the lean, handsome Guerin had learned to roll his crisp shirt cuff down over his 
tanned forearmto cover his tattoo. He seemed to have a great number of friends as well as a tinge of 
Hollywood in his blood; one day he brought his friend, the actor Charlton Heston, down to the exchange for a tour.21 He did the tradingfor Wheeler, Munger, and says he immediately recognized that Munger had a money mind and began to cultivate him. He came to the conclusion that he¡¯d been on the wrongside of the Wheeler deal right away, and began to emulate Munger and Buffett, with the goal of forminghis own investingpartnership. 
¡°With some, the idea of buying dollar bills for forty cents takes, and with some it doesn¡¯t take. It¡¯s like an inoculation. It¡¯s extraordinary to me. If it doesn¡¯t grab them right away, I find that you can talk to them for years and show them records¡ªyou can do everything¡ªand it just doesn¡¯t make any difference. I¡¯ve never seen anyone who became a convert over a ten-year period with this approach. It¡¯s always instant recognition or nothing. Whatever it is, I¡¯ve never understood it. But with a fellow like Rick Guerin¡ªno business background in terms of studying it, but he saw it like that, he understood what it¡¯s about, and he was applying it five minutes later. And Rick was smart enough to know that you should get a great teacher, which is what I was lucky enough to do with Ben Graham.¡± 
As the day progressed at the Pacific Coast Stock Exchange, Munger would sit, lost in thought, usually 
reading. ¡°Charlie! Charlie!¡± Ed Anderson would shout from the next desk. Munger would say nothing, or grunt somethingin response. 22 Eventually, Anderson learned to make Munger respond clearly to questions, erasingambiguity; a simple grunt was not sufficient. But it took time and experience for most people to figure out that Munger¡¯s mind and mouth often went their separate ways. 
Guerin did not know this yet. One day he came into the office fromhis booth on the floor. ¡°Charlie,¡± he said. ¡°I¡¯ve just been offered fifty thousand shares of XYZ at fifteen dollars. This looks like a good deal.¡± ¡°Hmmm, uhm,¡± said Munger. ¡°Look, Charlie,¡± Guerin carried on, ¡°if this interests you, I¡¯m goingto buy it.¡± ¡°Yeah, yeah,¡± said Munger. A little later, Guerin walked back into the office and said, ¡°Charlie, we got them.¡± ¡°Got what?¡± said Munger. 
¡°We bought the fifty thousand shares at fifteen dollars.¡± Bigmoney. ¡°What!?¡± screamed Munger. ¡°What are you talkingabout! I don¡¯t want ¡¯em! Sell ¡¯em! Get rid of ¡¯emright now!¡± 
Guerin tried to explain. He called on Anderson for backup: ¡°Ed, did you hear this when I said it earlier?¡± ¡°Charlie, I was sittinghere listeningto it, just as Rick said,¡± Anderson interjected. ¡°I don¡¯t care! I don¡¯t care! Sell ¡¯em! Sell ¡¯em! Sell ¡¯em!¡± yelled Munger. 
Guerin ran out the door and got rid of the shares. ¡°That was an object lesson,¡± says Anderson.23 
Munger bought cigar butts, did arbitrage, even acquired smallbusinesses¡ªmuch of this in Buffett¡¯s style¡ªbut he seemed to be headingin a slightly different direction than Buffett. Periodically, he said to Ed Anderson, ¡°I just like the great businesses.¡± He told Anderson to write up companies like Allergan, the contact-lens-solution maker. Anderson misunderstood and wrote a Grahamian report emphasizingthe company¡¯s balance sheet. Munger dressed himdown for it; he wanted to hear about the intangible qualities of Allergan:the strength of its management, the durability of its brand, what it would take for someone else to compete with it. 
Munger had invested in a Caterpillar tractor dealership and saw how it gobbled up money, which sat in the yard in the formof slow-sellingtractors. To grow, the business had to buy more tractors, gobblingup more money. Munger wanted to own a business that did not require continualinvestment, and spat out more cash than it consumed. But what were the qualities of such a business? And what gave such a business an enduring competitive advantage? Munger was always askingpeople, ¡°What¡¯s the best business you¡¯ve ever heard of?¡± 
But he was a man of no great patience, and inclined to think that people could read his mind.24 
His impatience stood out more than any theory that was emerginginside his head. He wanted to get really rich, really fast. He and Roy Tolles made bets on whose portfolio would be up more than one hundred percent in a year. And he was willingto borrow money to make money, whereas Buffett had never borrowed a significant sum in his life. ¡°I need three million dollars,¡± Munger would say, on one of his frequent visits to 
the Union Bank of California. ¡°Sign here,¡± the bank would reply.25 With these huge sums, Munger did enormous trades like British Columbia Power, which was sellingat around $19 and beingtaken over by the Canadian government at a little more than $22. Munger put not just his whole partnership, but all the money 
he had, and all that he could borrow into an arbitrage on this single stock26¡ªbut only because there was almost no chance that this dealwould fallapart. When the transaction went through, the deal paid off handsomely. 
Yet despite their different approaches, Munger regarded Buffett as the kingof investing, and saw himself as merely a friendly pretender to the throne.27 ¡°Vivian, get me Warren!¡± he shouted severaltimes a day to whichever secretary had come to occupy Vivian¡¯s desk.28 He cultivated Buffett like a garden he was tending. Buffett explained his philosophy: ¡°You¡¯ve got to coattail,¡± he said.29 But he did not want his friends to 
coattail him and considered it unethical when they did. Hence, while Munger, cultivatingBuffett, was open about his trades¡ªhe got Buffett into his British Columbia Power deal, for example¡ªBuffett always kept his trades to himself unless he was workingan idea with a partner. 
By the early 1960s, the Buffetts had begun to vacation in California, so that Warren could spend more time with Graham and Munger. Once Warren and Susie took the kids on a longtrip up and down the coast, but usually when they came to visit, they¡¯d settle into a motel on Santa Monica Boulevard, and he and Munger would talk stocks for hours. The differences in their philosophies made for longconversations. While Buffett made many of the same investments, he would forgo the chance of profits any day to avoid too much risk, and viewed preservinghis capitalas an almost holy imperative. Munger had the attitude that unless you were already wealthy, you could afford to take some risk¡ªif the odds were right¡ªto get rich. His audacity put him in a different category fromallthe others who cultivated Buffett, for his deference to Buffett was limited by his high opinion of himself. ¡°Charlie would get so excited by his own words that he¡¯d hyperventilate,¡± 
says Dick Holland, Buffett¡¯s friend and partner, who was present at some of these California get-togethers.30 
In his quest for the great businesses, Munger did not understand Buffett¡¯s fascination with Ben Graham. ¡°Because he is good at explainingBen Graham,¡± Munger later wrote, Buffett was ¡°behavinglike the old CivilWar veteran who after a few minutes of ordinary conversation always interjected: ¡®BoomBoom, that 
reminds me of the battle of Gettysburg.¡¯¡±31 
Graham¡¯s flaw, Munger felt, was that he considered the future ¡°more fraught with hazard than ripe with opportunity.¡± Grahamwas a man, he said, ¡°whose favorite story is that of Croesus, surveyingthe ruin of his life and empire after the too-hopeful misadventure with Persia, and recallingthe words of Solon that ¡®no 
man¡¯s life should be accounted a happy one until it is over.¡¯¡±32 Munger began tryingto wean Buffett away from Graham¡¯s dreary pessimism, which underlay the drudgery of stoopingfor cigar butts and suckingout their last puff. 
Buffett had a buoyant optimism about the long-termeconomic future of American business, which had enabled him to invest in the market against his father¡¯s and Graham¡¯s advice. Yet his investingstyle still reflected Graham¡¯s doom-laden habits of lookingat businesses based on what they were worth dead, not alive. Munger wanted Buffett to define the margin of safety in other than purely statistical terms. In doingso, Munger was workingagainst a subtle tendency toward catastrophismin Buffett¡¯s outlook that sometimes cropped up when solvingtheoretical problems. His father, Howard, had always prepared for the day the currency became worthless, as if that day were imminent. Warren was far more realistic. Nonetheless, he tended to extrapolate mathematicalprobabilities over time to the inevitable (and often correct) conclusion that if somethingcan go wrong, it eventually will. This style of thinkingwas the proverbial double-edged sword: It made Buffett a gifted visionary whose thoughts oriented toward doomsday. He would come to use this sword often to slice through knotty problems, sometimes in a very public way. 
A few years earlier, another friend of Buffett¡¯s, Herb Wolf of New York Hanseatic, an over-the-counter tradinghouse, had helped Buffett tame another personality trait that was hinderinghis financial quest. Wolf, an investor in the water utility American Water Works, had sought Buffett out in the early 1950s after 
readingan article that Warren had written on IDSCorporation in the Commercial & Financial Chronicle.33 
¡°Herb Wolf was one of the smartest guys I ever met. He could tell the effect on American Water Works¡¯ earnings if somebody took a bath in Hackensack, New Jersey. He was unbelievable. One day Herb said to me, ¡®Warren, if you¡¯re looking for a gold needle in a haystack of gold, it¡¯s not better to find the gold needle.¡¯ I had this thing that the more obscure something was, the better I liked it. I thought it was a treasure hunt. Herb got me out of that way of thinking. I loved that guy.¡± 
By 1962, Buffett had shaken off the treasure-hunt way of thinking. But he stillhad Wolf¡¯s passion for detail, and even with the addition of BillScott, his operations had expanded so much that he now needed another employee to assist him. He managed to keep this one off his own payroll; Buffett would forever go to extremes to control his overhead by payingfor expenses in ways that could be shut off as needed, or, better yet¡ªas in this case¡ªcould be covered in ways that made themeffectively free. 
Henry Brandt, Buffett¡¯s stockbroker friend who worked at Wood, Struthers & Winthrop, was a born sleuth who had been doingpart-time research for the BPL partnership. Buffett had been payingWood, Struthers for Brandt¡¯s time through the brokerage commissions he paid for tradingstocks through it. Since he would be 
payingcommissions to somebody anyway, Brandt effectively worked for himfor free.34 If Buffett decided he did not need Brandt¡¯s research anymore, he could use another brokerage firmto execute his trades. 
Now, Brandt worked for Buffett almost one hundred percent of the time. Buffett paid Brandt by waivinghis partnership fee and beginningto cut him in on outside deals without an override. The two men shared an interest in knowingthe minutest details about a company. Brandt was fearless about askingquestions. Unlike Buffett, he never thought twice about makinghimself obnoxious if this was what it took. He gladly did enormous amounts of meticulous research by gumshoeingand pesteringpeople. Brandt, however, was incapable of stoppingbefore he found the gold needle. Therefore, Buffett set the agenda and steered the 
process to keep it fromturninginto a treasure hunt. Brandt produced foot-high stacks of notes and reports.35 
Part of Brandt¡¯s job for Buffett was findingscuttlebutt, a term used by investment writer Phil Fisher, the 
apostle of growth, who said that many qualitative factors like the ability to maintain sales growth, good management, and research and development characterized a good investment.36 These were the qualities that Munger was searchingfor when he spoke of the great businesses. Fisher¡¯s proof that these factors could be used to assess a stock¡¯s long-termpotential was beginningto creep into Buffett¡¯s thinking, and would eventually influence his way of doingbusiness. 
Buffett now had Brandt digginginto an idea that would have pleased Munger, had he known about it. The episode that resulted would become one of the high points of Buffett¡¯s career. This opportunity had its roots in the machinations of a big-time commodities trader, Anthony ¡°Tino¡± De Angelis, who had become convinced in the late 1950s that he¡¯d found a shortcut to makingmoney in soybean oil. De Angelis¡ªwho had a shady past, havingonce sold tainted meat to the government school-lunch program¡ªhad by then become arguably the world¡¯s most important and legitimate dealer in soybean oil. 
It apparently struck De Angelis one day that no one actually knew how much oilwas in his warehouse. He was usingthe oil as collateralto borrow frombanks.37 As longas nobody knew how much soybean oilwas in 
the tanks, why not goose up the numbers a little bit so he could borrow more money? 
The tanks sat in a warehouse in Bayonne, New Jersey, which was managed by a tiny subsidiary that was an almost invisible part of the gigantic empire of American Express. This armof the business issued warehouse receipts: documents that certified how much oil was in a tank and could be bought and sold, just like the warehouse receipts for cocoa beans that Graham-Newman had bought fromJay Pritzker in exchange for Rockwood shares. 
After American Express had verified the oilin the tanks, De Angelis and his Allied Crude Vegetable Oil RefiningCorporation sold these receipts or used them as collateral to borrow frombanks¡ªfifty-one banks. Furthermore, American Express stood as guarantor of the quantity of oilbehind those receipts. 
As for the tanks, they were connected by a systemof pipes and valves, and De Angelis found that the soybean oilcould be sloshed and shunted around from one tank to another. Thus, a gallon of oilcould pull double or triple or quadruple duty as collateralfor a loan. Pretty soon, the loans guaranteed by warehouse receipts were secured by a smaller and smaller amount of soybean oil. 
Eventually, it occurred to De Angelis that, in fact, very little oilwas needed. Indeed, just enough to fool the inspectors would do the trick. So the tanks were filled with seawater, and oilwas placed inside a little tube that the inspectors used to guide their measuringsticks. They did not notice the difference or think to test a 
sample from outside the tube.38 
At about that point, dealingin the oil itself was no longer generatingenough money to satisfy De Angelis, so he began to trade in the futures market. Futures contracts give someone the right to buy soybean oil at a later date, bettingon the price of oilin the future versus the price today. They are like the futures contracts Graham-Newman had sold to lock in the price of cocoa beans. For a buck or two per ton, De Angelis could buy tons of soybean oil to be delivered in nine months at a certain price to be paid on that date. The contracts could be sold before the payment came due, which made speculatingin oilmuch cheaper than payingtwenty dollars to buy the oiloutright in order to sellit later. Thus stretched, the borrowed money went much further; De Angelis could, through the futures market, control a great dealof soybean oil. 
The people at American Express had not been entirely asleep; after an anonymous tip in 1960 that something was amiss down in New Jersey, they made inquiries of De Angelis and his employees. But De Angelis, who was as tubby as the tanks fullof seawater sittingthere right in front of the investigators¡¯ eyes, managed to give themanswers that apparently satisfied them. 
In September 1963, De Angelis saw a chance to make a further killing. The Soviet sunflower crop had failed, and rumors spread that the Russians would have to turn to soybeans for oil. De Angelis decided to corner the soybean market, forcingthe Communists to buy from him at an inflated price. There was no particular limit to how many soybean futures he could buy. In fact, he could and did controlmore soybean oilthan actually 
existed on the planet39 by borrowingheavily fromIra Haupt & Co., his broker, and takingon obligations in the futures market to buy 1.2 billion pounds of soybean oil. But this large a bet meant that he could afford to have the price of soybean oilgo in only one direction¡ªup. 
Then, suddenly, it appeared that the U.S. government might not let the Soviet deal go through. The price of soybean oilcollapsed, drivingthe market down by $120 million. Haupt began callingon De Angelis to meet his obligations, but De Angelis sent excuses instead. When Haupt came up short of money, the New York 
Stock Exchange shut the firm down and Haupt was forced into bankruptcy.40 De Angelis¡¯s lenders, holding the now-worthless warehouse receipts, hired investigators and turned to American Express, issuer of the receipts, to recoup their $150 to $175 million in losses. And American Express¡ªcaught holdingtanks full of nothingbut worthless seawater¡ªsaw its stock plummet. The story began to hit the newspapers. 
Two days later, on Friday, November 22, 1963, President John F. Kennedy was assassinated while ridingin a Dallas motorcade. 
Buffett was downstairs eatinglunch in the Kiewit Plaza cafeteria with an acquaintance, Al Sorenson, when somebody came in with the news that Kennedy had been shot. He went back upstairs to his office and found that the New York Stock Exchange floor was in a state of stupefaction; stocks were plungingon heavy 
trading. With the Dow down twenty-one points in half an hour, the market had lost $11 billion.41 Then the 
exchange closed, its first emergency closingduringtradingsince the Great Depression.42 Shortly afterward, the FederalReserve made a statement of confidence that meant¡ªafter translation fromFedargot to English¡ªthat internationalcentral banks would work together to thwart speculation against the dollar.43 
As a stunned country erupted in sorrow, anger, and shame, schools were dismissed and businesses shut their doors. Buffett went home to sit, alongwith the rest of the country, and watch the nonstop television coverage throughout the weekend. He characteristically displayed no powerful surge of emotion, rather a detached gravity. For the first time in history, a U.S. presidential assassination was beingcovered on television around the globe. For the first time, shock and sorrow united the world through the mediumof television. For a brief while America stopped thinkingabout anythingbut the assassination. 
The newspapers, of course, relegated the American Express scandalto their back inside pages for days as the dramatic headlines took precedence.44 But Buffett went lookingfor it. The stock never recovered fromthe 
blow it took on Friday when the market closed, and afterward it continued to slide downhill. Investors were fleeingin droves fromthe stock of one of America¡¯s most prestigious financialinstitutions. Its price had been cut in half.45 Indeed, it wasn¡¯t clear whether American Express would survive. 
The company was an emergingfinancial powerhouse. Now that the average person could suddenly afford air travel, half a billion dollars of the company¡¯s Travelers Cheques floated around the world. Its credit card, launched five years earlier, was a huge success. The company¡¯s value was its brand name. American Express sold trust. Had the taint to its reputation so leaked into customers¡¯ consciousness that they no longer trusted the name? Buffett started droppingin on Omaha restaurants and visitingplaces that took American Express 
cards and Travelers Cheques.46 He put Henry Brandt on the case. 
Brandt scouted Travelers Cheque users, bank tellers, bank officers, restaurants, hotels, and credit-card 
holders to gauge how American Express was doingversus its competitors, and whether use of American Express Travelers Cheques and cards had dropped off.47 Back came the usual foot-high stack of material. Buffett¡¯s verdict after sortingthrough it was that customers were still happy to be associated with the name 
American Express. The tarnish on WallStreet had not spread to Main Street.48 
Duringthe months that Buffett was investigatingAmerican Express, his father¡¯s health declined precipitously. Despite havingundergone several surgeries, Howard¡¯s cancer had spread throughout his body. In early 1964, Warren took charge as the de facto leader of the family. While time remained, he had Howard remove himfromhis willto increase the share left to Doris and Bertie in a trust. The amount ¡ª$180,000¡ªwas a fraction of his and Susie¡¯s net worth; he felt it made no sense for himto share it when he could so easily earn money himself. He set up another trust for his children so that Howard could leave them the farmto which the Buffett family had planned to flee when the dollar became worthless. Warren would be trustee of these trusts. Howard¡¯s previous willhad specified an ordinary wood casket and an economical 
funeral, and the family convinced himto delete that part.49 One of the most difficult things Warren felt he had to do was to level with his father that he was no longer a Republican at heart.50 The reason, he said, was civil rights.51 Amazingly, however, he could not bringhimself to change his voter registration as longas Howard was alive.52 
¡°I wouldn¡¯t throw that in his face. In fact if he had lived, it would have really constrained my life. I would not have come out against my father politically in public. I can envision his friends wondering why Warren was behaving that way. I couldn¡¯t have done it.¡± 
Although the family did not talk about Howard¡¯s impendingdeath at home,53 Susie took over much of his care fromLeila. She also saw to it that the children took part in their own way. She arranged for them to 
stand outside his hospitalwindow with a sign that said, ¡°We Love You, Grandpa.¡± At ten and nine years old, Susie Jr. and Howie understood what was goingon. Five-year-old Peter had a vaguer sense of his grandfather¡¯s illness. Susie also made sure that Warren¡ªwho had trouble facingillness under any circumstances¡ªwent to the hospital every day to see his father. 
As Howard worsened, Warren poured his attention into American Express. At the time, he had the largest cache of money with which to work that the partnership had ever seen: Its huge profits in 1963 meant that on January 1, 1964, $5 million of new money had come in, and the partnership was already enriched by $3 million of stock gains fromthe previous year. His own money had exploded:He was now worth $1.8 million. BPL¡¯s capitalat the beginningof 1964 stood at just under $17.5 million. DuringHoward¡¯s last weeks, Warren began to invest in American Express at a hyperactive sprint, pouringmoney into stock as fast as he could trade, workingtirelessly and methodically to get as many shares as he could without runningup the price. Only five years before, he had had to scrape and scrounge to find a few tens of thousands for National American. Never before had he invested like this. Never had he put to work anythingapproachingthis much money, and so fast, in his life. 
Through most of Howard¡¯s final few days, Susie was alone with him, often for hours at a time. She both feared and understood pain, but she was unafraid of death and had the strength to sit with Howard even when those around her were fallingapart. Her gift for comfortingthe hopeless and those in misery blossomed, and Leila, devastated, let her take charge. In such close proximity to death, Susie found that the boundaries between herself and the other dissolved. ¡°Many people kind of flee, but for me it was natural,¡± she said. ¡°It was a beautiful experience to be that physically and emotionally intimate with someone you loved, because I knew exactly what his needs were. You know when they need to turn their head, or you know when they need a little ice chip. You know. You feelit. I loved him very much. And he gave me that gift for myself of 
knowing, of havingthat experience, and realizinghow I felt about it.¡±54 
Susie Jr., Howie, and Peter were sittingat the kitchen table one eveningwhen their father came in, looking more depressed than they had ever seen him. ¡°I¡¯mgoingto Grandma¡¯s house,¡± he said. ¡°Why?¡± they asked. ¡°Aren¡¯t you goingto the hospital?¡± ¡°Grandpa died today,¡± Warren said, and walked out the back door without another word. 
¡°I thought, we don¡¯t want to talk about this,¡± Susie Jr. recalls. ¡°This was goingto be so bigthat talkingabout it was too painful.¡± BigSusie represented the family in planningthe funeral, while Warren sat at home, stunned into silence. Leila was distraught, but she anticipated her reunion with her husband in heaven. Susie tried to get Warren to explore and express his feelings about his father¡¯s death, but he literally could not think about it, fendingit off with anythingelse available. Fallingback upon his core of financialconservatism, he argued with Susie that she had been conned into spendingtoo much money on Howard¡¯s coffin. 
On the day of the funeral, Warren sat in silence through the service as five hundred people mourned his 
father. No matter how controversialHoward Buffett¡¯s views had been duringhis life, people came out to show respect for him in the end. Afterward, Warren stayed home for a few days.55 He parried unwelcome thoughts with the distraction of watchingCongress debate landmark civil rights legislation on television. When he returned to the office, he continued buyingAmerican Express at a hectic pace. By the end of June 1964, two months after Howard¡¯s death, he had put almost $3 million into the stock; it was now the 
partnership¡¯s largest investment. Although he never did show any visible sign of grief,56 eventually he placed a large portrait of his father on the wall across from his desk. And one day, weeks after the funeral, two bald patches appeared on the sides of his head. His hair had fallen out fromthe shock. 
27 
Folly 
Omaha and New Bedford, Massachusetts . 1964¨C1966 
Six weeks after Howard died, Warren did somethingunexpected. It was not just about money anymore. American Express had done wrong, and he thought that the company should admit it and pay for the damage. The company¡¯s president, Howard Clark, had offered the banks $60 million to settle their demands, saying the company felt morally bound. A group of shareholders sued, arguingthat American Express should defend itself rather than pay. Buffett offered to testify on behalf of the management¡¯s plan to settle, at his own 
expense. 
¡°It is our feeling that three or four years from now, this problem may well have added to the stature of the company in establishing standards for financial integrity and responsibility which are far beyond those of the normal commercial enterprise.¡± 
But American Express wasn¡¯t offeringthe money to be an example; it just wanted to get the risk behind it of losinga lawsuit that was shadowingits stock. Nor did its customers care; the salad-oilscandalhadn¡¯t registered with themin the first place. 
Buffett wrote that two paths lay before the company, and that an American Express that took responsibility 
and paid the $60 million to the banks would be ¡°worth very substantially more than American Express disclaimingresponsibility for its subsidiary¡¯s acts.¡±1 He described the $60 million payment as inconsequential in the longrun, like a dividend check that got ¡°lost in the mail.¡± 
Susie, who had thrown the dividend checks down the incinerator and had never had the nerve to tellher 
husband about the incident, might have been shocked to hear himso cavalierly dismiss a $60 million dividend check lost in the mail, had she known.2 And why should Buffett now be interested in whether American Express had ¡°standards for financial integrity and responsibility¡­beyond those of the normalcommercial enterprise¡±?Fromwhence had come the notion that a reputation for integrity would translate into a business ¡°worth substantially more¡±? Why did Warren want to testify?While he had always shared his father¡¯s commitment to honesty, now he seemed to have inherited Howard¡¯s penchant for pontificatingon matters of principle. 
Buffett had always wanted to influence the managements of companies in which he invested. But in the past he had not attempted to turn his investments into a church, where he could preach while passingaround the collection plate. Now he showed up at Howard Clark¡¯s door unannounced to lobby himto remain resolute despite the shareholder lawsuit. 
¡°I had this habit of just sort of dropping in and talking to different people. There was one time that Howard said to me that it¡¯d be a little nicer if I paid more attention to the organization chart¡­. He was very nice 
3
about it.¡± 
As if to confirm Buffett¡¯s sense that moralrectitude had financialvalue, American Express paid the settlement and worked through its travails, and the stock, which had plunged below $35, rose to more than $49 per share. By November 1964, the partnership owned more than $4.3 million of American Express stock. It had made other huge bets: $4.6 million in Texas Gulf Producingand another $3.5 million in Pure Oil, cigar 
butts both. Together the three made up more than half the portfolio.4 By 1965, American Express alone was almost one-third. 
The entire partnership had stood at only $7.2 million at the beginningof 1962. Buffett, fearless in concentratinghis bets, would keep buyinginto 1966 untilhe had spent $13 million on American Express. He felt the partners ought to know a new ¡°ground rule¡±: ¡°We diversify substantially less than most investment operations. We might invest up to forty percent of our net worth in a single security under conditions coupling an extremely high probability that our facts and our reasoning are correct with a very low 
5
probability that anything could drastically change the underlying value of the investment.¡± 
Warren had ventured far fromthe worldview of his mentor, Ben Graham. The hard-nosed ¡°quantitative¡± approach espoused by Grahamwas the world of the speed handicapper, of the cigar-butt stooper who worked from pure statistics. Come to work in the morning, flip through the Moody¡¯s Manual or the Standard & Poor¡¯s weekly report, look for cheap stocks based on a handfulof numbers, call TomKnapp at Tweedy, Browne & Knapp and buy them, go home when the market closed, and sleep well at night. As Buffett said of this, his favorite approach, ¡°The more sure money tends to be made on the obvious quantitative decisions.¡± But the method had a couple of drawbacks. The number of statistical bargains had shrunk to virtually nil, and since cigar butts tended to be smallcompanies, it did not work when large sums of money were involved. 
While still workingthis approach, Buffett had had what he would later calla ¡°high-probability insight¡± about American Express that confounded Ben Graham¡¯s core idea. Unlike companies whose value came fromcash, equipment, real estate, and other assets that could be calculated and if necessary liquidated, American Express had little more than its customers¡¯ goodwill. He had bet his partners¡¯ money¡ªAlice¡¯s inheritance; Doc Thompson¡¯s savings; Anne Gottschaldt¡¯s and Catherine Elberfeld¡¯s money; the Angles¡¯ life savings; and Estey Graham¡¯s money¡ªon that goodwill: the competitive advantage that Charlie Munger had been talking about when he spoke of the ¡°great businesses.¡± This was the method of the class handicapper, of Phil Fisher, and it involved qualitative, as opposed to quantitative, assessments. 
Buffett would later write to the partners that buying ¡°the right company (with the right prospects, inherent industry conditions, management, etc.)¡± means ¡°the price will take care of itself¡­. This is what causes the cash register to really sing. However, it is an infrequent occurrence, as insights usually are, and of course, no insight is required on the quantitative side¡ªthe figures should hit you over the head with a baseball bat. 
6
So the really big money tends to be made by investors who are right on qualitative decisions.¡± 
This new emphasis on a qualitative approach paid off in the stupendous results Buffett was able to announce to his partners at the end of 1965. When Buffett made his annual report to them, he compared the huge gain to an earlier prediction that he could beat the Dow by ten percent a year¡ªand referred to the dazzling performance by saying, ¡°Naturally no writer likes to be publicly humiliated by such a mistake. It is unlikely 
to be repeated.¡±7 Despite the irony, he had begun a tradition of hedgingagainst his partners¡¯ high expectations. As his record of outstandingresults lengthened, his letters also began to display a preoccupation with measuringsuccess and failure. He used terms like ¡°guilt,¡± ¡°embarrass,¡± ¡°disappoint,¡± or ¡°blame¡± with unusualfrequency, includingto describe his so-called mistakes¡ªfor he remained obsessed with never letting 
anyone down.8 As readers began to recognize this pattern, some assumed he was manipulatingthem, while others accused himof false modesty. Hardly anybody knew how deep his sense of insecurity ran. 
In the year followingHoward¡¯s death, Warren began to think of memorializinghimin some way¡ªfor example, through endowinga university chair. But he could never seemto find the perfect vehicle. He and Susie did set up the Buffett Foundation, which made small grants to educational causes. But this wasn¡¯t what he had in mind for his father. And he had no intention of becominga philanthropist; it was Susie who liked to dispense money and she who ran the foundation. Instead, Warren worked with no slackingof intensity. After his incredible home run on American Express, he hired John Hardingfrom the Omaha National Bank trust department in April 1965, to handle administration. And yet, when Hardingtook the job, Buffett warned him: 
¡°I don¡¯t know if I¡¯ll necessarily be doingthis forever, and if I quit, you¡¯ll be out of a job.¡±9 
But there was no sign of his quitting. Hardinghad hoped to learn investing, but that ambition was soon destroyed. ¡°Any idea that I wanted to handle investments on my own disappeared when I saw how good Warren was,¡± he says. Instead, Hardingsimply put most of his money into the partnership. 
Besides shovelingmillions of dollars¡¯ worth of American Express stock into BPL, Warren now chased bigger deals that required traveland coordination, both giant cigar butts and ¡°qualitative¡± class handicappingdeals that were a far cry fromflippingthrough the Moody¡¯s Manual in his bathrobe at home. His next target, another cigar butt, lay far fromOmaha. 
Each of the Grahamites in Buffett¡¯s network was always lookingfor ideas, and Dan Cowin had brought 
Buffett a textile maker in New Bedford, Massachusetts, that was sellingat a discount to the value of its assets. 10 His idea was to buy it and liquidate it, to sell it off piecemeal, and to shut it down. Its name was Berkshire Hathaway. By the time the hair had grown back on Warren¡¯s head fromthe shock of his father¡¯s loss, he was in fullpursuit of this new idea. 
Buffett began by circlingover the company and observingit. He started leisurely accumulatingstock in Berkshire Hathaway. This time, for better or worse, he had chosen a business run by a personality the size of Massachusetts. 
Seabury Stanton, president of Berkshire Hathaway, had reluctantly closed more than a dozen mills, one by one, over the past decade. The remnants sprawled alongthe rivers of the gently molderingtowns of coastal New England like empty red-brick temples of a long-lost faith. 
He was the second Stanton to oversee the company, and was filled with a sense of destiny. Standingon New Bedford¡¯s rocky shores, he cast himself as KingCanute, tellingthe tides of devastation to retreat. But unlike Canute, he actually imagined they would obey. A New England version of American Gothic come to life, Seabury peered coldly down on visitors from his six-foot two-inch height¡ªpeered down if, that is, they managed to find him. He sat tucked away in a remote penthouse office at the top of a long, narrow staircase, protected by his secretary¡¯s secretary, far from the din of the looms. 
New Bedford, the town that was his headquarters, once shone as the diamond in New England¡¯s crown. For a 
while the ships that sailed fromits harbor to hunt sperm whales made New Bedford North America¡¯s richest city.11 Stanton¡¯s grandfather, a whalingcaptain, had been head of one of the rulingfamilies of the city, capital of the world¡¯s most swashbucklingbusiness. But in the mid-nineteenth century, as spermwhales grew scarce, the great harpoon ships had to venture ever farther north in search of the bowhead whale, allthe way to the Arctic Ocean. In the autumn of 1871, the families of New Bedford waited in vain for their sons and husbands. Twenty-two ships, surprised by an early winter, lay trapped behind the Arctic ice and never 
returned.12 New Bedford would never be the same. Nor would the whalingbusiness, once its mainstay, ever recover. As the supply of whales shrank, demand for their products had dwindled. After 1859, when oil gushed from the ground in Pennsylvania, kerosene became an increasingly popular substitute for the 
ever-scarcer whale oil. The flexible, comblike whale baleen13 used in women¡¯s corsets, hoop skirts, and fancy parasols, in buggy whips and other mainstays of Victorian life, ceased to find a market as those products gradually disappeared fromthe shelves. 
In 1888, Horatio Hathaway, whose family had roots in the China tea trade,14 and Joseph Knowles, his 
treasurer, organized a group of partners to follow what they saw as the next business trend. They formed a pair of textile mills, Acushnet Mill Corporation and Hathaway ManufacturingCompany.15 One of their partners was Hetty Green, the notorious ¡°Witch of Wall Street,¡± a shippingheiress raised in New Bedford who rode the ferry to New York City from her tenement apartment in Hoboken to make loans and investments. She stalked through lower Manhattan in an ancient black alpaca gown, swirlingcape, and rusty veiled hat like an elderly bat, her appearance so eccentric and her parsimony so notorious that rumors circulated that she wore newspapers as underclothes. By the time of her death in 1916, Green would be the 
richest woman in the world.16 
Financed by such investors, mill after millsprangup to comb, spin, weave, and dye the deep stacks of cotton bales unloaded fromSouthern ships onto the wharves of New Bedford. Congressman WilliamMcKinley, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, who passed through the region fromtime to time to christen new mills, sponsored a tariff to protect the textile mills from foreign trade, for it was already cheaper 
to make fabric elsewhere.17 Thus, even from the beginning, the textile mills of the North needed political help to survive. Early in the twentieth century, a new technology¡ªair-conditioning¡ªrevolutionized factories by allowingprecise controlof humidity as wellas particulate matter in the air, and it was no longer economically justifiable to ship cotton out of the South, where labor was cheaper, to the chilly shores of New England. Knowles¡¯s successor, James E. Stanton Jr., watched half his competitors¡¯ mills melt away to the 
South.18 Put to the rack by repeated wage cuts, workers at the remainingnorthern mills went out on a cripplingfive-month strike that broke their employers¡¯ backs. James Stanton ¡°hesitated to spend stockholders¡¯ money on new equipment when business was so bad and the prospects were so uncertain,¡± recalled his son. 19 He pulled capitalout of the business by payingdividends. 
By the time Stanton¡¯s son Seabury, a Harvard graduate, took over in 1934, the aged, rickety Hathaway plant still rattled out a few bolts of cotton cloth each day. Seabury became seized with a vision of himself as the hero who saved the textile mills. He said ¡°there was a place in New England for a textile company that had the latest machinery and capable management,¡± and he and his brother Otis conceived a five-year plan to 
modernize.20 They spent $10 million installingair-conditioning, electric lifts, overhead conveyers, better lighting, and futuristic locker rooms in the company¡¯s venerable red-brick buildings. They shifted from cotton to rayon, the poor man¡¯s silk, and made rayon parachute cloth duringthe war, enjoyinga temporary boom. Nonetheless, as time passed, cheap foreign labor kept loweringthe price their customers would pay. To compete, Seabury squeezed the pay of the workers in his modern new plant. But year by year the tides lappingat his shore¡ªcheaper foreign fabric, better-automated competition, and lower labor costs in the South¡ªpresented a risingthreat to his mills. 
In 1954, Hurricane Carol¡¯s fourteen-foot stormsurge poured into Hathaway¡¯s Cove Street headquarters. Though the firm¡¯s distinctive clock tower rode out the storm, a sea of muck and debris swamped the looms and yarn inside the building. Rather than rebuild the mill, the obvious response would have been to join the march southward. Instead, Seabury Stanton merged Hathaway with another mill, Berkshire Fine Spinning, 
tryingin effect to build a levee against a tidal wave. 21 
Berkshire Fine Spinningmade everythingfromthe stiffest twills to the sheerest marquisettes, crisp curtain dimity, and fancy broadcloth shirting. Malcolm Chace, its master, steadfastly refused to sink a nickelinto modernization. His nephew, Nicholas Brady, had written a paper on the business at the Harvard Business School in 1954, reachingso discouraginga conclusion that he sold his Berkshire stock. 
Chace naturally opposed Seabury Stanton¡¯s demand for modernization, but the new Berkshire Hathaway was 
governed by Stanton¡¯s sense of destiny. He simplified the product line, focusingon rayon, turningout more than half the men¡¯s suit linings in the United States.22 As Berkshire Hathaway under Stanton unreeled nearly a quarter billion yards of fabrics a year, he continued his ¡°relentless¡± modernizing, pouringanother million dollars into the mills. 
By this time, his brother Otis had begun to have doubts about the feasibility of remainingin New Bedford, but Seabury thought the time for a textile mill to move south had passed,23 and refused to give up his dream of revivingthe mills.24 
When Dan Cowin approached Buffett about Berkshire in 1962, Buffett was already aware of it, just as he 
was of any U.S. business of a meaningful size. The money that poured into the company meant that Berkshire was worth¡ªaccordingto its accountants¡ª$22 million as a business, or $19.46 per share.25 And yet, after nine years of losses, anyone could acquire the stock for just seven and a half bucks. Buffett started buying 
it.26 
Seabury had been buyingBerkshire¡¯s stock as well, usingextra cash that was not beingpoured back into the mills to make a tender offer for shares every couple of years. Buffett¡¯s theory was that Seabury would continue, and he could time his own transactions, buyingwhenever the stock got cheap and sellingit back to the company whenever the price rose. 
He and Cowin set about buyingstock. Had anyone known Buffett was buying, it might have pushed up the price, so he bought through Howard Browne of Tweedy, Browne. The firm was a favorite broker of Buffett¡¯s because everyone there, especially Browne, was closemouthed, of utmost importance to Buffett given his 
insistence on secrecy. Tweedy, Browne had code-named the Buffett partnership¡¯s account BWX.27 
When Buffett arrived at Tweedy, Browne, which maintained a tiny office at 52 Wall Street, in the same art 
deco buildingwhere Ben Grahamhad once worked, it felt like enteringan old-fashioned barbershop, with its black-and-white ceramic tile floor. In a little office to the left sat the firm¡¯s secretary and office manager. To the right lay the tradingroom. Past that, in a small rented alcove half filled with a water cooler and a coatrack¡ªin effect a sort of closet¡ªsat Walter Schloss, runninghis partnership from a battered desk. Using Graham¡¯s method without the slightest variation, he had been averagingreturns of better than twenty percent a year since leavingGraham-Newman. To pay his rent to Tweedy, Browne, in lieu of cash he gave the firm commissions by tradingstocks. His trades were few, and he was gettinga great bargain on the rent. He limited his other expenses to the cost of a subscription to Value Line Investment Survey, some paper and pencils, subway tokens, and nothingelse. 
Alongthe center of the tradingroomran a twenty-foot wooden table, which the firmhad acquired somewhere on its way to a garbage dump. Its surface bore the marks of generations of schoolchildren armed with penknives. To write down figures, a tablet had to be placed underneath the paper; otherwise, ¡°Todd loves Mary¡± would be embossed into the text. 
On one side of the child-scarred table, Howard Browne ruled with benign authority. He and his partners faced the firm¡¯s trader, who¡ªlike all traders¡ªsat, jumpy and restless, waitingfor the phone to ringso that he could trade. Next to him, an empty space at the table served as the ¡°visitors¡¯ desk.¡± The cheapest of wooden filingcabinets lined the walls. 
Nowhere else in New York did Buffett feel so at home as sittingat the Tweedy, Browne visitors¡¯ desk. The firm had branched out into arbitrage, workouts (all-but-completed turnaround situations where a little money remained to be made), and ¡°stubs¡±(companies beingacquired and broken up)¡ªall the sorts of things he liked. It traded securities such as fifteen-year Jamaica (Queens) Water warrants¡ªrights to buy the water company¡¯s stock, which rose whenever there was speculation that New York City would someday take over the waterworks. They fell again when speculation lulled. Tweedy, Browne bought themevery time they dropped and sold themevery time they rose, over and over and over again. 
The firmalso made a specialty of fencingwith the managements of these obscure, undervalued businesses, tryingto force out hidden value, as with Sanborn Map. ¡°We were always in court suing,¡± one partner says. 28 Allof it reeked of the old Graham-Newman days and bore little similarity to the gargantuan American Express deal, but Buffett loved the atmosphere. TomKnapp researched stocks and spent his days plotting practical jokes when he wasn¡¯t orchestratingtrades. He had commandeered a huge storage closet, fillingit 
with the four-cent Blue Eagle stamps he and Buffett had made the mistake of buyingand topographical maps of the Maine coastline. The pile of maps continually grew, for Knapp was funnelingthe cash he made from stocks into buyingup the coast of Maine.29 The pile of Blue Eagles slowly shrank as Tweedy, Browne pasted 
forty stamps onto each batch of the Pink Sheets they sent to Buffett once a week, every week. 
The Pink Sheet quotations for stocks not listed on the New York Stock Exchange were stale the moment they went to print. Buffett used his Pink Sheets merely as a startingpoint for the telephonic bazaar in which calls to numerous brokers might be required to make a trade. He was a master at workingthis systemthrough his brokers. The lack of a publicly posted price helped reduce competition. Someone who was willingto call every market-maker and squeeze themmercilessly had a meaningful advantage over the less energetic or the more fainthearted. 
Browne would call Buffett to let himknow they had XYZ stock on offer at $5 a share. 
¡°Hmmm, $43/4 bid,¡± Buffett would say, without hesitation. This maneuver, Castingthe Line, would fish out how hungry the seller was. 
After callingthe client to see if he would take a lower price, Browne would call Buffett with the response: ¡°Sorry. Can¡¯t take less than five bucks.¡± 
¡°Unthinkable,¡± Buffett would answer. 
A few days later, Browne would call Buffett again. ¡°We got the stock at $43/4. We¡¯llgo alongwith $43/4 bid.¡± 
¡°Sorry,¡± Buffett would now say instantly. ¡°$41/2 bid.¡± 
Browne would go back to the seller, who would say, ¡°What the hell? What happened to the $43/4?¡± 
¡°We¡¯re just passingalongthe message. $41/2 bid.¡± 
More calls would go back and forth until a week later, Browne came back to Buffett: ¡°Okay. $41/2 bid,¡± he¡¯d say. 
¡°Sorry,¡± Buffett would say, and drop it another eighth. ¡°$43/8.¡± 
Thus he Buffetted the price ever lower. And rarely¡ªalmost never¡ªdid he want a stock badly enough to raise his bid.30 
He placed his first order for Berkshire Hathaway through Tweedy on December 12, 1962, for two thousand shares at $7.50 a share, payingthe broker a $20 commission.31 He told Tweedy to keep buying. 
Cowin got the scuttlebutt on Berkshire fromboard member Stanley Rubin, Berkshire¡¯s top salesman, who happened to be a friend of Otis Stanton, another member of the board. Otis Stanton felt his brother was out of touch. Protected by his secretaries in his ivory tower, Seabury was doingmore and more drinkingas the clash 
between his lofty vision and reality worsened.32 Otis was by now sharply at odds with Seabury.33 He felt his brother should have taken a strike rather than givingin to demands for higher wages. 34 He also disapproved of Seabury¡¯s choice of a successor, his son, Jack, who was a pleasant enough youngman but not up to the job¡ªaccordingto Otis. Otis had his own idea about who should succeed Seabury¡ªKen Chace, the vice president of manufacturing. 
Seabury Stanton responded to Buffett¡¯s purchases as though a takeover threat was imminent, and made severaltender offers for the stock. This was exactly what Buffett wanted, for his purchases were predicated on the theory that, eventually, Seabury would buy him out. He wanted the Berkshire stock not to keep it but to sell it. Nevertheless, in every trade there is a buyer and a seller. Seabury Stanton had so far withstood the forces of cheap foreign fabric and Hurricane Carol. Instead of Seabury gettingBuffetted, there was a chance that Buffett could get Seaburied. 
Eventually, Warren drove up to New Bedford to see the place for himself. For once, he was not just dropping in. Miss Tabor, who was fiercely loyal to Seabury, decided which callers would be allowed through the glass doors and up the narrow stairs to Stanton¡¯s penthouse office. When she grimly ushered Warren into Stanton¡¯s palatially furnished, ballroom-size wood-paneled lair, he saw that there was no place anywhere near Stanton¡¯s desk to sit. This, clearly, was a man used to summoningpeople to stand before himwhile he sat behind his desk and directed them what to do. 
The two men seated themselves at the uncomfortable rectangular glass conference table in a corner, and Buffett asked where Stanton stood on the next tender offer. Stanton looked at himthrough the wire-rimmed glasses perched on the tip of his nose. ¡°He was reasonably cordial. But then he said, ¡®We¡¯ll probably have a tender one of these days, and what price would you sell at, Mr. Buffett?¡¯ or words to that effect. The stock at the time was selling at something like $9 or $10 a share. 
¡°I said I¡¯d sell at $11.50 a share on a tender offer, if they had one. And he said, ¡®Well, will you promise me that if we have a tender offer you¡¯ll tender?¡¯ 
¡°I said, ¡®Well, you know, if it¡¯s in the reasonably near future, but not if it¡¯s twenty years from now.¡¯ But I said, ¡®Fine.¡¯ 
¡°So now I was frozen. I felt that I couldn¡¯t buy any more stock because I knew too much about what he might do. So I went home, and not too long after, a letter comes from the Old Colony Trust Company, which was part of First National of Boston, offering $113/8 per share to anyone who would tender their Berkshire.¡± That was 121/2 cents less per share than agreed. 
Buffett was furious. ¡°It really burned me up. You know, this guy was trying to chisel an eighth of a point from having, in effect, shaken my hand saying this was the deal.¡± 
Warren was used to doingthe Buffetting, and now Stanton had tried to chisel him. He sent Dan Cowin to New Bedford to try to reason with Stanton not to renege on the deal. The two men argued, and Stanton denied that he had made a dealwith Buffett; he told Cowin that it was his company and he would do as he pleased. That was a mistake. For tryingto chiselWarren Buffett, Seabury Stanton was goingto be sorry, very sorry. Buffett decided that¡ªinstead of selling¡ªnow, he would buy. 
He vowed that he would have Berkshire; he would buy it all. He would own it lock, stock, loom, and spindle. That Berkshire Hathaway was a failing, futile enterprise daunted himnot. It was cheap, and he craved it. Above all, he wanted Seabury Stanton not to have it. Buffett and the other shareholders deserved it more. In his determination, he ignored all the lessons learned from the experience at Dempster¡ªsave one. And that was the one he should have ignored. 
Buffett sent his scouts out, lookingfor more chunks of the closely held stock. Cowin got hold of enough to join Berkshire¡¯s board. But other people began to take notice too. Jack Alexander, Buffett¡¯s old friend from Columbia, had an investment partnership with his classmate Buddy Fox. ¡°One day we saw that Warren was buyingthis Berkshire Hathaway,¡± he says. ¡°And we started to buy.¡± On a trip to New York fromtheir office in Connecticut they told himthey were followinghim in the stock, ¡°He got very upset. ¡®Look,¡¯ he said, ¡®you¡¯re ridingon my coattails. That¡¯s not right. Cut it out.¡¯¡± 
Fox and Alexander were taken aback. What were they doingwrong? Buffett gave themto understand that he was seekingcontrol. Yet coattail-riding, even in control situations, was a popular pastime amongthe Graham crowd. It was considered sportingconduct. In effect, Buffett took their stock. I need it more than you, he said. They agreed to sell their stock to himat the then-market price, because it clearly mattered to him so much. He appeared to have some sort of mysterious attachment to Berkshire Hathaway. ¡°It wasn¡¯t that important to us. It was obviously very important to him,¡± Alexander says. 
Like Fox and Alexander, a few others had also become Buffett-watchers, trackingWarren¡¯s trail like the spoor of Bigfoot. This created competition for the stock. He made it understood amongthe Grahamites that they were to keep their mitts off Berkshire. The only exception was Henry Brandt; he let Brandt¡ªin recompense for his services¡ªbuy it below $8.00. He had begun to carry himself with a bit of swagger, which some people found irritating. Yet his surefootedness, the way he always seemed to be so right, kept them fascinated. Even his cheapskate qualities were part of the aura. For years he had been possibly the only person doingbusiness regularly in New York who managed to get by with not only free lodging(by staying with Fred Kuhlken¡¯s mother, Anne Gottschaldt, on LongIsland), but free office space to boot (at Tweedy, Browne). 
PhotoInsertOne 

Image1 
Warren,aroundagetwo. 

Image2 
Warrenin1933ontherunningboardofthefamily¡¯sfirstcar,ausedChevrolet. 

Image3 
Warrendressedinoneofhisearliestcostumes,whichhisfatherbroughtbackfromabusinesstriptoNew 
YorkCity. 

Image4 
ErnestBuffettsurroundedbyhisgrandchildren:WarrenandDorisatleft,BertieinErnest¡¯slap. 

Image5 
SidneyBuffett,whofoundedthefamilygrocerystorein1869,ina1930photographwithAliceBuffett,his granddaughter. 

Image6 
TheStahlsistersinWestPoint,Nebraska,around1913.Warren'smotherLeilaistopright.Seatedbeside 
herisEdithand,infront,Bernice. 

Image7 
Warren¡¯sfatherHoward(rightrear)playswithhissiblingsGeorge,Clarence,andAliceinthefamily¡¯s fringedsurrey.HismotherHenrietta(holdingyoungerbrotherFredinherlap)sitsinthebackseat. 

Image8 
HowardandLeilaBuffett,shortlyaftertheirmarriagein1925. 

Image9 
WarrenandBertieinfrontofthefamily¡¯sBuick,around1938. 

Image10 
Arevealingfamilyportrait,around1937. 

Image11 
Warren,agesix,holdshisfavoritetoy,anickel-platedmoney-changer,inaphotographwithhissisters fromthewinterof1936-1937.HeandDorislaterrecalledtheunhappinesstheirfacesexpressed. 

Image12 
Theeighth-gradeclassatRosehillSchool,May1938,showingthegirlsandboysofthedisastrous¡°triple date¡±andWarren¡¯sothercrush,Clo-AnnKaul. 

Image13 
FredandErnestBuffettinfrontoftheBuffett&Songrocerystore. 

Image14 
Bertie,Leila,andWarrensingtoDoris¡¯saccompanimentinWashingtonaround1945. 

Image15 
A1948campaignflyerfortheonlyelectionHowardeverlost. 

Image16 
HowardBuffett,Congressman. 

Image17 
Warren(secondleft)andhisfather(fourthleft)onafishingtripwiththeNebraskacongressional delegationaround1945.TheBuffettslookasthoughthey¡¯dratherbeelsewhere. 

Image18 
Asapreteen,Warren¡¯sfirstlovewasDaisyMaeScragg.ShealwayslovedLi¡¯lAbner,nomatterhowhe treatedher. 

Image19 
WarrentakesthecontrarianviewinaJanuary1946debateaboutCongress¡¯sproblems;thisairedonthe 
WashingtonradiostationWTOP¡¯s¡°AmericanSchooloftheAir.¡± 

Image20 
Warreninthelate1940s,playingtheukeinhisclassicbatteredtennisshoesandsaggysocks. 

Image21 
TheBuffettsinthesummerof1950.¡°DorisandBertiewereknockouts,¡±saysWarren,whofeltsocially maladjusted. 

Image22 
Warren¡¯spledgephotoforAlphaSigmaPhifraternityattheUniversityofPennsylvania,January1948. HowardBuffettwasalsoanAlphaSig. 

Image23 
Warren,NormaThurston,andDonDanlyposenexttotheSpringfieldRolls-RoyceBrewsterCoupe.Don andWarrenboughtitasastuntin1948. 
Now that Susie accompanied himon some of these trips, however, at her behest he had upgraded from hostelingwith his deceased college friend¡¯s mother to takinga roomat the Plaza Hotel. Not only was the Plaza more convenient for business, but fromSusie¡¯s perspective, it put department stores like Bergdorf Goodman, Best & Company, and HenriBendel close at hand. Then a rumor circulated amongBuffett¡¯s friends¡ªthe kinds of rumors that always swirled around Buffett, like the one that had him stashinghis daughter in a dresser drawer rather than buyingher a crib¡ªa rumor that he had found the Plaza¡¯s cheapest room, a tiny windowless cubicle like his old maid¡¯s room at Columbia, and cut a dealto stay there at a 
beggarly price whenever he came alone to New York.35 Regardless of the rumor¡¯s truth, each time he checked in to the Plaza he doubtless felt a pangof regret, for he no longer stayed in New York scot-free. 
The trips to Bergdorf¡¯s were another aspect of how much the New York routine had changed. Susie spent her days goingto lunch and shopping; in the evenings they went to dinner, then Broadway or cabaret shows. He liked to see her enjoy herself, and she had become used to shoppingat the better stores. Nevertheless, while she now had the power to loosen the purse strings, their game was to tussle over how much money she got to spend. Her way of justifyingspendingwas to do it on someone else¡¯s behalf. Susie Jr. was often a beneficiary; her closets filled with clothes fromBergdorf¡¯s. One time Susie came back fromNew York with an ermine jacket. They had met a friend of Warren¡¯s who took them to a furrier. ¡°I felt like I had to buy something,¡± she said. ¡°They were beingso nice to me.¡± She had done it for the furrier¡¯s sake. 
Now, all this protectingBerkshire fromcoattailingwould be for naught unless Buffett figured out how to run it well enough to keep Susie in ermine jackets. He made another visit to New Bedford, goingby the mill to see Jack Stanton, the heir apparent. Somebody was goingto have to run the place once it was wrested from Seabury¡¯s hands, and Warren needed to know who that would be. 
But Stanton claimed to be very busy, and sent Ken Chace to escort Buffett around the mill.*22 Stanton had no idea that his uncle had already suggested Chace as a possible replacement for Seabury. 
Ken Chace was a chemicalengineer by training, forty-seven, quiet, controlled, and sincere. He did not know that he was a contender to run the company; nonetheless, he spent two days teachingBuffett the textile business while Buffett asked question after question and Chace explained the mills¡¯ problems. Buffett was impressed by his candor and equally impressed by his attitude. Chace made it clear that he thought the 
Stantons foolish for pouringmoney into a business that was on its way down the drain.36 When the tour was over, Buffett told Chace he would ¡°be in touch.¡±37 
A month or so later, Stanley Rubin had to be called into service to persuade Chace not to take a job at a competingtextile mill. Meanwhile, Buffett was scramblingto buy more stock, includingshares that belonged to various members of the Chace family. 
Buffett¡¯s finaltarget was Otis Stanton, who wanted his brother to retire. He had no confidence in Seabury¡¯s son, Jack, and doubted Seabury would ever let go of the reins. 
Otis and his wife, Mary, agreed to meet Buffett at the Wamsutta Club in New Bedford.38 Over lunch at the graceful Italianate mansion, a relic of New Bedford¡¯s onetime grandeur, Otis acknowledged that he would sell, on the condition that Buffett make an equivalent offer to Seabury. Warren agreed. Then Mary Stanton asked if they could keep just a couple of shares out of the two thousand they were selling, out of family sentiment. Just a couple of shares. 
Buffett said no. It was all or nothing.39 
Otis Stanton¡¯s two thousand shares pushed Warren¡¯s ownership to forty-nine percent of Berkshire Hathaway ¡ªenough to give himeffective control. With the prize within his grasp, he met Ken Chace one April afternoon in New York and walked himout to the teemingplaza at Fifth Avenue and Central Park South, where he sprangfor two bars of ice creamon a stick. Within a bite or two he got to the point, saying, ¡°Ken, I¡¯d like to have you become president of Berkshire Hathaway. How do you feel about that?¡± Now that he 
controlled the company, he said, he could change the management at the next directors¡¯ meeting.40 Chace, who was stunned to be selected despite the hints Rubin had given himwhen he convinced him not to take another job, agreed to keep quiet untilthe board meeting. 
Not realizingthat his fate had been decided, Jack Stanton and his wife raced down from New Bedford to meet Warren and Susie at the Plaza Hotelfor breakfast. Kitty Stanton, more aggressive than her husband, pled Jack¡¯s case. Reachingfor an argument that would appealto the Buffetts, Kitty threw in what she must have thought was the clincher. Buffett surely would not overturn New England¡¯s hereditary millaristocracy, who had overseen the business for generations, to put a mill rat like Ken Chace in charge. She and Jack fit in 
at the Wamsutta Club. Kitty, after all, was a Junior Leaguer, like Susie.41 
¡°She was a nice enough person. But I also got the impression that she felt Jack was entitled to it because of his dad. Part of her appeal was that Ken Chace really wasn¡¯t in the same class as Jack Stanton and she and Susie and I were.¡± 
Poor Kitty, makingthis pitch to a man who so disdained hierarchy that he had refused to join Ak-Sar-Ben and thumbed his nose at the establishment of Omaha. 
It was too late for Jack. It was too late for Seabury, who ruled by autocracy and had no friends on the board. Even his own chairman, MalcolmChace, did not like him. Thus, when backers of Buffett arranged for himto be nominated to the board at a specialmeeting, on April 14, 1965, he was swiftly elected a director with 
much of the board¡¯s support.42 
A few weeks later, Buffett flew into New Bedford, where he was greeted by a headline in the New Bedford Standard-Times about ¡°outside interests¡± takingover the company. 43 The planted story infuriated him. The one lesson that had stuck with himfromDempster was to never, ever let himself be branded a liquidator¡ªand wind up with a whole town hatinghim. Buffett vowed to the press that he would carry on business as usual. He denied that millclosings would result from the takeover¡ªand saddled himself publicly with this commitment. 
On May 10, 1965, the board convened at Berkshire¡¯s headquarters in New Bedford. It presented a silver tray to the retiringvice president of sales, approved the minutes of the last meeting, and agreed to increase wages five percent. Then the meetingturned surreal. 
Seabury, his nearly bald seventy-year-old head speckled with age spots, claimed that he had planned to retire 
in December to let Jack succeed him. But, he said, he could not continue as president ¡°of an organization over which he would not have complete authority.¡±44 With as much hauteur as his character allowed him¡ªwhich was considerable, despite the mutineers havingtaken over the ship¡ªSeabury made a little speech, commendinghimself for his accomplishments. Then he tendered his resignation, and the board accepted it. Jack Stanton added a bitter little coda, sayingthat, had he become president in December, he was certain that it would have meant ¡°continued success and profitable operations.¡± The board listened patiently, then accepted his resignation as well. 
At that point, Jack Stanton put down his pen and stopped takingthe minutes in which these two speeches had been recorded, and the two Stantons stalked out of the room. The board paused, and sighed with relief. 
Movingquickly on, the board elected Buffett chairman and confirmed Ken Chace in his new job runningthe doomed company that Buffett¡ªin a moment of folly¡ªhad exerted such strenuous effort to acquire. A few days later, he explained his thinkingon textiles in a newspaper interview. ¡°We¡¯re neither pro nor con. It¡¯s a business decision. We try to assess a business. Price is the big factor in investment. It determines the 
45 
decision. We bought Berkshire Hathaway at a good price.¡± 
He would later come to revise that opinion. 
¡°So I bought my own cigar butt, and I tried to smoke it. You walk down the street and you see a cigar butt, and it¡¯s kind of soggy and disgusting and repels you, but it¡¯s free¡­and there may be one puff left in it. Berkshire didn¡¯t have any more puffs. So all you had was a soggy cigar butt in your mouth. That was 
46 
Berkshire Hathaway in 1965. I had a lot of money tied up in the cigar butt. 
¡°I would have been better off if I¡¯d never heard of Berkshire Hathaway.¡± 
28 
DryTinder 
Omaha . 1965¨C1966 
The dynamics changed one hundred percent when my father died,¡± says Doris. ¡°Everythingwent flyinginto 
space. My father was the linchpin of our family. The center was gone.¡± 
Leila had endured multiple losses over recent years. Her mother, Stella, had died in 1960 in Norfolk State Hospital, and her sister Bernice had died a year later of bone cancer. Without Howard, she had to find a new sense of purpose, and she became dependent on Warren and Susie and their family. The grandchildren went to her house on Sundays, where she gave thembags of candy to eat duringchurch, then took themto lunch afterward and gave themmoney if they could add up the bill correctly. In the afternoons, she took them to Woolworth¡¯s to buy a toy to play with at her house. Like Howard, who had once paid his children to go to church, she found a Buffettesque solution to the problem of her loneliness¡ªmakingdeals with the grandchildren so that they would stay with her as longas possible. 
Howard¡¯s presence was what had always made beingwith Leila tolerable to Doris and Warren. Without him, both found visits with their mother unbearable. Warren trembled when forced to be in proximity to her. At Thanksgiving, he took a plate, went upstairs, and ate dinner by himself. Leila continued to erupt in occasional fits of rage. For decades, her bizarre behavior had been aimed only at family members, though once she leaped out of the car in a parkinglot and spent an hour screamingat an acquaintance over some trivial matter, as BigSusie and Howie looked on in astonishment. But Doris, who had idolized her father even more than her brother had, was still her main victim. Doris had always felt she had let the whole family down with her divorce from Truman. The contrast between Warren and Susie¡¯s successes and her own life as a divorc¨¦e at a time when divorce was stillrare only reinforced her lingeringfeelings of worthlessness. Shortly before his death, Howard had told her that she must remarry to provide a father for her children. So she did, to George 
Lear, the first person who asked her.1 He was a lovable man; but Doris felt coerced into remarrying, which augured poorly for the union¡¯s prospects. 
Bertie, always the least troubled by her mother¡¯s behavior and the least dependent on her father, now found her life the least changed by her father¡¯s death. Like Warren, however, her relationship with money both triggered her anxieties and gave her a sense of control. She kept records of every dollar she spent, and when she felt stressed she paid bills to relax. 
Allof the Buffetts had ¡°issues¡± with money that ran so deep none of themreally noticed what an unusual family they were. After Howard¡¯s death, Warren and Susie naturally assumed leadership of the family ¡ªpartly because of their money, but also through the force of their personalities. Leila and Doris and Bertie looked to Warren and Susie for support, and so did virtually everyone else. Warren¡¯s uncle Fred Buffett and his wife, Katie, who now owned the grocery store, gave Warren a run for his money in the family¡¯s cheapskate contest. They were especially attached to Warren and Susie, and grew more so as their nephew¡¯s stature and wealth increased. Leila, who had always been jealous of her sister-in-law, fixated on an incident many years before in which Ernest had danced with the vivacious Katie and not her at a Rotary Club dance. Now she grew even more jealous of Katie, and Susie¡ªwho was trusted by everyone¡ªhad to juggle visits to separate them. Given allthe work to separate Leila from Warren and fromKatie, Susie was an expert juggler by the time she had nursed Howard through his finalillness. Perhaps it was not surprising, therefore, that Warren¡¯s aunt Alice, his favorite relative since childhood, had grown to trust Susie more than anyone else in the family except him. 
So it was Susie, not Leila, whomAlice tracked down one Monday in late 1965. Susie was at the beauty parlor with Doris when the callcame. She got out fromunder the dryer to go to the phone at the front desk; Alice explained that she was concerned about Leila¡¯s sister Edie, who had called her on Sunday to say she was feelingextremely depressed. Alice, a fellow teacher, had taken Edie for a drive and talked to her, and they had stopped for ice cream. Edie idolized Warren and Susie and Alice, indeed all the Buffetts; she confided 
that she felt she had disgraced the perfect family with her imperfect life.2 Her impulsive, high-spirited marriage had not worked out; the husband she had followed to Brazil had turned out to be a philandering embezzler who left her there for someone else. Since returningfromBrazil, she had found it hard adjustingto life as a divorced single mother of two daughters in Omaha. 
Alice told Susie that today Edie hadn¡¯t shown up at TechnicalHigh Schoolto teach her home economics classes. Worried, Alice had gone over to Edie¡¯s apartment. Nobody answered when she rangand knocked. Alice told Susie that she feared that somethinghad happened. 
So Susie raced out the door to her gold Cadillac convertible, with her rollers still in her hair, drove over to the garage apartment where Edie lived, and started knockingand ringingherself. When nobody answered, she got inside somehow and began to search. She found no sign of anybody; the place was immaculate. There were no notes or messages and Edie¡¯s car was there. Susie continued searchinguntil she reached the 
basement of the house, and there she found Edie. She had slit her wrists, and was already dead.3 
Susie called an ambulance, then had to break the news to the family. No one had known that Edie was this depressed, and nobody had seriously considered her a possible victimof the Stahl family¡¯s history of mental instability until now. 
Those whom Edie had left behind worked through a complex web of feelings: guilt that she had been so desperate without their realizingit; pity that she may have seen herself as so inferior to the Buffetts; grief at the loss. Warren, Doris, and Bertie were shaken and sad at the loss of a kind, lovingaunt whomthey had been extremely fond of since childhood. 
There is no tellingwhat Leila, sixty-two years old, felt at her sister¡¯s death. But why should Leila¡ªwho always did feel put upon¡ªfeelany different than other survivors of those who commit suicide, who normally experience anger and abandonment, alongwith other emotions?At the very least, Edie¡¯s death meant that Leila was the last remainingmember of her immediate family; Edie had also taken away the opportunity to repair their strained relationship. And yet another of the Stahls had embarrassed the Buffetts, this time by stigmatizingthe family with suicide. Whatever Leila did feel, less than a month later she abruptly married Roy Ralph, a pleasant man twenty years her senior who had been pursuingher since Howard¡¯s death. Until now she had refused his proposals. Her relatives had listened with numb boredom throughout her widowhood 
as she ceaselessly invoked the past and the 381/2 wonderful years with Howard. Thus she stunned them all when she reversed herself¡ªand changed her name to Leila Ralph. Some of themthought she was out of her mind, and conceivably she was, at least temporarily. Howard, who had remained an invisible but constant presence since his death less than two years before, now went unmentioned at family gatherings for the sake of politeness, while his children adapted uneasily to a new stepfather who was in his eighties. 
Susie, meanwhile, was takingon more obligations than ever, not just in the family but in the community. She began to press Warren to calla halt to his continuingobsession. The Buffett Partnership was stuffed like a Thanksgivingturkey by American Express. It ended 1965 with assets of $37 million, includingmore than $3.5 million in profit on this one stock, which had risen to $50, then $60, then $70 per share. Warren had earned more than $2.5 million in fees, bringinghis and Susie¡¯s stake in the partnership to $6.8 million. He was thirty-five years old. The Buffetts were amongthe very rich by the standards of 1966. How much money did they need? How longdid he have to keep goingat this pace? Now that they were so rich, Susie thought they should do more for Omaha. 
In 1966 she glowed with the fire of a woman who had found her cause in life. She had become close to leaders of the black community and was all over Omaha, brainstorming, coordinating, cajoling, publicizing, workingon behind-the-scenes relationships in a town where racialtensions were reachingthe point of violence. Every summer now in the nation¡¯s major cities, race riots flared after minor incidents involvingthe police. Martin Luther KingJr. had issued a call the previous year:Desegregatingworkplaces and public facilities wasn¡¯t enough; segregated housinghad to be eliminated. The idea terrified many whites, especially after riots in the Watts neighborhood of Los Angeles, which had turned into a war zone of arson, sniping, and lootingin which thirty-four people were killed. Similar uprisings had taken place in Cleveland; Chicago; 
Brooklyn; Jacksonville, Florida; and other smaller towns.4 Duringa fifteen-day heat wave in July 1966, riots 
erupted in Omaha; the governor called out the National Guard, blamingthe riots on ¡°an environment unfit for human habitation.¡±5 Susie now made the elimination of segregated housingin Omaha her central cause. She tried to involve Warren in some of her community and civil-rights work, and he complied, but he was not much for committees. In the 1960s Buffett generally rolled over sapheads without even commenting. ¡°I got involved in half a dozen of these things. It¡¯s just the nature of it; if people focus their whole lives on one thing, they get a little obsessed after a while. And Susie would always see it coming with me¡ªI would be sitting with these guys and she could see the look on my face as they went off into the wild blue yonder.¡± 
Committee meetings also gave hima ¡°splittingheadache,¡± accordingto Munger; his way, therefore, was to let other people sit on the committees while he fed them ideas. Warren was far fromindifferent to socialand political causes, however. He had become deeply concerned about the potential for nuclear war¡ªa vivid and seemingly impendingthreat in the early 1960s, since President Kennedy had urged families to build fallout shelters in order to survive a nuclear attack and the United States had barely averted a nuclear war after a standoff between Kennedy and Khrushchev over the removalof Soviet missiles fromCuba. When Buffett discovered philosopher Bertrand Russell¡¯s 1962 antinuclear treatise, Has Man a Future?, it affected him 
powerfully.6 He identified with Russell, admired his philosophicalrigor, and frequently cited his opinions and aphorisms. He even kept a small plaque on his desk quotinga phrase froman influentialantinuclear ¡°manifesto¡± on which Russell had collaborated with Albert Einstein: ¡°Remember your humanity, and forget 
the rest.¡±7 
But it was the antiwar movement that had taken on more urgency in Buffett¡¯s mind after Congress passed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution in 1964, authorizingPresident Johnson to use military force in Southeast Asia without formally declaringwar, usingan alleged but unproven navalattack against a U.S. destroyer as the pretext to attack North Vietnam. Youngmen were burningtheir draft cards, goingto jail, and fleeingto Canada to avoid the draft. Hundreds of thousands took to the streets all over the world to protest the war escalation; they marched in New York City on Fifth Avenue, in Times Square, and at the New York Stock Exchange; in Tokyo, London, Rome, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Los Angeles, and elsewhere. 
Warren was not an ideological pacifist like many of those who were marching, nor an extreme isolationist like his father, but he did feelstrongly that the war was wrong, and that U.S. involvement in it was based on deception¡ªespecially troublingfor a man who placed such a high value on honesty. 
He started askingspeakers over to the house to talk to his friends about it. Once he brought an antiwar speaker from as far away as Pennsylvania.8 He himself, however, was not goingto march against the war. 
Warren had strongviews about specialization; he defined his specialskills as thinkingand makingmoney. When asked to donate, his first choice, always, was to donate ideas, includingideas that would get other people to give money. But he would also give money himself¡ªnot a lot, but some¡ªto politicians and to Susie¡¯s causes. He never labored in the trenches stuffingenvelopes; volunteeringdirectly for causes, no matter how urgent and important, would consume time he felt was more efficiently spent thinkingof ideas and makingmore money to write bigger checks. 
Many people in the 1960s felt a burningdesire to tear down the Establishment that had created the war and operated the ¡°military-industrial complex¡±¡ªa desire to avoid ¡°sellingout¡± to ¡°the Man.¡± For some, therefore, socialconsciousness clashed with the need to make a living. Warren, however, saw himself as workingfor his partners, not for ¡°The Man,¡± and as someone whose business acumen and money helped the civil rights and antiwar causes. So he could focus on his business with a sense of dualpurpose, and felt no inner conflict about how he spent his time. 
The conflict he was beginningto feel was a struggle to find investments for the partnership. Duringthe past year he had put money into safe but increasingly scarce cigar butts like his old favorite Philadelphia and Reading, and Consolidation Coal. He had managed to find some of the few undervalued stocks that still paraded through the Standard & Poor¡¯s weekly report:Employers Reinsurance, F. W. Woolworth, and First Lincoln Financial. He¡¯d also bought some stock in Disney after meetingWalt Disney and seeingthe entertainment showman¡¯s singular focus, his love of his work, and the way these had translated into a priceless catalogof entertainment. But the concept of ¡°great businesses¡± had not entirely sunk in, and he didn¡¯t load up. Of course, he¡¯d continued to cobble together a bigger and bigger stake in Berkshire Hathaway. But he had also built a $7 million ¡°short¡± position in stocks like Alcoa, Montgomery Ward, Travelers Insurance, and Caterpillar Tractor¡ªborrowingthe shares and sellingthemas a hedge against the 
risk that the market would plunge.9 When investors changed their minds, stocks often dropped like doves thwacked fullof bird shot in midflight. He wanted the protection for the partners¡¯ portfolio. 
In January 1966, another $6.8 million had rolled in from his partners; Buffett found himself with a $44 
million partnership and too few cigar butts to light with his cash. Thus, for the first time, he had set aside some money and left it unused¡ªan extraordinary decision.10 Ever since the day he left Columbia Business School, his problemhad always been gettinghis hands on enough money to pump into a seemingly endless supply of investment ideas. 
Then, on February 9, 1966, the Dow had briefly streaked across the mythicalone thousand mark before closingjust a few points below. The chant began: Dow one thousand! Dow one thousand! The market would not break through the barrier again that year, but the euphoria carried on anyway. 
Buffett had been worryingall year about disappointinghis partners. Although he started his latest letter to them cheerily with the news about the huge profits on American Express¡ª¡°Our War on Poverty was successful in 1965,¡± he wrote, alludingto President Johnson¡¯s program to bringabout a ¡°Great Society¡± through a vast array of new social-welfare programs¡ªhe then delivered the real news in what would be the first of many similar warnings: ¡°I now feelthat we are much closer to the point where increased size may prove disadvantageous.¡± And with that he announced that he would be shuttingthe door to the partnership, lockingit, and puttingaway the key. 
There would be no more new partners. He made a joke of it. Susie couldn¡¯t have any more kids, he wrote, because they wouldn¡¯t be allowed in. This joke was not particularly apt, since none of their children had ever actually been partners¡ªor would be. He was determined to manage their expectations about money, in order to ensure that they would find their own way in life. From an early age, each of the kids knew not to expect financial help from himexcept to pay for their education. He could have brought the children into the partnership as a learningexercise¡ªto teach themabout money, about investing, and about how he spent his time. Certainly he used it that way with those who were members of the partnership. But Warren rarely¡ªif ever¡ª¡°taught¡± those he saw day to day. For him, teachingwas a performance, a conscious act that took place before an audience. His kids got no lessons. 
Instead, he bought themstock in the benighted Berkshire Hathaway. As trustee of the trust left to his children by his father, he sold the farmthat Howard had bought as a refuge for the family and used the money to buy the stock. Given that Warren didn¡¯t approve of unearned wealth¡ªwhich was how he viewed inheritance¡ªhe might have left the farmalone. A small farmin Nebraska would never be worth much, and the kids would never become rich fromtheir grandfather¡¯s inheritance. But by investingthe proceeds in his flounderingtextile business, he increased his hold on Berkshire by another two thousand shares. Why he cared so much about it was a mystery to observers, but ever since Buffettinghis way to control of Berkshire, he seemed obsessed by it. 
The Buffett kids were not expectingto get rich. They did not even really know that their family was rich.11 Their parents wanted themto be raised unspoiled, and they were. Like children everywhere, they had to do chores to get their allowances. But when it came to money, their family¡¯s odd disconnection meant that Susie and Warren tussled over her allowance as if the Buffetts were broke; then she got the money anyway and used it to give theman upper-middle-class life. The children went on nice vacations, enjoyed themselves at the country club, wore good clothes, and saw their mother¡¯s Cadillac and fur coats. But they never got to take money for granted. Their father niggled over smallamounts of money all the time and surprised them by denyinglittle requests. If he took themto a movie, he might not pay for popcorn. If one of the kids asked for something, his answer might wellbe no:If I did it for you, I¡¯d have to do it for everyone. 
Whatever message he and Susie were tryingto give the children about money, one unvaryingtheme came through: Money was important. They were growingup in a household where it was routinely used as a toolof control. Warren would take BigSusie to a store for her birthday and give her ninety minutes to race through and buy whatever she could grab. The Buffett side of the family had always been about makingdeals. Although Susie felt that Warren¡¯s obsession with makingmoney was unworthy, she stillangled to get more of it from him. Now she was strugglingwith her weight and this too became a money deal. Warren¡¯s childhood obsession with weighingmachines¡ªhe would have weighed himself fifty times a day¡ªhad been no passing phase; he was obsessed with his family¡¯s weight and preoccupied with keepingthemallthin. 
The family¡¯s eatinghabits helped neither his cause nor their health. Susie, who had suffered froma mysterious and excruciatingabdominal adhesion two years before, cooked unenthusiastically. She and Warren both willingly ate the same thingday after day:mostly meat and potatoes. Unlike Warren, Susie would eat vegetables, but she refused every fruit except watermelon. She picked at healthy food while living on chocolate and Rice Krispies treats, frostingout of a can, cookies, Tootsie Rolls, and milk, milk, milk. Warren breakfasted on Fritos and Pepsi, ate handfuls of chocolate and popcorn, and chose steaks, hamburgers, and the odd sandwich as his mainstay meals. 
Finally, Susie asked himto make a deal to pay her to keep her weight at 118 pounds. Since she cared less about money than her husband did, however, motivation was a problem for her. Allmonth longshe picked and snacked; but then, as the weigh-in date approached, she would get on the scale. If the news was bad and she had to take the pounds off fast, ¡°Uh-oh,¡± she¡¯d say to one of Susie Jr.¡¯s friends: ¡°Kelsey, I¡¯ve got to call 
your mom for her diuretic pills.¡±12 
Warren disciplined himself to maintain his own weight by danglingmoney in front of his kids. When they were younger, he made out unsigned checks to themfor $10,000 and said that if he didn¡¯t weigh 173 pounds on such-and-such a date, he would sign the checks. Little Susie and Howie went crazy tryingto tempt him with ice creamand chocolate cake. But the prospect of givingup money pained Warren far more than giving 
up a treat. He made out those checks over and over, but he never had to sign a single one. 13 
*** 
Instead of his children, one of the last new partners Warren allowed to join his partnership was Marshall Weinberg, a stockbroker friend of Walter Schloss who had taken Graham¡¯s seminar twice. A cultivated man with a bent for the arts and philosophy, Weinberghad met Buffett at one of Graham¡¯s lectures at the New School in New York. Lunchingtogether a few times and talkingof stocks, they had become friends. Weinbergsoon gave up on interestingBuffett in music, art, philosophy, or travel, but Buffett traded through him at times and Weinbergbecame interested in joiningthe partnership. So on one of the Buffetts¡¯ frequent trips to New York, Warren agreed to meet with himto discuss it. 
Lopingdownstairs from his roomat the Plaza, Warren met Weinbergin the lobby. Then Susie glided in, and Warren lit up. She sidled over to himand gave hima hug, then put her hand behind himas if he were a child and gazed at Weinbergwith her large brown eyes. ¡°How are you?¡± she asked, beamingat him. She wanted to know everythingabout him. He felt he was beingwelcomed into a family and went away thinkingthat he had 
made a new friend in Susie. He also intuited that he had just met Buffett¡¯s most powerful asset.14 
Weinberghad squeaked through the door just in time. Through 1966, the urban riots continued, the war in Vietnamescalated, and antiwar protesters rallied in New York, Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, Washington, and San Francisco. The stock market began to decline, down ten percent fromthe beginningof the year. Buffett had never stopped lookingfor things to buy, no matter how uphill the climb, but despite the market¡¯s easing, the days of cigar butts scattered everywhere were gone. He became seriously worried about how to keep up his performance. He thought more often of buyingentire businesses now. In fact, he had gotten started on an entirely new venture, one that consumed large amounts of his time. 
29 
WhataWorstedIs 
Omaha . 1966¨C1967 
Buffett ran a $50 million partnership that owned a textile business, yet he had never stopped lookinglike the 
Raggedy Man.1 His only concession to the sideburns and longhair that other men wore was a little patch of fine dark hairs that he occasionally let sprout from his crew cut like baby grass over his domed forehead. 
The rest of the world was turningmod. Men wore Nehru jackets, turtlenecks, and wide geometric-and floral-patterned ties. Buffett never varied his skinny striped ties and white shirt, though the shirt¡¯s collar had grown tighter, and the jacket of the old gray suit he wore day after day bunched around his shoulders and gapped at the neckline. He refused to part with his favorite camel-colored V-neck sweater, although its elbows had grown thin. His shoes had holes in the soles. When Chuck Peterson tried to introduce himto a potential investor at a party, the man¡¯s reaction had been ¡°You¡¯re kidding!¡± He didn¡¯t even want to talk to Buffett, 
based purely on the way Warren dressed.2 Susie had no influence; her husband¡¯s taste had formed back in 1949 when he was sellingsuits at JC Penney¡¯s, and Mr. Lanford told himthat ¡°nobody knows what a worsted is.¡± 
He now bought his suits at Parsow¡¯s, downstairs in the lobby of Kiewit Plaza, where Sol Parsow was always tryingto upgrade his taste. Buffett considered Parsow a ¡°very wild dresser¡± and paid no attention to his suggestions. Warren¡¯s idea of a proper suit was one ¡°that you could bury a ninety-year-old banker from a 
small town in western Nebraska in.¡±3 Parsow prided himself on givingBuffett good advice about stocks, however. He had steered himaway fromhatter Byer-Rolnick, warningthat hats were goingout of style. He had also kept himfrom investingin Oxxford Clothes, deliveringthe news that suits were not a growth 
business in the 1960s.4 Buffett, however, had ignored Parsow¡¯s warningnot to buy suit-liningmaker Berkshire Hathaway.5 
Since he knew nothingabout clothing, why the next episode of his career would consist of buyinga department store remains somewhat mysterious. It took a whopper of an idea to crack open his wallet these days. But in 1966 he was havingtrouble findingthings to buy for the partnership. 
It was one of his newer friends, David ¡°Sandy¡± Gottesman, who brought himthis latest idea. Gottesman was like Fred Stanback, Bill Ruane, Dan Cowin, Tom Knapp, Henry Brandt, Ed Anderson, and Charlie Munger: people who worked their own ideas and fed ideas to him. The ever-handy Ruane had connected themat a lunch in New York City. Gottesman, a fellow Harvard graduate froma different year, worked for a small 
investment bank and sometimes found the odd cigar butt or two.6 Buffett considered hima shrewd, disciplined, hard-nosed, opinionated, unabashed capitalist. Naturally, they hit it off. 
¡°From then on,¡± says Gottesman, ¡°every time I had a good idea, I would callWarren. It was like vetting. If you could get Warren interested in something, you knew that you had the right idea.¡± The quintessential New Yorker, Gottesman valued his time with Buffett highly enough to be willingto travel to Omaha often. ¡°We¡¯d stay up till late at night talkingabout stocks,¡± he says, ¡°and then I¡¯d go back the next morningand go to work in New York. We also talked every Sunday night at around ten o¡¯clock for maybe an hour and a half about stocks. I was lookingforward to that conversation allweek, thinkingabout what are the stocks I¡¯m goingto talk to himabout. No matter what I talked to him about, he knew as much as I did about them, most of the time. After I hungup,¡± says Gottesman, ¡°I used to go to bed around midnight or afterward, and I couldn¡¯t go to sleep for a couple of hours, I was so charged up.¡± 
In January 1966, Gottesman had brought Buffett an idea:Hochschild-Kohn, a venerable department store headquartered in a buildinga city block in size that sat at an intersection in downtown Baltimore. Although it was kitty-corner to three competitors¡ªHutzler¡¯s, Hecht Co., and Stewart¡¯s¡ªall four stores had prospered since the times when ladies donned hats and gloves and rode the streetcar downtown to spend all day shoppingand havinglunch. The well-regarded Hochschild-Kohn sold apparel, home furnishings, and housewares. Its proprietors, the Kohn family, drove old cars and lived modestly¡ªjust the kind of people Buffett liked. 
Martin Kohn, the company¡¯s CEO, had called Gottesman to tellhimthat severalbranches of the family were thinkingof sellingand would probably accept a discount price. The Kohns ¡°took enormous pride in this 
store,¡± says Gottesman, ¡°but if it had a good dress department, they never bought a dress there. It was too expensive for them.¡± 
When Charlie Munger was in Omaha, he, Buffett, and Gottesman usually played a lot of golf, and they¡¯d sit at the grill at the Omaha Country Club drinkingpitchers of iced tea, talkingstocks, and kiddingaround. But although they liked the same kind of stocks, the three had never partnered on a deal. This time, Gottesman called Buffett and told himthe part about Hochschild-Kohn¡¯s discount price and the Kohns¡¯ parsimony, and Buffett got hooked. He owned no other retailingstock besides a little F. W. Woolworth. Department stores rose and fell on fashion and customer tastes; he knew as much about that as how to bake a souffl¨¦. 
He wanted Munger, to tap into his incisive way of sizingup businesses. The two of themflew into Baltimore, 
and liked the Kohns immediately. They were the soul of integrity, reliable people with connections all over town.7 After the episodes with Lee Dimon at Dempster and Seabury Stanton at Berkshire, Buffett knew that if he were to buy a company, he needed a manager he could count on to run the business for him. He felt that Louis Kohn was that man. Kohn had a financial background and understood the numbers and profit margins well. Buffett had become confident of his ability to assess people quickly after experience with bringingin three hundred partners and meetingcountless business executives over the years. The two men looked at the balance sheet and made a $12 million bid on the spot. 
Munger did the negotiatingwith Louis Kohn¡¯s relative Martin, the outgoingCEO, whomhe considered ¡°this wonderful old guy who headed the place.¡± He told Martin Kohn, ¡°I came in here and I saw a lot of old women with swollen ankles standingbehind your perfume counter, with unfunded pension liabilities. Do you really want to sell this business, which is the work of your life, to somebody who might worry you about their 
pensions?Don¡¯t you want to take care of your own?¡±8 Kohn tossed the towel into Munger¡¯s lap so fast that Charlie could barely catch it.9 
On January 30, 1966, Buffett, Munger, and Gottesman formed a holdingcompany, Diversified Retailing Company, Inc., to ¡°acquire diversified businesses, especially in the retail field.¡±10 Buffett owned eighty 
percent of DRC. Gottesman and Munger each took ten percent. Buffett and Munger then went to the Maryland National Bank and asked for a loan to make the purchase. The lendingofficer looked at them goggle-eyed and exclaimed, ¡°Six million dollars for little old Hochschild-Kohn?¡±11 Even after hearingthis, 
Buffett and Munger¡ªcharacteristically¡ªdid not question their own judgment and run screamingout the door. 
¡°We thought we were buyinga second-class department store at a third-class price¡± is how Buffett describes little old Hochschild-Kohn. 
He had never borrowed any significant money to buy a company. But they figured the margin of safety reduced their risk, and interest rates were cheap at the time. Profits in department stores were thin, but as those profits grew over the years, the interest on the debt would stay the same and any increase in the profits would flow to themselves. If the profits grew over the years. 
¡°BuyingHochschild-Kohn was like the story of a man who buys a yacht,¡± says Munger. ¡°The two happy days are the day he buys it and the day he sells it.¡±12 
Louis Kohn and Sandy Gottesman flew out to Laguna Beach, where the Buffetts were rentinga house, and holed up in a nearby motel. Buffett strategized with Kohn and Gottesman. He was already becomingfond of Louis Kohn. ¡°He was as high-grade a guy that you could ever imagine, had an IQ way up there, very decent guy, and he came into the partnership when we bought Hochschild-Kohn. I loved the guy.¡± The Kohns were another couple for himand Susie to socialize with¡ªmeaningthat he and Kohn could talk business while Susie entertained Kohn¡¯s wife. The Buffetts¡¯ social life by now included a significant number of people who lived outside of Omaha, people they usually saw on one of Warren¡¯s business trips or, as now, when friends visited the Buffetts in California. 
But Buffett began to grow concerned on his next trip to Baltimore, when Kohn showed hima plan the 
company had been developingfor some time to build two new stores, one in York, Pennsylvania, the other in Maryland. The idea was to capitalize on the exodus from city to suburb that was sendingpeople to suburban shoppingmalls. 
¡°They¡¯d been planning those two stores for a couple of years. The guy that had the men¡¯s furnishings department had his section laid out. He knew exactly how he was going to decorate it. The woman who ran the high-priced dress department had hers all planned too.¡± Buffett didn¡¯t like confrontation and dreaded disappointingpeople, but he and Charlie agreed that neither of these locations made sense. He spiked the York store and the Hochschild-Kohn employees and management resisted. Lackingthe stomach for a fight, Warren gave in. But he drew the line at the Columbia, Maryland, store. ¡°I ended up killing that. And everybody died. They just died.¡± 
Then more signs of trouble arrived in the formof numbers comingfromBaltimore, revealingthat every time one of the four department stores downtown put in an elevator, the other three had to do the same. Every time one store upgraded its window displays or bought new cash-register systems, the others had to follow suit. Buffett and Munger came to callthis ¡°standingon tiptoe at a parade.¡± Once anybody did it, everybody 
had to do it.13 
Still, for the first time, Buffett and Munger had found somethingthey could partner on. Through Diversified Retailing, they and Gottesman had, in effect, created a separate company specifically to own retailers. But Hochschild-Kohn was the beginningof a pattern that would recur more than once in frothy markets:Buffett had lowered his standards to justify an investment. That he had done it at a time when he was havingmore and more trouble findingwhat he considered to be good investments in the stock market was no coincidence. 
In this case, ¡°We were enough influenced by the Graham ethos,¡± says Munger, ¡°that we thought if you just got enough assets for your dollars, somehow you could make it work out. And we didn¡¯t weigh heavily enough the intense competition between four different department stores in Baltimore at a time when department stores no longer had an automatic edge.¡± 
Within the first couple of years at Hochschild-Kohn, Buffett had figured out that the essentialskillin retailing was merchandising, not finance. He and his partners also had learned enough about retailingto understand that it was a lot like the restaurant business: a wearyingmarathon in which, every mile, fresh, aggressive competition could leap in and race ahead of you. When the three had the opportunity to acquire another retailer through DRC¡ªthis one very different and run by a true merchandiser¡ªthey went ahead, however. This retailer came to themthrough WillFelstiner, the lawyer who had also worked on the Hochschild-Kohn deal, who called to say, ¡°If you¡¯re interested in retailing, here¡¯s the numbers on Associated Cotton Shops.¡± The Cotton Shops sold women¡¯s dresses. Here Buffett was headed even further afield fromhis basic ¡°circle of competence,¡± although this next episode would bringinto his fold one of the all-time greatest managers and characters he would ever meet in his life. 
¡°A cheap little scroungey¡± is how Munger described Associated Retail Stores, the parent of the Cotton Shops.14 Seeinga set of third-class stores for a fourth-class price, he and Buffett were immediately interested. Associated owned eighty stores with $44 million of sales and earned a couple of million dollars a year. Benjamin Rosner, its sixty-three-year-old proprietor, ran discount dress shops, in tough neighborhoods in cities such as Chicago, Buffalo, New York, and Gary, Indiana, under names like Fashion Outlet, Gaytime, and York. Sometimes he installed several tiny stores carryingthe same goods under different names on the same city block. They ranged in size fromthat of a modest New York City apartment to a well-appointed suburban house. Rosner kept the overhead microscopic and sold only for cash. Runningthese outlets required unusual skills. In Chicago, a manager at the Milwaukee Avenue store, a big, hard-boiled woman, 
¡°blew a whistle every time she saw somebody come in that she knew was a shoplifter type. All the employees would look over and watch the guy from then on. She knew them all and had the lowest ¡®shrinkage¡¯ rate of practically any store you could ever find in the toughest neighborhood you could imagine.¡±*23 
Born in 1904 to Austro-Hungarian immigrants, Ben Rosner dropped out of school in the fourth grade. In 1931, the downdraft of the Great Depression, he started with one little store on the North Side of Chicago, 
$3,200 in capital, a partner, Leo Simon, and a batch of dresses they sold for $2.88 apiece.15 When Simon died in the mid-1960s, more than three decades later, Rosner continued to pay his widow, Aye Simon.24 (daughter of communications mogul Moses Annenberg), Leo¡¯s salary in exchange for the nominaltask of signingthe rent checks for their eighty stores. 
¡°This went on for about six months, and then she started complaining and second-guessing and criticizing. And that really got to Ben. She was a spoiled, spoiled, spoiled woman. Now, Ben was a guy whose principle, as he later explained to me, was to screw everybody except his partner. And in his mind, she¡¯s no longer his partner. So he decided that he had to end this whole thing. 
¡°So as the switch flips in his mind, he¡¯s going to screw her. He decided that he was going to sell the business to me too cheap, even though he owns half of it, because it¡¯ll show her. When we met with him, he started talking and I got the picture very quickly.¡± 
Buffett had been there before with people who were talkingthemselves into thinkingthey were better off without something, and he knew not to do anythingthat would interfere. ¡°He¡¯s talking about selling his business that he¡¯s built up all his life, and he¡¯s going crazy because he can¡¯t stand it and he can¡¯t stand her. He¡¯s just a total mess. So Charlie goes back in the room with me. And after about half an hour, Ben was jumping up and down, and he said, ¡®They told me you were the fastest gun in the West! Draw!¡¯ And I said, ¡®I¡¯ll draw on you before I leave this afternoon.¡¯¡± 
Buffett needed a manager, but Rosner told him that he would stay only untilthe end of the year, then turn the business over to the new owners. Buffett could see, however, that, just as the business couldn¡¯t carry on without Rosner, fortunately, Rosner couldn¡¯t carry on without the business. 
¡°He loved it too much to quit. He kept a duplicate set of store records in the bathroom so that he could look at them while he was sitting on the can. He had this rival, Milton Petrie of Petrie Stores. One time, Ben went to a big bash at the Waldorf. Milton¡¯s there. They immediately started talking business. Ben said, ¡®How much do you pay for lightbulbs? How much do you mark up¡­?¡¯ And that¡¯s all Ben could talk about. Finally, he said to Milton, ¡®How much are you paying for toilet paper?¡¯ And Milton said so much. Ben was buying his quite a bit cheaper, and he knew that you want to be not just cheaper but right. Milton said, ¡®Yeah, that¡¯s the best I can get.¡¯ And Ben said, ¡®Excuse me,¡¯ and he got up, left the black-tie benefit, drove out to his warehouse in Long Island, and started tearing open cartons of toilet paper and counting the sheets, because he was suspicious. He knew that Milton could not be paying too much by that wide a margin, and therefore that he must be getting screwed himself somehow on toilet paper. 
¡°And, sure enough, the vendors were saying there were five hundred sheets per roll in one of these things. And there weren¡¯t. He was getting screwed on toilet paper.¡± 
Buffett knew that he wanted to be in business with the kind of guy who would leave a black-tie party to count sheets of toilet paper; a guy who might screw the guy across the table but never his own partner. He made a dealwith Rosner for $6 million. To make sure that Rosner would stay on the job after he bought the business, he flattered Rosner, made certain he got the numbers to evaluate its performance, and otherwise 
left himalone.16 
Buffett felt at one with the Ben Rosners of the world¡ªhe saw in their relentlessness the spirit of success. He was sick of problem companies like Hochschild-Kohn and was lookingfor more Ben Rosners, people who had built excellent businesses that he could buy. He and Rosner shared a mutual obsession. As Buffett liked to put it, ¡°Intensity is the price of excellence.¡± 
30 JetJack 
Omaha . 1967 
As late as 1967, Susie seemed to think that Warren would be more attentive to her and the family if he quit working. In her mind, the two of themhad an understandingthat they would scale back their lives once he made $8 or $10 million. His 1966 fees of $1.5 million and gains on his capital brought the family¡¯s net worth 
to over $9 million.1 She badgered himthat the time had come. But Warren¡¯s pace never slackened as he shifted his focus from one preoccupation to another:raisingmoney for the partnerships, buyingNational American, Sanborn Map, Dempster, Berkshire Hathaway, Hochschild-Kohn, American Express, and any number of investments in between. Sometimes his back seized up when he got on a plane, and occasionally Susie had to nurse himfor several days while he was bedridden with pain. His doctor couldn¡¯t find any specific cause, suggestingthat work or stress might have somethingto do with it. But Warren was about as likely to stop workingfor the sake of his back as he was to fork down a bigplate of broccolifor the sake of his health. 
He was always sittinghunched over something, a book, the phone, a bridge or poker game with friends like Dick Holland and Nick Newman, a prominent businessman who owned Hinky Dinky, the same grocery chain from which Warren had slunk, humiliated, as a boy after his grandfather sent himto buy loaves of bread. Newman and his wife were active in the community and in civil-rights circles, and, like the low-key Hollands, they were typical of the Buffetts¡¯ friends. Warren and Susie stayed away fromthe Omaha socialcircuit. Their joint social life was evolvinginto a series of recurringevents that followed the rhythmof Warren¡¯s work and often took place when they were travelingto see Warren¡¯s friends. In town, however, Susie stayed on call; she shuttled between her own friends, family, needy cases, and community work. A sign now hung on the Buffetts¡¯ unlocked back door that read: ¡°The Doctor Is In.¡± One or another of Susie¡¯s ¡°patients¡± could often be found wanderingaround the house. Her clientele came fromalldifferent ages and stations in life, and some were more demandingthan others. They asked and Susie gave, and when they asked for more, she gave more. 
When Susie asked, Warren gave, and when Susie asked for more, Warren complied. Unyieldingabout how he spent his time, he gave in to her on almost everythingelse. This was the year they remodeled the house. Already the biggest on the block, under Susie¡¯s direction a new wingreplaced the old garage, givingthe neighborhood kids a place to gather in a new family room. Warren was excited at havinghis own racquetball court in the basement underneath¡ªlike Ping-Pongon a human-size scale¡ªwhere he took his friends and business colleagues to play. 
But even though Warren was like a kid in many ways, and Susie wished he were a more attentive father, he was loyaland committed: He showed up at school events and took the children on vacations. And while 1967, the year of White Rabbit and Sgt. Pepper¡¯s Lonely Hearts Club Band, marked the apex of the rock-and-roll drugculture, with Susie Jr. in eighth grade, Howie in sixth, and Peter in third, the Buffetts were blessedly free of worries faced by many other parents. 
Susie Jr. had developed froma timid child to a self-sufficient teen and the undisputed boss of her siblings. While her mother filled the house with ballads and soulmusic when she sangand played albums, Little Sooz had turned into a rock-and-rollgirl; she introduced her brothers to groups like the Byrds and the Kinks. She was a straight kid, however, not sucked into the druggy element at school. Howie, now twelve, was still youngenough to try to scare his sister and her friends by loomingfrom the crabapple tree outside her window in a gorilla costume. But his pranks were gettingmore sophisticated, and more dangerous. He put Scout the dogon the roof, went downstairs, and called himto see if he would come. Scout did, and wound up at the vet 
with a broken leg. ¡°Well, I just wanted to see if he would come,¡± Howie protested.2 To foil his mother from periodically lockinghimin his roomout of frustration, he bought a lock at a hardware store and started locking her out. Peter spent hours at the piano, playingby himself or with his friend Lars Erickson. He was winningtalent shows and seemed as absorbed in his music as his father was in makingmoney. 
The one person in the family who was seduced by the dark side of the psychedelic sixties was seventeen-year-old Billy Rogers, son of Susie¡¯s sister, Dottie, now a buddingjazzguitarist who was experimentingwith drugs. His mother did some volunteer work and was an expert seamstress, but she also slept until noon, seemed paralyzed by makingdecisions, and at times was so distant and vague that it was literally impossible to carry on a coherent conversation with her. Dottie was drinkingmore and not payingattention to her kids. Susie often took Billy to watch Calvin Keys, a local jazz guitar player¡ªso that Billy could learn technique 
from him, but also to try to straighten Billy out.3 
She faced a dauntingtask in an era when the drugculture of pot and LSD was ubiquitous and Timothy Leary invited America to ¡°Turn on, tune in, drop out.¡± The youth-led counterculture was rebellingagainst allforms of authority, everythingfor which the prior decades had stood. ¡°This ain¡¯t Eisenhower¡¯s America no more,¡± said one of the hundred thousand hippies millingabout San Francisco¡¯s Haight-Ashbury that summer, as if 
that were explanation enough.4 
Warren stilllived in Eisenhower¡¯s America. He had never suffered from Beatlemania. He wasn¡¯t singing ¡°Kumbaya¡± or puttingup posters sayingthat war was unhealthy for children and other livingthings. His state of consciousness remained unaltered. His mind was deep in rigorous philosophical inquiry, torn between the cigar-butt philosophy of Ben Grahamand the ¡°great businesses¡± of PhilFisher and Charlie Munger. 
¡°I was in this Charlie Munger¨Cinfluenced type transition¡ªsort of back and forth. It was kind of like during the Protestant Reformation. And I would listen to Martin Luther one day and the Pope the next. Ben Graham, of course, being the Pope.¡± 
While Munger was nailinghis theses on the door of the Cigar Butt Cathedral, the market itself had 
abandoned allauthorities past and present; as the 1960s progressed, chatter about stocks enlivened cocktail parties, and housewives called their brokers from the beauty parlor. Tradingvolumes were up by one-third.5 Buffett, at thirty-six, felt like a grizzled old man in a world that craved Transitron, Polaroid, Xerox, Electronic Data Systems¡ªcompanies whose technology he did not understand. He told his partners that he 
was slowingdown. ¡°We simply don¡¯t have that many good ideas,¡± he wrote.6 
Yet he did not relax his rules in search of ways to keep the money at work. Instead, he laid out two new restrictions that would make it even harder for himto invest. These personalpreferences now became part of the official canon. 
1.Wewillnotgointobusinesseswheretechnologywhichiswayovermyheadiscrucialtotheinvestment decision.IknowaboutasmuchaboutsemiconductorsorintegratedcircuitsasIdoofthematinghabitsof thechrzaszcz. 
2.[W]ewillnotseekoutactivityininvestmentoperations,evenifofferingsplendidprofitexpectations, wheremajorhumanproblemsappeartohaveasubstantialchanceofdeveloping. 
By ¡°major human problems¡± he meant layoffs, plant closings¡ªand union businesses that couldn¡¯t take a strike. This also meant he would think once, twice, three times, before smokingany more cigar butts. 
The cigar butts he owned were problemenough. Berkshire Hathaway was now ¡°on life support.¡± Buffett had recently hired his Peat, Marwick auditor, Verne McKenzie, and sent himoff to New Bedford to oversee the wretched textile mill. He had been regrettinga mistake he had made at a recent Berkshire Hathaway board meeting. Feelingflush duringwhat would turn out to be a brief moment of financialsuccess¡ª¡°we were 
sellingout of rayon linings for a few months and makinga lot of money¡±7¡ªBuffett had let himself get talked into a ten-cent-per-share dividend. The firm¡¯s lawyers had argued that Berkshire was doingso well that it might be accused of unjustifiably retainingearnings. Either while daydreamingor simply in a moment of weakness, Buffett went alongwith the distribution; a dime a share sounded measly; it somehow took him twenty-four hours to realize the fallacy of their argument. By then it was too late and his uncharacteristic agreeableness had showered on the partners and shareholders $101,733 that he knew he could have turned 
into millions someday.8 He would never make a mistake like that again. 
Eight months later, Buffett offered the Berkshire shareholders a swap. Anyone who wanted an income-producingsecurity could have a 71/2 percent debenture in exchange for stock. A total of 32,000 shares were 
turned in. With this move Buffett washed out of the mix a group of shareholders who wanted income, ensuringthat the rest were more likely to care about growth instead of dividends. ¡°It was brilliant,¡± says Verne McKenzie.9 And, of course, with fewer shares outstanding, he was able to tighten his grip on Berkshire 
that much more¡ªcuriously, even as the magnitude of his originalerror in buyingthe place was clearer. Ken Chace stoically followed Buffett¡¯s orders to shrink the business. Rather than precipitate a hateful backlash like that at Dempster, Buffett listened to Chace¡¯s recommendations that the unions be treated well, and decided to tolerate losses to keep some remnant of the company operational and New Bedford content. 
By 1967 Chace and McKenzie had managed to pull the hapless maker of men¡¯s suit linings back to breakeven. But the term ¡°inflation¡±¡ªmoribund since the Second World War¡ªwas again on everyone¡¯s lips. The costs of wages and raw materials were risinglike silt in a river, and both foreign and southern textile mills with cheaper labor were dryingup Berkshire¡¯s sales. 
Buffett gave the news to his partners: ¡°B-H is experiencing and faces real difficulties in the textile business. While I don¡¯t presently foresee any loss in underlying values, I similarly see no prospect of a good return on the assets employed in the textile business. Therefore, this segment of our portfolio will be a substantial 
10 
drag on our relative performance¡­if the Dow continues to advance.¡± 
He tried to pull money out of the textile business as fast as possible. He became intimately involved in the most ordinary decisions of the mills, on the phone almost daily with Chace and McKenzie.11 Chace had had to shut down the Box Loomdivision for a week back in October 1966 because of competition fromimports; 
less than six months later Buffett told himto permanently shut down the KingPhilip D division in Rhode Island, which made fine lawn cotton, about one-tenth of Berkshire¡¯s output. The loss of 450 jobs marked the end of Rhode Island¡¯s cotton industry.12 ¡°The tide continues to be far more important than the swimmers¡± was the bottomline, as Buffett saw it.13 
It wasn¡¯t enough. As the numbers came in, Buffett realized that the Apparel Fabrics and Box Loomdivisions were losingso much money that the only way to salvage them was to modernize the equipment. But throwing good money after bad had been Seabury Stanton¡¯s mistake. Buffett refused to invest in the business; it would be like tryingto irrigate the desert with a garden hose. Still, closingthe plants down would throw hundreds of people out of work. He sat behind his desk and swiveled his chair and thought about it, then thought about it some more. 
The irony was that the partnership was swimmingin a sea of money. 14 And on Wall Street, brokers in pinstripes were gettinghigh on cash. A new breed of men, who had come of age after World War II without the lessons of the Crash and the Great Depression seared into their brains, had risen on the Street. As they pushed stocks to never-before-seen values, Buffett began sellingdown his American Express position, which by now was worth $15 million more than the $13 million that it had cost, accountingfor two-thirds of the partnership¡¯s gain. But he didn¡¯t want to plow that money back into Berkshire Hathaway. 
Rather, his most important task that year was to find somethingnew to which he could hitch the broken-down nagof Berkshire before its ¡°substantialdrag¡± on his performance became intolerable. In Omaha, he had longhad his eye on a company, National Indemnity, headquartered just a few blocks away from his Kiewit Plaza office. Buffett first met its founder, Jack Ringwalt, in the early 1950s, in the boardroom at the broker Cruttenden and Company. Ringwalt was one of the smartest, most enterprisingmen in town. 
Then Warren¡¯s aunt Alice had tried to steer Ringwalt into the Buffett Partnership.15 Ringwalt later claimed that Buffett had demanded a minimuminvestment of $50,000 (though Buffett was takingfar less than that from nearly everyone at the time). ¡°If you think I am goingto let a punk kid like you handle $50,000 of my money, you are even nuttier than I think you are,¡± Ringwalt supposedly replied, and declined to invest. Ringwalt considered himself an investingexpert, however, and Buffett¡¯s penchant for secrecy put many people off.16 
Buffett kept an eye on National Indemnity nonetheless. A nonstop learningmachine, he wanted to know everythingthere was to know about the insurance business. He checked out armloads of books fromthe library and came to understand Ringwalt¡¯s strategy, which was to insure the most difficult customers. Ringwalt, Buffett saw, was the mix-up player of insurance¡ªthe cautious risk-taker and the penny-pinching, 
aggressive underwriter who went around the office every night and turned off allthe lights.17 For a fancy price, he insured the unusual:circus performers, lion tamers, the body parts of burlesque stars.18 ¡°There¡¯s no such thingas a bad risk,¡± Ringwalt liked to say, ¡°only bad rates.¡± His first break had come when a bank asked him to guarantee that a bootlegger¡ªpresumed murdered¡ªwould not return to Omaha, because the presumptive widow wanted to withdraw his account without waitingthe legally required seven years. Ringwalt figured the alleged murderer¡¯s lawyer might have a pretty good idea whether the missing bootlegger¡¯s blood no longer pulsed. He had helped the accused murderer beat the rap, but the dead man¡¯s widow (and the bank) suspected that was mainly just good lawyering, not exoneration. Still, the lawyer couldn¡¯t say whether his client had confessed to him. So Ringwalt got himto put up some of his own money on the guarantee, on the theory that unless the bootlegger had croaked louder than a bullfrog, the lawyer wouldn¡¯t take the risk. Sure enough, the cash told all; the bootlegger never reappeared, and the bank never made a claim. Jack Ringwalt was enterprising, and a natural handicapper. 
From there, he expanded into insuringtaxicabs, then he put up the stakes for radio-station treasure hunts, hidingthe clues in lipstick cases, buryingthemhimself, usingclues so obscure that only one prize was ever claimed. He soon became the fastest-moving, most swashbuckling, energetic businessman in Omaha. His daughter referred to himby the racy-soundingnickname Jet Jack. He managed National Indemnity¡¯s investments himself, buyingtiny positions in hundreds of stocks, scribbled almost illegibly on ledger sheets: fifty shares of National Distillers, 2,500 of Shaver Food Marts. He carried around hundreds of stock certificates in an old gym bag. 
In the early 1960s, Buffett had called his friend Charlie Heider, who was on the board of NationalIndemnity, and asked whether Ringwalt had any interest in selling. Heider¡¯s answer was intriguing. 
¡°For fifteen minutes every year, Jack would want to sell National Indemnity. Something would make him mad. Some claim would come in that irritated him, or something of that sort. So Charlie Heider and I discussed this phenomenon of Jack being in heat once a year for fifteen minutes. And I told him if he ever caught him in this particular phase to let me know.¡± 
One gray and gloomy February Omaha day in 1967, Heider was havinglunch with Ringwalt, who said, ¡°I don¡¯t like this weather.¡± The conversation wound around to the fact that he wanted to sell National Indemnity. Ringwalt had convinced himself he was better off without it; the fifteen-minute window had appeared. ¡°There¡¯s somebody here in town who might want to buy it,¡± Heider said. ¡°Warren Buffett.¡± Ringwalt allowed as how he might be interested. Heider called Buffett afterward and told himthat Jack Ringwalt would possibly sell the company for so many million. ¡°Do you care to meet with him in the coming days?¡± 
¡°What about this afternoon?¡± Buffett said immediately. Ringwalt was leavingfor Florida the next morning, but Heider convinced himto go down to Kiewit Plaza first.19 
Buffett asked Ringwalt to explain why he hadn¡¯t sold to anyone yet. Ringwalt said that all the offers came from crooks. He started layingdown conditions. He said he wanted to keep the company in Omaha. Sensing that the fifteen-minute window was about to disappear, Buffett agreed he wouldn¡¯t move the company. 
Ringwalt said he didn¡¯t want any employees fired. Buffett said that was okay. Ringwalt said all the other offers had been too low. ¡°How much do you want?¡± Buffett asked. Fifty dollars a share, said Ringwalt, fifteen dollars more than Warren thought it was worth. ¡°I¡¯lltake it,¡± Buffett said. 
¡°So we made a deal in that fifteen-minute zone. Then, Jack, having made the deal, really didn¡¯t want to do 
it. But he was an honest guy and wouldn¡¯t back out of a deal. However, he said to me after we¡¯d shaken hands, ¡®Well, I suppose you¡¯ll want audited financial statements.¡¯ And if I¡¯d have said yes, he would¡¯ve said, ¡®Well, that¡¯s too bad, then, we don¡¯t have a deal.¡¯ So I just responded, ¡®I wouldn¡¯t dream of looking at audited financial statements¡ªthey¡¯re the worst kind.¡¯ Then Jack said to me, ¡®I suppose you¡¯ll want me to sell my insurance agencies to you as well.¡¯¡± 
It would have been naturalfor Buffett to want the agencies. They controlled relationships with some of the customers who did business with NationalIndemnity. ¡°I just said, ¡®Jack, I wouldn¡¯t buy those agencies under any circumstances.¡¯ If I¡¯d said yes, that I wanted him to sell the agencies to Berkshire¡ªhe would¡¯ve said, ¡®Well, I can¡¯t do that, Warren. We must¡¯ve misunderstood each other.¡¯ 
¡°So we went through about three or four iterations like this. And finally Jack gave up and sold me the business, though I don¡¯t think he really wanted to do it.¡± 
Buffett wanted himto do it, because Berkshire Hathaway was a lousy business that he had partially liquidated, and this was his chance to swap those funds for a great business. Since he knew that Ringwalt would be havingsecond thoughts while away in Florida, he moved fast to seal the deal before Ringwalt could 
change his mind. Both men wanted a contract no more than one page long.20 Buffett had finalpapers drawn up quickly and the funds deposited in the U.S. NationalBank.21 
When Ringwalt returned fromFlorida a week later, Buffett freight-trained himwith a deal ready to close. But 
Ringwalt showed up to the closingmeetingten minutes late. Buffett and Heider would later explain this by sayingthat Ringwalt was drivingaround the block lookingfor a parkingmeter with time left on it.22 Ringwalt always said he was just late. But maybe he¡¯d realized he wasn¡¯t actually better off without it, and was dragginghis feet, sorry at havingbowwowed himself into thinkinghe was better off without National Indemnity. 
Buffett, of course, knew full wellthat the partnership was better off with it; National Indemnity was the chance to give his fortunes a gigantic push. A short time later, he wrote a paper on the subject under the dull title ¡°Thoughts RegardingCapitalRequirements for Insurance Companies.¡± 
The word ¡°capital¡±¡ªmoney¡ªwas an important hint at what Buffett was thinkingwhen he acquired National Indemnity, for capital was his partnership¡¯s lifeblood. He was pullingcapitalfrom Berkshire and it needed to be put to work. NationalIndemnity took a lot of risk and needed gobs of capital to do so. ¡°By most standards,¡± he wrote, ¡°National Indemnity is pushingits capitalquite hard. It is the availability of additional resources in Berkshire Hathaway that enables us to follow the policy of aggressively usingour capital which, on a long-range basis, should result in the greatest profitability within National Indemnity¡­. Berkshire 
Hathaway could put additionalcapitalinto National Indemnity, should underwritingturn sour.¡±23 
Buffett had figured out a whole new type of business. If National Indemnity made money, he could send those profits out to buy other businesses and stocks, instead of leavingthemto hibernate in National Indemnity¡¯s vault. But if the lion ate the lion tamer, National Indemnity might need money to pay the lion tamer¡¯s weepingfamily. Then the money could come back home to NationalInsurance from the other businesses. 
Graftingthe insurance business onto Berkshire Hathaway, the mess of a textile mill, made its capital homeostatic. It could respond internally to the environment at Buffett¡¯s command, rather than hibernating like a lizard when it got cold or runningout when the sun shone to find a rock on which to sun itself. 
The key was to price the risks right. Thus he needed Jack Ringwalt, who had talked himself into sellinghis own business, to stick around. Buffett paid Ringwalt handsomely and cultivated himas a friend; and as with Ben Rosner and Associated Cotton Shops, he had bought an excellent business run by an able manager. 
The two men often played tennis in California. Ringwalt, whose taste in clothes resembled Buffett¡¯s, would show up in a grimy old sweatshirt that his daughter had made for him. His racy nickname, Jet Jack, stretched 
in huge letters over his bay window of a gut. Once when he and Buffett were havinglunch at a Jolly Roger restaurant, a little kid came up to him. ¡°Can I have your autograph, Jet Jack?¡± he asked. Ringwalt swelled with pride. The kid thought he was a celebrity:an astronaut or a movie star. He may not have looked the part except to a little kid, but in his heart, he stillfelt like Jet Jack. 
And rightly so, because the swashbuckle came frominside, not from the way he looked. Ringwalt may have sold his company, but he had gotten back a bit of his own¡ªfor what he did with some of the money he got from sellingNational Indemnity was to buy stock in Berkshire Hathaway.24 
31 
TheScaffoldSwaystheFuture 
Omaha . 1967¨C1968 
The greatest wave of riots, lootings, and burnings since the Civil War swept the country duringthe summer of 1967. Afterward, Dr. Martin Luther Kingsaid, ¡°Many more riots of the kind we had last summer and we shall be in danger of a right-wingtakeover of the fascist type!¡±1 Privately angry at the movement¡¯s lack of progress, Kingstillrefused to endorse violent resistance; some activists felt that the Student Nonviolent CoordinatingCommittee and Dr. King¡¯s Southern Christian Leadership Conference should have mounted a much more confrontationalresponse to the ugly force of nightsticks and cross burnings they faced that 
summer. 
Omaha¡¯s nonviolent activists counted the Buffetts¡ªboth of whom were now influential in town¡ªamong their informalnetwork. Rackie Newman, the wife of Warren¡¯s best friend in Omaha, Nick Newman, was workingwith Susie to pressure the YMCA and the boards of other organizations to give a fairer share of money to their branches in impoverished areas. Through the United Methodist Community Center, run by an 
African-American friend, Rodney Wead,2 Susie and Rackie sent black kids to summer camp and set up an interracial dialogue group for local high schoolstudents.3 Wead had become a frequent presence in the Buffett house. John Harding, who ran Buffett¡¯s back office, collected thousands of signatures for an open-housingpetition. Nick Newman helped bringWarren directly into the struggle by sponsoringhis 
participation in various local civil-rights groups. Warren¡¯s role was not to labor, but to speak. He, Newman, and Hardingtestified before the legislature in Lincoln on open housing. For her part, Susie went out and at least a few times actually bought houses, frontingfor blacks who wanted to move into white neighborhoods.4 
Recently, Warren had been introduced to Joe Rosenfield, who ran the Younkers chain of department stores 
based in nearby Des Moines.5 Rosenfield was wellconnected in both localand nationalpolitics and shared the Buffetts¡¯ political views. He was also a trustee of GrinnellCollege, which sat like a tiny radicalisland in the middle of the farminghamlet of Grinnell, Iowa.6 Its liberal-minded students tended to go into social 
services after graduation, and the school was focusingits fundingon increasingits African-American enrollment. 
Eighty-some years after its foundingin 1846, Grinnell had nearly gone broke, but in the quarter century since Rosenfield had taken over the endowment, he had built it to nearly $10 million.7 He had a keen wit, as well as an edge of sadness about him, havinglost his only son in a tragic accident; Susie Buffett quickly developed a special relationship with him. Given all their shared interests, Rosenfield naturally wanted to involve the Buffetts with Grinnell, his most important cause. 
In October 1967, the college was presentinga three-day fund-raisingconvocation on ¡°the liberal arts college 
in a world of change¡± and had assembled a brilliant panoply of 1960s culture in its speakers¡¯ roster ¡ªincludingauthor Ralph Ellison, whose novel Invisible Man had won a National Book Award; social biologist Ashley Montagu, who had questioned the validity of race as a biologicalconcept; communications theorist Marshall McLuhan, who had popularized the idea of a media-driven ¡°global village¡± contemporary artist Robert Rauschenberg; and Fred Friendly, the retired former president of CBSNews. But the speaker 
they were all waitingfor was Dr. Martin Luther KingJr.8 NobelPeace Prize winners were not everyday visitors to Iowa. Rosenfield had invited the Buffetts to the convocation; they were amongthe five thousand people who packed themselves into Darby Gymnasiumfor that Sunday morning¡¯s program. 
Kingflew in with the president of Morehouse College, who was goingto introduce him. They were hours late; state troopers, deputies, police, and private security guards had been standingon alert since before ten a.m., ready for trouble. As they waited, the audience grew hungry and restless. 
Finally Kingstrode to the podium, dressed in his preacher¡¯s robes. He had chosen the theme of ¡°Remaining Awake Duringa Revolution,¡± and his resonant voice rangout with a quote frompoet James Russell Lowell¡¯s ¡°The Present Crisis,¡± the anthemof the civil-rights movement. 
Truth forever on the scaffold, Wrongforever on the throne: Yet that scaffold sways the future, And behind the dimunknown, Standeth God within the shadow 
Keepingwatch above His own. 9 
He spoke of the meaningof suffering. Inspired to nonviolent resistance by Gandhi, Kinginvoked the lessons of the Sermon on the Mount. Blessed are the persecuted, it said, for theirs is the kingdomof heaven. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. 
As touched as she was by Dr. King¡¯s powerfulwords, Susie must also have been deeply moved by the way he transfixed her husband.10 Buffett had always responded to powerful, charismatic orators. Now he saw King standingbefore him:moralcourage in the flesh, a man who had been beaten and imprisoned, put in shackles and sentenced to hard labor, stabbed and clubbed for his beliefs, a man who had carried a movement on the strength of his ideas for nearly a decade despite enraged opposition, violence, and limited success. Kinghad once described the power of nonviolence, which ¡°has a way of disarmingthe opponent. It exposes his moral defenses. It weakens his morale and at the same time it works on his conscience¡­. Even if he tries to kill 
you, you develop the inner conviction that some things are so precious, that there are some things so dear, some things so eternally worthful, that they are worth dyingfor. If an individual has not discovered somethingthat he will die for, he isn¡¯t fit to live. When one discovers this, there is power in this method.¡±11 
Kingwas a prophet, a man who saw a vision of glory, of evil exposed through visible suffering, of people roused from sleep by the sight of horrors. He called his followers to nail themselves to his vision, to lift it up behind them and dragit through the streets. Christianity, he said, has always insisted that the cross we bear precedes the crown we wear. One of his lines, which he repeated in many of his speeches, struck Buffett¡¯s 
heart and pierced his reason. 12 
¡°The laws are not to change the heart,¡± he said, ¡°but to restrain the heartless.¡± 
¡°With that great voice of his, he just rumbled that out, and then went on and used that as a theme.¡± 
*** 
Susie had often told her husband that there was more to life than sittingin a room makingmoney. That October 1967, in the throes of the civil-rights struggle, he had written a specialletter to the partners, which 
showed that somethingin his thoughts had changed. This letter went out a little earlier than the annualreport he wrote to the partners each year, and it laid out his strategy without revealingthe year¡¯s pendingresults. After describingthe ¡°hyper-reactive pattern of market behavior against which my analytical techniques have limited value,¡± he went on to say: ¡°My own personal interests dictate a less compulsive approach to superior investment results than when I was younger and leaner¡­. I am out of step with present conditions. On one point, however, I am clear. I will not abandon a previous approach whose logic I understand (although I find it difficult to apply) even though it may mean forgoing large, and apparently easy, profits to embrace an approach which I don¡¯t fully understand, have not practiced successfully, and which, possibly, could lead to substantial permanent loss of capital.¡± 
He also brought up another reason for this ¡°less compulsive approach¡±: Personalgoals, he said, had begun to intrude: ¡°I would like to have an economic goal which allows for considerable noneconomic activity¡­. I am likely to limit myself to things which are reasonably easy, safe, profitable, and pleasant.¡± 
Buffett then stunned his partners by droppinghis stated goal of beatingthe market by ten points a year to beatingit by just five points a year¡ªor to earningnine percent, whichever was less. If they could find better results elsewhere, he said, they should go, and he wouldn¡¯t blame them. 
He knew that this was takinga risk. Some of the hot new mutual funds were doingmuch better than the partnership, doublingtheir money in a year. Each January, the partners could add money to the partnership¡ªor take it out. Many other skippers were forecastingsunnier skies. 
Yet his timingin announcingthat he was cuttingthe goalworked in his favor. The Dow produced an 
unusually poor year in 1966.13 Some of the partners, shaken by the market¡¯s roiling, had advised him to sell stocks. He paid attention neither to the market nor to advice, and the partnership beat the Dow by thirty-six points, the best record in its ten-year history. ¡°If you can¡¯t join ¡¯em, lick ¡¯em,¡± he wrote.14 So, it was not a 
bad time to be offeringhis partners the chance to take their money elsewhere. 
One side effect of this strategy would be to test their trust in him. They would be makingtheir decision without knowingthe actualresults of his latest year¡ªand for 1967 he was about to report his second stellar year in a row. If they stayed in, it would be because of that trust and because they were willingto accept his more modest goal. Beatingthe market by five points a year, compounded over any long-termperiod, would 
produce stupendous wealth.*25 Even Ben Grahamhad beaten the market by just 2.5 percent a year. Buffett¡¯s revised goalof nine percent put a floor on their results that was still two percent or more better than owning an average bond. That consistency, year after year, and not losing money, would lead to a stunningresult. Stickingwith him, an investor took only a modicumof risk, could achieve these extraordinary returns, and do so safely. Nevertheless, by loweringhis target, Buffett had just taken his partners down a peg psychologically, and the results reflected that. 
For the first time, instead of investors rushingto put more money into the partnership, they pulled out a net $1.6 million of capital in January 1968. Yet it was a fraction of what might have been. Less than one in thirty dollars had gone elsewhere. And when he reported his 1967 results a few weeks later, Buffett Partnership, Ltd. had advanced thirty-six percent¡ªversus the nineteen percent rise in the Dow. Thus, in two years, a dollar in Buffett¡¯s stewardship grew more than sixty cents, while a dollar in the Dow was still a measly dollar. 
He wished the departingpartners Godspeed with what might be perceived as the subtlest trace of irony: ¡°This makes good sense for them, since most of them have the ability and motivation to surpass our objectives and 
15 
I am relieved from pushing for results that I probably can¡¯t attain under present conditions.¡± 
¡°Financial genius is a risingmarket,¡± as Kenneth Galbraith would later say. 16 
Now Buffett had more time to pursue the personalinterests he had spoken about, and less pressure¡ªat least in theory. After King¡¯s speech, Rosenfield easily recruited Buffett to become a Grinnelltrustee. Given Buffett¡¯s dislike of committees and meetings, this signified how much he had been touched by the convocation¡ªas well as how close he had grown to Rosenfield. Naturally, he went straight onto the finance committee, where he found the trustees to be a group of like-minded men. Bob Noyce, who ran a company called Fairchild Semiconductor, which made electronic circuits¡ªsomethingabout which Buffett knew little and had even less interest¡ªwas chairman. Noyce, a former Grinnellgraduate who had once been expelled from schoolfor stealinga pigto roast at a luau¡ªa serious offense in a pig-farmingstate¡ªhad the aura of a 
man who knew what he was about.17 Yet ¡°he was really a regular guy. He didn¡¯t seem like a scientist at all,¡± says Buffett. Above all, Noyce had an overarchinghatred of hierarchy and a love of the underdog, in keepingwith the guidingspirit of Grinnell. 
Buffett seemed to feela sense of urgency to do somethingmore for civilrights too. He felt he could best serve the cause by usinghis brains and financial savvy behind the scenes. Rosenfield began to introduce Buffett around the Democratic Party power network. Buffett started to get involved with Iowa¡¯s Democratic Senator Harold Hughes and with Gene Glenn, who was runningfor the Senate. 
Then, in March 1968, the most controversialman in America, former Alabama Governor George Wallace, arrived at the Omaha City Auditorium to campaign for President.18 
More than five thousand people crammed into a roomdesigned to seat 1,400 to see the man who had run for 
governor seven years before on the platform ¡°Segregation now, segregation tomorrow, segregation forever.¡±19 It took less than eight minutes for his supporters to collect the signatures to place himon the Nebraska ballot. The odor of stink bombs filled the air. When Wallace began to speak, demonstrators pelted 
the platform with sticks, bits of placards, paper drinkingcups, and stones.20 Chairs flew, nightsticks cracked, blood splattered, and the police sprayed the crowd with Mace. As the melee spilled out along16th Street, rioters pulled drivers out of cars and beat them. People started throwingMolotov cocktails, flames raced through the neighborhood, sidewalks filled with broken glass, and looters pawed through the stores. Hours later the violence passed, and calmfinally began to descend. Then an off-duty policeman shot and killed a 
sixteen-year-old black boy inside a pawnshop, mistakinghim for a looter.21 
Over the next few days, high school students walked out of class, smashingwindows and settingfires.22 A few days later, police and snipers armed with automatic weapons traded shots and arrested severalpeople, includingmembers of the Omaha Black Panthers.23 
The racial violence continued all that summer, even as Susie never stopped goingto the North Side. She trusted in her excellent relations with the community and discounted the personal danger; Warren was not always aware of the details of what she was doingbut did feel that at times she went too far in puttingothers¡¯ interests before her own. His own horror of violence and fear of mob rule had roots that went back a generation. 
Howard Buffett had recounted over and over to his children a scene he had witnessed when he was sixteen years old¡ªa day when thousands of people converged on the Douglas County Courthouse, broke in and attempted to lynch the mayor of Omaha, and beat, castrated, and lynched an elderly black man who had been accused of rape. Afterward they dragged his body through the streets, shot bullets into it, lynched it again, and set it afire. The Courthouse Riot became the most shamefulepisode in Omaha¡¯s history. Howard missed seeingmuch of the violence, but witnessed the lynch mob turninga streetlamp into an improvised scaffold, 
and the mayor of Omaha hangingby a noose around his neck before beingrescued in the nick of time.24 The memory haunted himfor the rest of his life.25 He had seen with his own eyes the speed with which ordinary people, formed into a mob, could act out the lowest depths of human nature. 
King¡¯s warningearlier that year about mass social unrest potentially leadingto fascismrequired no explanation to Warren Buffett. His own commitment to sidingwith the underdogwent beyond instinct and rested partly on this train of logic. Many people thought such a thingwas inconceivable in the United States, but the seemingly impossible happened time and again. The law is not to change the heart, Kingsaid, but to restrain the heartless. And who are they, the heartless? That he did not say. 
A few weeks later, Kingflew to Memphis to speak at the Masonic temple. He reflected on a woman who had 
stabbed himin New York City and the persistent rumors that an assassin was waitingfor him. ¡°I don¡¯t know what willhappen now,¡± he told the audience. ¡°We¡¯ve got some difficult days ahead. But it really doesn¡¯t matter with me now, because I¡¯ve been to the mountaintop.¡± The next day, April4, as he stood on the balcony of the Lorraine Motel preparingto lead a march of sanitation workers, he was fatally shot in the 
neck.26 
Grief, rage, and frustration poured out of black communities across America, turningurban centers into fiery combat zones. 
At this time, tens of thousands of students were demonstratingagainst the VietnamWar on college campuses. The Vietconghad launched the Tet Offensive, attackinga hundred South Vietnamese cities. Americans had been horrified by a photograph of a South Vietnamese police chief shootinga Vietcongguerrila in the head point-blank, an image that for the first time changed the Communists froman abstraction to human beings. The U.S. government had just eliminated most draft deferments, finally puttingthe sons of the upper middle class at risk of beingdrafted. Public sentiment turned decisively against the war. By the time Kingwas shot, the country felt as though revolution could erupt at any moment. 
In their various ways, many people decided they were fed up, and done with beingput down. Buffett¡¯s friend 
Nick Newman abruptly announced that he would no longer attend meetings at clubs that discriminated against Jews as members.27 Warren, too, was moved to take action. Since his Graham-Newman days, he had broken away from the segregated 1950s culture and the anti-Semitismof his family¡¯s elder generation to forge friendships and business connections with a wide circle of Jewish people. He even seemed to feel a sense of personal identification with Jews, some thought; their status as outsiders fit with his own sense of maladjustment and his alignment with the underdog. Some time before, Buffett had quietly resigned fromthe Rotary Club, repelled by the bigotry he saw as a member of its membership committee. But he never told anyone the reason. Now he made it his personal project to sponsor a Jew¡ªhis friend Herman Goldstein¡ªfor membership in the Omaha Club. 
Since one of the rationales that institutions like the Omaha Club used to defend their exclusionary policies 
was that ¡°they have their own clubs that don¡¯t admit us,¡± Buffett decided to ask Nick Newman to nominate him for the all-Jewish Highland Country Club.28 Some of its members objected, usingthe same logic employed by the Omaha Club: Why take in gentiles when we had to establish our club because their clubs 
wouldn¡¯t have us?29 But a couple of rabbis got involved and an Anti-Defamation League spokesman appeared on Buffett¡¯s behalf.30 Once accepted, Buffett quietly stormed the Omaha Club, armed with his Jewish country-club membership. Herman Goldstein was voted in, and the long-standingreligious barrier to membership there finally toppled. 
Buffett had devised a clever solution, a way to get the club to do the right thingwithout confrontinganyone. It avoided the thinghe dreaded, but it also reflected his reasoning¡ªprobably correct¡ªthat marchingand demonstrations would not change the minds of well-off businessmen. 
It also worked because he was now a well-known figure in Omaha. He was no longer an upstart; he had clout. The man who had once had to work to get off the blacklist of the Omaha Country Club had singlehandedly effected what was perhaps the most significant organizational change since its foundingin one of Omaha¡¯s most elite institutions. 
Yet Buffett wanted to play more than just a local role. With his money, he knew he could have an impact at the nationallevel, for 1968 was an election year, and it would take a lot of money to try to unseat an incumbent President¡ªLyndon Johnson¡ªin favor of an antiwar candidate. 
Vietnamwas the central issue of the campaign, and Eugene McCarthy, the liberal Senator fromMinnesota, was initially the only Democrat willingto run in the primaries against Johnson. 
The campaign had started in New Hampshire, where a McCarthy ¡°children¡¯s crusade¡± against the war sent nearly ten thousand youngactivists and college students to knock on almost every door in the state in heavy 
snow. He won forty-two percent of the New Hampshire vote, a strikingly strongshowingagainst an incumbent President. Many students, blue-collar workers, and antiwar voters considered McCarthy a hero. Buffett became treasurer of his Nebraska campaign, and he and Susie attended a campaign event, she smiling broadly in an eye-catchingdress and mob cap that she had had made out of fabric striped with McCarthy¡¯s name. 
Then Johnson announced that he would not run again and John F. Kennedy¡¯s brother Robert Kennedy entered the race. He and McCarthy raced through a bitter primary battle in which there was no clear front-runner untilKennedy won the California primary, givinghim a decisive lead in delegates. But on the night of his victory, he was shot by an assassin, dyingtwenty-four hours later, and Johnson¡¯s Vice President, Hubert Humphrey, announced his candidacy. He captured the nomination at a tumultuous Democratic convention in Chicago marked by battles between police equipped with nightsticks and Mace and riotingantiwar protesters. Buffett then supported Humphrey against the Republican Richard Nixon, who won the election. In later years, McCarthy switched parties several times and made severalerratic independent runs for President, undermininghis credibility as a serious politician. 
Buffett was notably loyal to his close friends. His enthusiasm for more distant acquaintances, and especially for public figures was fickle, however, waxingand waningwith their stature in others¡¯ eyes. In his insecurity, he worried constantly about how associatingwith others reflected on him. Eventually he regretted and downplayed his association with McCarthy. But his involvement in politics and his commitment of money signaled a sea change in Buffett¡¯s life. For the first time he had made roomfor somethingbesides investing, a ¡°noneconomic activity¡± with roots in his family¡¯s past and one that stretched toward the unknowable future. 
32 
Easy,Safe,Profitable,andPleasant 
Omaha . 1968¨C1969 
In January 1968, Buffett had issued a callto his fellow Grahamites, summoningthem together for the first time as a meetingof the faithful in the middle of a stock market gone mad. ¡°[T]here has been a tremendous change in attitude in the last few years, and I think the gang that is assembling in La Jolla is about all that 
is left of the old guard,¡±1 he wrote, invitingGraham¡¯s former students BillRuane, Walter Schloss, Marshall Weinberg, Jack Alexander, and TomKnapp. He also invited Charlie Munger, whomhe had introduced to Graham, as wellas Munger¡¯s partner, Roy Tolles, and Jack Alexander¡¯s partner, Buddy Fox. Ed Anderson, who had left Munger¡¯s partnership to become a partner in Tweedy, Browne, was on the guest list, too, as was Sandy Gottesman, who, Buffett told Graham, is ¡°a good friend of mine and a great admirer of you.¡± Lastly, 
he said, ¡°I think you probably remember Henry [Brandt], who works very closely with us.¡±2 
Fred Stanback, Buffett¡¯s partner in deals like Sanborn Map and the best man at his wedding, was too busy to attend. A few years after Warren had finished at Columbia, he and Miss Nebraska 1949, Vanita Mae Brown, had reunited for dinner in New York. They made it a sort of double date by bringingalongSusie and Fred, who had met Vanita at least once before through Warren. She was then Vanita Mae Brown Nederlander, havingbeen briefly married to a member of the Nederlander family, theater owners who were part of an American entertainment dynasty. After the dinner, Fred, Warren¡¯s most introverted friend, became, as another friend put it, ¡°putty in her hands,¡± as if to prove the old maximthat opposites attract. Initially, their marriage probably seemed like a sort of charmingpostscript to Warren¡¯s career at Columbia: a couple brought into the Buffetts¡¯ circle fromthat era. He did have a tendency to arrange his friends¡¯ lives, asking them to partner with him, puttingthemon his companies¡¯ boards, and in general wrappingtheminto his life through ties of various kinds. Two friends married may have felt almost like a compliment to him, but it turned out to be the worst decision Fred ever made in his life. 
He and Vanita had been livingin Salisbury, North Carolina, where Fred grew up and where his family had built their ¡°Snap Back with Stanback¡± headache-powder business. Now Fred himself needed boxcarloads of headache powder; he was extractinghimself fromthis pulse-poundingmarriage. Vanita had thoroughly established herself in tiny Salisbury and remained there to torment him with allher considerable creativity while they battled in the courts. Thus, unlike the rest of the Grahamites, Fred¡¯s interest in the stock market had been temporarily diverted. It was at a time when the market was growingless attractive anyway: Hundreds of millions of dollars had been poured into it by people mindlessly coattailingso-called experts, who themselves had no more than a couple of years¡¯ proven ability to make money. More than fifty new 
investment funds had come to market, with nearly sixty-five more waitingin the wings.3 For the first time in 
U.S. history, it became fashionable for a broad group of individuals to own stocks.4 Buffett would describe 
this phase as resembling ¡°an ever-wideningcircle of chain letters,¡± even a ¡°mania,¡± populated mostly by ¡°the hopeful, credulous, and greedy, graspingfor an excuse to believe.¡±5 
In a business that was still transacted through paper trade tickets and physical delivery of stock certificates, tradingvolume had reached such a level that the market was nearly crushed under the weight of paperwork. Huge numbers of orders were duplicated or never executed, the tickets misplaced or simply thrown in the garbage, while file rooms worth of stock certificates disappeared, presumed stolen, amid rumors that the Mafia had infiltrated the market. All sorts of reforms pushed through in 1967 and 1968 automated and computerized the tradingsystems in a desperate effort to catch up. One of the most important would shut down the old ¡°under-the-counter¡± market. The National Association of Securities Dealers announced that it 
was about to bringonline a new systemcalled NASDAQ that would quote prices for smaller stocks.6 Instead of appearingon Pink Sheets that were stale the moment they were printed, the prices of most companies not listed on the stock exchanges would now be posted and updated electronically as they changed. Market makers had to show their hands and stand by the quotes they posted. Any trader who was very knowledgeable, good at haggling, and strongof backbone was not goingto like the new system. In the middle of an already difficult market, it was goingto make Buffett¡¯s job harder. 
To each of the Grahamites comingto La Jolla, Warren sent out instructions. ¡°Please do not bringanything more current than a 1934 edition of Security Analysis alongwith you,¡± he wrote.7 Whatever their age, wives, too, would remain at home. 
In his letter, Buffett reminded themthat they were there to listen to Graham, the Great Man, not one another. Severalin the group¡ªMunger, Anderson, Ruane¡ªwere inclined to be loquacious. When it came to investing, of course, no one had more of this tendency than Buffett himself. At age thirty-seven, he had finally attained peerage and was able to callhis former teacher ¡°Ben,¡± but sometimes he still slipped and said ¡°Mr. Graham.¡± So he must have been at least partly remindinghimself not to try to take over as the best student in the class. 
Thus instructed, the dozen Graham-worshippers convened at the Hotel delCoronado, across the bay from San Diego. Warren had wanted to meet at a much cheaper venue such as a Holiday Inn; he made sure the group knew that the extravagance of this pink-and-white Victorian confection of a resort was Graham¡¯s idea. 
By the time the dozen arrived in San Diego, a huge storm with lashingrain and churningseas had hit, but no one cared; they were there to talk about stocks. Buffett was burstingwith pride at havingengineered a tribute to his teacher and a chance to show off the wisdom of Ben Graham to his new friends. Grahamarrived at the Coronado late. Ever the teacher, as soon as he got there, he immediately gave theman exam. 
Graham was almost painful to listen to under any circumstances. Every sentence was complex and larded with classical allusions. The exam he gave themwas much the same. ¡°They were not terribly complicated questions, although they were a little¡ªyou know, some were French history, or something like that. But you thought you knew some of the answers,¡± says Buffett. 
They didn¡¯t. Only Roy Tolles got more than half. By answeringeverything¡°true¡± except a couple that he knew for certain were not, he scored eleven out of twenty. The ¡°little exam¡± turned out to be one of 
Graham¡¯s teachingtricks, designed to show that even an easy-lookinggame can be rigged. Buffett would later have a saying: Knowingthat a clever guy is stackingthe deck is not necessarily protection. 
Duringthe rest of the meeting, Grahamtolerated the discussions of stock promotion, manufactured 
performance, phony accounting, institutional speculation, and the ¡°chain-letter acquisition syndrome¡± with bemusement.8 But he was no longer engaged; instead, he wanted to tell riddles and joined with enthusiasmin brainteasers and word and numbers games. 
Buffett, however, was as much engaged as ever, notwithstandingthe tenor of his letter to his partners in October 1967, when he wrote that fromnow on he would limit himself to activities that were ¡°easy, safe, profitable, and pleasant.¡± When he returned to Omaha from San Diego he focused intensely on the problems of the partnership. He needed to let the partners know that allwas not wellat some of the businesses they owned and in his next two letters dropped subtle hints. After havingdescribed the travails of textiles eloquently in 1967, he made no further mention of the business in 1968, although the prospects and results of 
the Berkshire mills had not improved. Earnings at DRC were fallingbecause of Hochschild-Kohn.9 Still, Buffett did not take the logical next step, which would have been to sellBerkshire Hathaway and Hochschild-Kohn. 
Here, his commercial instincts chafed against some of his other traits: the urge to collect, the need to be liked, the preoccupation with avoidingconfrontation after the Dempster windmill war. In an intricate minuet of rationalization, he explained his thinkingin his January 1968 letter to the partners: ¡°When I am dealing with people I like in businesses I find stimulating (what business isn¡¯t?), and achieving worthwhile overall returns on capital employed (say, ten to twelve percent), it seems foolish to rush from situation to situation to earn a few more percentage points. It also does not seem sensible to me to trade known pleasant personal relationships with high-grade people, at a decent rate of return, for possible irritation, aggravation, or 
10 
worse at potentially higher returns.¡± 
Some of the growingcrowd of Buffett-watchers may have read these words with surprise. Measuringby ¡°overall¡± returns allowed for some businesses to do considerably worse than the average. To witness Buffett¡ªwho squeezed the last tenth of a percentage point from a buck like a miser grippinga toothpaste tube¡ªdismissively wavingaway ¡°a few more percentage points¡± was astonishing. 
Yet his performance stopped complaints, for even as he lowered expectations, he continued to surpass himself. Despite the deadweights, the partnership had averaged more than a thirty-one percent return over the dozen years of its existence, while the Dow had produced nine percent. The margin of safety Buffett 
always insisted on had skewed the odds sharply in his favor.11 Alongwith his talent for investing, its cumulative impact on his battingaverage meant that $1,000 put in the Dow was now worth $2,857, whereas he had turned it into nearly ten times that, $27,106. Buffett¡¯s partners by now trusted himto always deliver more than he promised. He manifested predictability and certainty in 1968, the tumultuous year in which students would take over and close Columbia University, flower-child demonstrations would turn militant, 
and activists would nominate a pigfor President.12 
But by mid-1968, Buffett had made a decision to try to jettison the intractable Berkshire Hathaway¡ªa business that was neither easy, safe, profitable, nor pleasant¡ªand its unlucky textile workers. He offered to sellthe company to Munger and Gottesman. They came to Omaha to visit and talk. After three days of discussion, however, neither man wanted to buy somethingthat Buffett thought he was better off without. He was stuck with Berkshire Hathaway. 
Because the Apparel and Box Loomdivisions were not self-sustainingand it would take gobs of cash to keep them running, Buffett was now forced to act. Deployingcapitalwith no hope of a return was a cardinal sin to him. He told Ken Chace what to do. Chace was upset, but, in typically stoic fashion, he followed orders and 
shut the two divisions down.13 Still, Buffett could not bringhimself to put a spike through the whole thing and bury it. 
What he was left with, therefore, was a partnership that owned two businesses, one thriving¡ªNational 
Indemnity¡ªand one failing¡ªBerkshire Hathaway¡ªplus eighty percent of DRC, the retail holdingcompany, and, of course, shares in a wide range of other companies. As 1968 waned, stocks on the fringes of the market began to slide; investors concentrated on the biggest, safest names. Indeed, Buffett himself started buyingthe blandest, most popular stocks that remained reasonably priced:$18 million of AT&T, $9.6 million of BF Goodrich, $8.4 million of AMK Corp. (later United Brands), $8.7 million of Jones & Laughlin Steel. But above all, he kept accumulatingmore Berkshire Hathaway¡ªdespite his restriction against buyingany more bad businesses and even though the textile business was sinkinginto the mud. Only a short while ago, he had tried to sellit to Munger and Gottesman, but now that he could not sell it, he seemed to want as much of the stock as he could get. 
He and Munger had also discovered another company they saw as promisingand were buyingas much stock of it as they could. This was Blue Chip Stamps, a trading-stamp company. They would buy it separately and together, and over the course of time Blue Chip would dramatically reshape the course of both men¡¯s careers. 
The tradingstamp was a marketinggiveaway. Retailers handed stamps to their customers with their change. Customers dumped themin a drawer, then pasted theminto little booklets. When redeemed, enough of the booklets bought themanythingfroma toaster oven to a fishingrod or a tetherballset. The smallthrill of savingstamps fit neatly into a disappearingworld: a world of thrift, a world that feared debt, that viewed these ¡°free gifts¡± as the reward for takingthe trouble to collect and save those stamps and for never wasting 
anything.14 
But the stamps were not really free.15 The stores paid for themand marked up the merchandise accordingly. The national leader in tradingstamps was Sperry & Hutchinson, except in California. There, a group of chains had shut out the S&H Green Stamp by startingtheir own tradingstamp, Blue Chip, and sellingit to 
themselves at a discount.16 Blue Chip had a classic monopoly. 
¡°When you had all the major oil companies and grocers giving out a single stamp, it became like money. People would leave their change behind and take the stamps. Morticians gave out stamps. Prostitutes gave them. I always thought the funniest thing would be if the madam would call in one of the girls and say, ¡®From now on, I think you better double-stamp, honey.¡¯ It was ubiquitous. Everybody had them. People even counterfeited them.¡± 
In 1963, the Department of Justice had filed suit against Blue Chip for restraint of trade and monopolizingthe trading-stamp business in California.17 S&H also sued it. With the stock in a slump, Rick Guerin, who had founded his own partnership, Pacific Partners, noticed Blue Chip and took it to Munger. Buffett had noticed it too. ¡°Blue Chip did not have an immaculate conception,¡± Charlie Munger concedes, but they alldecided to make a calculated bet that Blue Chip could work its way out of its woes¡ªthe S&H lawsuit beingthe most threatening. 
They wanted it because Blue Chip had somethingcalled ¡°float.¡± The stamps were paid for in advance; the prizes got redeemed later. In between, Blue Chip had use of the money, sometimes for years. Buffett had first encountered this tantalizingconcept with GEICO, and it was part of why he had wanted to own National Indemnity. Insurers, too, got paid premiums before the claims came in. That meant they could invest this steadily growingstreamof ¡°float.¡± To someone like Buffett, who was supremely confident in his investing ability, such a business was catnip. 
Allkinds of businesses had float. Deposits in banks were also float. Customers often thought of banks as doingthema kind of favor by holdingtheir cash in a safe place. But the bank invested the deposits in loans at the highest interest rates they could charge. They made a profit. That was ¡°float.¡± 
Buffett, Munger, and Guerin understood how to invert every financialsituation. If someone offered them tradingstamps, they upended the situation and thought, ¡°Hmm, it¡¯s probably better to own the trading-stamp company,¡± then figured out why. They would no more spend time savingtradingstamps to get a hibachi or a croquet set than they would wear their great-aunt Betsy¡¯s petticoats to the office. Even Buffett¡ªa boyhood stamp collector who stilldreamed occasionally about countingstamps, and had a sentimental stash of Blue 
Eagle stamps in his basement¡ªwould rather own Blue Chip stock than collect Blue Chip stamps. 
In 1968, Blue Chip began settlingthe lawsuits filed against it by competitors.18 It entered into a ¡°consent 
decree¡± with the Justice Department, under which the grocery chains that owned it would sellforty-five percent of the company to the retailers who gave away the stamps.19 To remove even more control fromthe grocers who had given Blue Chip its less-than-immaculate conception, the Justice Department required the company to find another buyer for one-third of its stamp business. Still, it looked as though Blue Chip had 
survived this part of the legalfight.20 
Munger¡¯s partnership had bought 20,000 shares, and Guerin bought a similar amount. In the process, Munger developed the proprietary attitude about Blue Chip that Buffett displayed about Berkshire Hathaway. He warned others away from it. ¡°We don¡¯t want anyone buyingBlue Chip,¡± he told people. ¡°We don¡¯t want 
anyone buyingthis.¡±21 
As the market rose, Buffett increased the partnership¡¯s temporary cash position to the tens of millions, even though he was stillbuyingstocks in huge chunks. His partnership also took over large blocks of Blue Chip stock from Lucky Stores, Market Basket, and shares owned by Alexander¡¯s Markets, however, and would continue to buy for the next few months until the partnership had acquired more than 70,000 shares. For National Indemnity and Diversified, he also bought five percent of the stock of Thriftimart Stores, one of Blue Chip¡¯s largest shareholders. Buffett figured he could eventually get Thriftimart to swap the Blue Chip it owned for its own stock. Fortunately they were bettingmainly on the S&H lawsuit settling¡ªotherwise, the timingwould have been awful. 
Just as he and Munger and Guerin were makinglarge commitments to Blue Chip, its steadily growingsales apexed. Women had started to lose interest in sittingat home, stickingtradingstamps in a book. The burgeoningwomen¡¯s liberation movement meant that they had better things to do with their time, more money, and with that a sense of entitlement that meant that if they wanted an electric blender or a fondue set, they went out and bought it, rather than fussingover books of stamps to trade in for it. Social roles and conventions had gone topsy-turvy, the Establishment culture so reviled that youngpeople said categorically, ¡°Don¡¯t trust anyone over thirty.¡± Buffett, at thirty-eight, did not feel old personally¡ªhe would never feel old 
personally¡ªbut ¡°I amin the geriatric ward, philosophically,¡± he wrote to the partners.22 He was out of step with modern culture and finance. 
In 1968, the prospect of Vietnampeace talks in Paris set off another boisterous rally in the market. Though proud of havinghusbanded, tended, and compounded his partnership, with minimalrisk, fromseven investors and $105,000 to more than three hundred people and $105 million, Buffett had become an elder of the market, seemingly eclipsed by youngbarnstormers who could flash a couple of years¡¯ worth of showy numbers and joy-ride new investors into givingthem$500 million nearly overnight. 
He seemed especially¡ªand comfortably¡ªantiquated when it came to all the new technology companies that were forming. At Grinnell College, he showed up for a meetingto find his fellow trustee Bob Noyce itching to leave Fairchild Semiconductor. Noyce, Gordon Moore (its research director), and its assistant director of research and development, Andy Grove, had decided to start a nameless new company in Mountain View, 
California, based on a vague plan to extend the technology of circuits to ¡°higher levels of integration.¡±23 Joe Rosenfield and the college endowment fund each said they would put in $100,000, joiningdozens who were helpingto raise $2.5 million for the new company¡ªwhich was soon to be named Intel, for Integrated Electronics. 
Buffett had a long-standingbias against technology investments, which he felt had no margin of safety. Years ago, in 1957, Katie Buffett, wife of his uncle Fred Buffett, had arrived at Warren¡¯s back door one day with a question. Should she and Fred invest in her brother Bill¡¯s new company?BillNorris was leavingRemington 
Rand¡¯s*26 UNIVAC computer division to start a company called Control Data Corporation to compete with IBM. 
Warren was horrified. ¡°Bill thought that Remington Rand was falling behind IBM. I thought he was out of his mind. When he left Remington Rand he had six kids and no money to speak of. I don¡¯t think Bill left to get rich. I think he left because he just felt frustrated. Everything had to go to New York to get approved and come back. And Aunt Katie and Uncle Fred wanted to put a few bucks in Control Data there right at the start. Bill didn¡¯t have any money. Nobody had any money, in a sense.¡± Well, except Warren and Susie. ¡°I could have financed half the thing if I¡¯d wanted. I was very negative on it. I told them, ¡®It doesn¡¯t sound 
24 
like much to me. Who needs another computer company?¡¯¡± 
But since Billwas Katie¡¯s brother, for once she and Fred had ignored Warren¡¯s advice and invested $400 anyway, buyingthe stock at sixteen cents a share.25 
That Control Data had geysered investors with money hadn¡¯t changed Buffett¡¯s opinion about technology. Many of the other technology companies that had started at the same time had failed. As much out of regard for Rosenfield as for any other reason, however, Buffett signed off on a technology investment for 
Grinnell.26 ¡°We were betting on the jockey, not the horse,¡± as he saw it.27 But, more important, Rosenfield provided the margin of safety by guaranteeingthe college¡¯s investment. And as much as Buffett admired Noyce, he did not buy Intel for the partnership, thus passingon one of the greatest investingopportunities of his life. While he had lowered his investingstandards in difficult environments¡ªand would do so again¡ªone compromise he would never make was to give up his margin of safety. This particular quality¡ªto pass up possible riches if he couldn¡¯t limit his risk¡ªwas what made himWarren Buffett. 
Now the whole market was startingto look like Intelto him, however. His 1968 year-end letter assessed it soberingly, sayingthat investingideas were at an all-time low.28 ¡°Nostalgia just isn¡¯t what it used to be,¡± he concluded. 
As he later explained: ¡°It was a multi-trillion-dollar market, and yet I couldn¡¯t find a way to invest $105 million intelligently. I knew I didn¡¯t want to manage other people¡¯s money anymore in an environment where I didn¡¯t think I could do well, and yet where I¡¯d feel obliged to do well.¡± 
That attitude was remarkably different from1962, when the market was similarly soaring. Both times he bemoaned it. But then he had raised money with an energy that belied his inability to put it to work. 
The partners were dumbfounded by the contrast between his dour words and the wing-walk way he seemed to be earningmoney for them. Some began to impart an almost supernatural level of confidence to him. The more he surpassed his own gloomy predictions, the more the legend seemed to grow. But he knew it wasn¡¯t goingto last. 
33 
TheUnwinding 
Omaha . 1969 
In the outer office on Kiewit Plaza¡¯s eighth floor, Gladys Kaiser sat guardingWarren Buffett¡¯s doorway. Rail-thin, perfectly made up, chain-smoke driftingthrough her platinumhair, Gladys dispatched paperwork, phone calls, bills, and nonsense with brisk efficiency.1 She kept Buffett off limits to everyone¡ªincludinghis family at times. It made Susie seethe, but with Gladys guardingthe door there was nothingshe could do. 
Susie blamed Gladys. And, of course, Warren would never give Gladys an actualorder to keep Susie out. But everyone at his office knew how to interpret what he wanted from his subtle way of sayingsomething 
without directly statingit. Nobody would so much as cough if they thought he would disapprove. People had to follow hints and signals as if they were stated rules simply to work at the Buffett Partnership. Beetled brows and ¡°hmmmf¡± meant ¡°Don¡¯t even consider it.¡± ¡°Really?¡± meant ¡°I disagree but won¡¯t say so directly.¡± An averted head, crinkled eyes, and backpedalingmeant ¡°Help me, I can¡¯t.¡± Gladys brooked no nonsense in followingthese unarticulated requests and orders, and sometimes people¡¯s feelings got hurt. But her job was to protect her boss, and that meant doingthings he couldn¡¯t bringhimself to do. She had to be tough enough to take the blame. 
On the dingy walls above her head hungsome framed newspaper clippings, reminders of the 1929 Crash. Dented metalfurniture, alongwith an old ticker machine, furnished the offices. Down the short linoleum hallway beyond Gladys sat the other people who knew how to interpret Buffett¡¯s signals and signs. To the left was BillScott¡¯s little office, where he barked ¡°Hurry up, I¡¯m busy!¡± at the brokers to execute Buffett¡¯s trades. Down the hallway to the right, in a workroom packed with files and the small refrigerator Gladys kept filled with Pepsibottles, part-time bookkeeper Donna Walters plied her trade, meticulously keepingthe 
partnership¡¯s records and preparingits tax returns.2 Just past Walters sat John Harding, managingthe partners¡¯ and the partnership¡¯s affairs. Straight ahead behind Gladys was Buffett¡¯s own realm, furnished with a couple of recliningarmchairs, a desk, and a litter of newspapers and magazines. Its most prominent feature was the large portrait of Howard Buffett on the wall across from his desk. 
Warren arrived every morning, hungup his hat, and disappeared into his sanctuary to read the papers. After a while he emerged and told Gladys, ¡°Get me Charlie.¡± Then he shut the door, got on the phone, and spent the rest of the day swivelingbetween the phone and his reading, spelunkingfor companies and stocks to buy. Once in a while he would reappear and tell Bill Scott about a trade. 
With the stock market high, Scott was less busy these days. Buffett, his pockets full of the money that National Indemnity produced, was delvingfor entire businesses, since their prices were less subject to the whim of investors. He had discovered the Illinois National Bank & Trust, one of the most profitable banks he had ever seen, run by seventy-one-year-old Eugene Abeggin Rockford, Illinois. Buffett wanted the crusty Abeggas part of the deal. Abeggresembled Ben Rosner, who had counted sheets of toilet paper. Buffett talked to Abeggabout a few things he wanted to change in the business, then said, ¡°I¡¯ve dropped allthe shoes. I¡¯m not a centipede. If you want to go ahead, fine, and if not, then we¡¯re stillfriends.¡± 
¡°Gene had already made a deal to sell the bank to somebody else. But the buyer had started criticizing it, or they wanted an audit and he¡¯d never been audited and he wanted out. He was pretty dominant, and everything he did was unbelievably conservative. 
¡°He carried around thousands of dollars of cash in his pocket, and he cashed checks for people on the weekends. He carried a list of the numbers of unrented safe-deposit boxes with him everywhere and would try to rent you a safe-deposit box at a cocktail party. Mind you, this is the biggest bank in the second-largest city in Illinois at the time. He set every salary and paid every employee in cash, so the head of the trust department did not know how much his own secretaries made. So I went out there, and I named a number that turned out to be about a million dollars less than the other guy. And Gene, who owned a quarter of the stock, called up his biggest shareholder, who owned more than half the stock, and said, ¡®This young guy from Omaha¡¯s come here and offered this. I¡¯m tired of those guys at XYZ Company. If you want to sell to them, then you come run this bank, because I won¡¯t.¡¯¡± 
Sure enough, Abeggaccepted his offer. And doingbusiness with him cinched Buffett¡¯s instinct that strong-willed and ethical entrepreneurs often cared more about how they and the companies they had built were goingto be treated by the new owners than about grabbingthe last nickel in a sale. 
The Illinois NationalBank, which Buffett soon came to refer to by its colloquial name of Rockford Bank, had been chartered in the days before the U.S. Treasury assumed the exclusive right to coin money. Buffett was fascinated to discover that it still issued its own currency. The ten-dollar bills featured Abegg¡¯s picture. Buffett, whose net worth was now more than $26 million, could have bought almost anythinghe wanted, but not this. Gene Abegghad done himone better. He and the United States Treasury had the privilege of issuing 
their own currency, but not the Buffett Partnership or Berkshire Hathaway.3 The idea of legaltender with 
your own picture on it captivated him. He began carryinga Rockford bill in his wallet. 
Heretofore, Buffett had not wanted his picture on a billor anywhere else. He had more or less shunned the 
spotlight while managingthe partnership. True, a few more stories and photographs of his family had found their way into the local paper than might be expected of someone who wanted privacy.4 Nevertheless, except for his letters to the partners, he had gone through the sixties with his lips sealed¡ªhe didn¡¯t want anyone coattailinghim. He didn¡¯t talk about how he invested and he didn¡¯t broadcast his results, in contrast to the flash and razzle-dazzle shown by other money managers of the era, whose self-promotion propelled themto nearly instant fame. 
Even when the opportunity to promote himself arrived on his doorstep, he hadn¡¯t used it. A few years earlier, John Loomis, a securities salesman, visited Buffett at Kiewit Plaza. Loomis¡¯s wife, Carol, wrote the investing column for Fortune magazine. She had once interviewed a money manager named Bill Ruane, who told her that the smartest investor in the United States lived in Omaha. Some time later, her husband arrived at the 
pale monolith of Kiewit Plaza and made his way upstairs to the 2271/2-square-foot space that looked nothing like the office of one of the richest men in town. 
Buffett took him over to the restaurant at the Blackstone Hotel across the street, where he downed a strawberry malt and told Loomis what he did. Loomis talked about his wife¡¯s job as a journalist, and Buffett found that interesting. He said that if he had not become a money manager, he would have pursued 
journalismas a career. 5 
Warren and Susie met with the Loomises when they were in New York not longafter. ¡°They got us a special little room someplace where we had lunch,¡± Buffett says. The well-connected youngmoney manager from Omaha with the stellar track record and the ambitious reporter for Fortune found they shared many attributes: a zealfor unmaskingthe flimflamof fat cats, a magpie obsession with minutiae, and a streak of competitiveness as longas the interstate fromNew York to Omaha. Carol Loomis was a tall, athletic-looking, no-nonsense woman with short brown hair who tolerated shoddy journalismabout as wellas Buffett tolerated losingmoney, and she was a punctilious editor. They began to correspond and she ushered himinto the world of big-league journalism. He began helpingher with her story ideas. ¡°Carol very quickly became my best 
friend other than Charlie,¡± he says. 6 At first she did not publish anythingabout Buffett. 
By the late 1960s, however, the risingmarket had made investingin stocks less viable for the partnership. The advantage of a higher profile when tryingto buy entire businesses began to outweigh the advantage of secrecy in buyingstocks. And thus it was in the late 1960s that Buffett¡¯s longtime interest in newspapers and publishingcame together with his newly recast investinggoals and his desire for personal attention in a way that would fundamentally change his world. 
Before long, Buffett was immersed in the black-and-white world of journalism. Page by page, newspapers fell to cover the litter of financialreports fromthe publishers of newspapers and magazines that lay scattered on his desk. When he went to sleep, more newspapers¡ªpulled froma bundle and folded into tidy packets¡ªflew 
through his dreams. On his most restless nights, he dreamed of oversleepinghis childhood paper route.7 
Buffett¡¯s fortune had grown large enough for himto afford the purchase of a newspaper or a magazine, or both. His dream was to be not just an investor but a publisher¡ªto have the influence that went with owning the means through which the public learned the news. Around 1968, he and some friends tried to buy the 
entertainment newspaper Variety, but this came to naught.8 Then another acquaintanceship bore fruit. Stanford Lipsey was a friend of Susie¡¯s who liked to go to clubs with her and listen to jazz. One day, he showed up in Warren¡¯s office and said he wanted to sell the Omaha Sun Newspapers. Buffett was immediately interested; he had already tried to buy it once. 
The Sun was a chain of weekly neighborhood newspapers that Stan and Jeannie Blacker Lipsey had inherited from her father. It published seven editions in the Omaha suburbs; its meat-and-potatoes stories were the police blotter, local society news, neighborhood business doings, high schoolsports¡ªand gossip about who was goingsteady with whom, which made it a must-read for both parents and kids. Although the Sun was the underdogin Omaha, its editor, PaulWilliams, specialized in investigative journalism, and competed by publishingstories that the leadingpaper, the Omaha World-Herald, missed, often stories that exposed the follies and misdeeds of city bigwigs, stories that would offend major advertisers of the World-Herald. Usually these advertisers shunned the Sun. 
Despite his own elevation to the Omaha establishment, Buffett took a particular interest in the muckraking aspect of the Sun. Ever since collectinglicense-plate numbers to catch bank robbers, he had wanted to play the cop. And ¡°he¡¯d always had this huge admiration for newspapers,¡± Lipsey says. ¡°I recognized intuitively that Warren understood the role of newspapers in our society. There was a new highway about to come through my plant, and I would have had to borrow a whole lot of money to buy a new press. I didn¡¯t like the Sun¡¯s business prospects, but I knew that Warren had enough money that the journalismwouldn¡¯t suffer because of the economics. In twenty minutes, it was done.¡± 
¡°I figured we¡¯d pay a million and a quarter for it and take out a hundred thousand a year,¡± Buffett says. This return was eight percent, about as much as a bond would provide¡ªless, far less, than he expected to earn on a business or a stock, and the long-termoutlook suggested that return would decline, not increase. But the partnership¡¯s money was lyingfallow, and he really wanted to be a publisher. ¡°Part of my deal,¡± Lipsey says, ¡°was that, even though the partnership was closed, he had to take me in.¡± Buffett wanted the Sun so much that he agreed even though he knew he was beginningto consider shuttingthe partnership down. 
Berkshire Hathaway became owner of the Omaha Sun Newspapers on January 1, 1969. But this little neighborhood newspaper was only a beginning; Buffett wanted to be a publisher on a nationalscale. Joe Rosenfield introduced himto West Virginia¡¯s Secretary of State Jay Rockefeller, whomRosenfield considered a risingpolitical star. Soon, the Buffetts were hostingthe Rockefellers for dinner in Omaha; Rockefeller, in turn, introduced Warren to Charles Peters, an idealist whose start-up magazine, the Washington Monthly, seemed like the right national voice to express viewpoints on important ideas. Buffett 
talked to Gilbert Kaplan, who ran Institutional Investor magazine, to get a handle on magazine publishing.9 Then he wrote to Rockefeller: ¡°You have found my Achilles¡¯ heel. I ama pushover for publishing deals¡ªwhen I like the product¡­. I might mention that my enthusiasm for publishingadventures is in exact 
inverse proportion to my calculated assessment of their financial probabilities.¡±10 
Buffett introduced Fred Stanback and Rosenfield to the idea of investingin the Washington Monthly, warningthemthat it was unlikely to be a financial table-pounder. But the scandals it might uncover¡ªthe ideas it could promote¡ªthe minds it could awaken¡ªthe expos¨¦s it could expose! They put in a little 
11 
money. 
In short order, the Washington Monthly ran through its initialcapital stake. Buffett held out the possibility of another $50,000. Then he and Peters had a fifty-minute phone conversation. And, ¡°Oh God,¡± says Peters. ¡°As an investment it reeked of the potentialfor failure. There was his instinct as a hard businessman, and his philanthropic, good-citizen instinct on the other side, and they were clearly at war. He was worried about his business reputation and would come within an inch of pullingout, and I would slowly try to pullhimback. Warren kept findingnew plausible escape routes, and I tried to block the exits. But the glorious thingwas, he 
ended up stayingin.¡±12 Buffett added the condition that the editors had to put in some of their own money while Peters raised some outside, which Buffett said he would match eighty percent.13 
Peters was a better journalist than an accountant. They raised the money; the checks went out; then nobody 
heard from the Washington Monthly for months. ¡°They just vanished,¡± says Buffett. ¡°Fred Stanback complained that he was getting IRS forms late, and had to amend his tax returns.¡±14 Although the Washington Monthly was indeed puttingout strongstories¡ªas Buffett had wanted¡ªit wasn¡¯t enough. He had known from the beginningthat it would not make money, but he thought it ought to be accountable for the money that it had. He was embarrassed at havingdrawn Stanback and Rosenfield into a bear hunt. The investors felt they were beingtreated like bank tellers. Buffett wanted to be a partner in journalism, a fellow newshound, not just the guy who bankrolled idealism. 
Yet even with mixed results, Buffett was now pursuingthe personalconcerns of which he had spoken in his October 1967 letter to his partners. Meanwhile, the market continued to dry up and deprive himof opportunities. Spendingpart of his time as a publishingmagnate was no help in adjustingto that reality. Whatever else occupied him, he remained wholly committed to the partnership, too, and it turned out that a ¡°less compulsive approach¡± to investingwas not in his nature. So he started to figure out the best way to wind down the partnership. He says he received offers from a couple of people to buy the management firm, which would have meant the opportunity to sell at a large profit, but he thought this was not right. It was unusualfor a money manager to forgo a large sumof money, even in those days, and so far, Buffett had shown no inclination to avoid gettingricher. But he had always stayed on the same side as his partners, harnessinghis avarice to their benefit as well as his own. Around Memorial Day 1969, Buffett wrote the partners to tell themthat simply loweringhis goal hadn¡¯t lessened his intensity: 
¡°If I am going to participate publicly, I can¡¯t help being competitive. I know I don¡¯t want to be totally occupied with outpacing an investment rabbit all my life. The only way to slow down is to stop.¡±15 And then he delivered his bombshell:He announced he would be givinghis formalnotice of retirement by year-end and closingdown the partnership in early 1970. ¡°I am not attuned to this market environment, and I don¡¯t 
16 
want to spoil a decent record by trying to play a game I don¡¯t understand just so I can go out a hero.¡± 
What would he do now? 
¡°I don¡¯t have an answer to that question,¡± he wrote. ¡°I do know that when I am sixty, I should be attempting 17 
to achieve different personal goals than those which had priority at age twenty.¡± 
The partners howled with disappointment, and a few with fear. Many were na.fs, like his aunt Alice. They were ministers, rabbis, schoolteachers, grandmothers, and mothers-in-law. His announcement amounted to a market call on stocks. He did not think the game would be worth playinganytime soon. He had taught even the inexperienced to be wary of an overheated market. Some trusted no one other than him. But ¡°he just didn¡¯t want to operate in an environment where he didn¡¯t feelcomfortable with the opportunities,¡± says John Harding, ¡°especially when it was somethingthat he felt he had to devote all his time to.¡± 
*** 
Susie Buffett was happy that Warren was shuttingdown the partnership, at least for the kids¡¯ sake. They cared desperately what their father thought of them. Susie Jr. had always gotten most of what little attention Warren provided, and Peter felt rewarded for beingquiet and stayingin the background. But fourteen-year-old Howie, who had always sought some emotional connection to his father that was never forthcoming, had grown wilder as he grew up. Susie Jr. would find a pair of mannequin legs covered with fake blood stickingout of her closet. He climbed on the roof in the gorilla costume to spy on her when she came home from dates and drenched her with the sprayer fromthe kitchen sink when she appeared in her promdress. 
When their parents were in New York City, Howie seized the chance for an experiment in anarchy.18 Warren, still relyingon Susie for everything, assumed she would take care of whatever Howie and the other kids needed. But by now, Susie herself had stopped tryingto controlher children. And she had longsince let go of any idealistic expectations regardingher marriage. Her attention was increasingly taken up by an expandingnumber of ¡°vagrants,¡± as one friend put it, who wandered through the house, sought her help, and 
occupied her time.19 
Since she almost always accepted people unconditionally, some of those ¡°clients¡± had pasts as felons, con men, addicts, or, in one case, as the purported proprietor of a bawdy house. From time to time these people conned her out of money. She didn¡¯t really mind. Buffett was infuriated at the thought of beingcheated himself, but he had eventually come to think of this as part of Susie¡¯s giveaway budget and even accepted it as part of her charm. 
Her large group of women friends continued to expand: Bella Eisenberg, Eunice Denenberg, Jeannie Lipsey, 
Rackie Newman, and others. Though Warren recognized who most of them were, this was Susie¡¯s circle, not his. Other ties of hers, people like Rodney and Angie Wead, came fromthe activist community; another set of friends centered around the tennis courts at Dewey Park. And there was always the family:Leila, especially now that Roy Ralph had died and she had taken back the Buffett name; Fred and Katie Buffett and their son Fritz, who had married Warren and Susie¡¯s former babysitter, Pam¡ªalso, of course, a friend of Susie¡¯s now. Her nephews Tom and Billy Rogers were often around, as was another guitarist fromthe local music scene whom she had met through Billy, David Stryker. Like the Rogers boys and Dave Stryker, a number of Susie¡¯s friends were younger: She was close to Renee and Annette Gibson, daughters of the baseball player Bob Gibson and his wife, Charlene. Severalof the black students to whom she had given scholarships had come under her wingand wandered in from time to time:Russell McGregor, Pat Turner, and Duane Taylor, son of the jazzgreat Billy Taylor. And so it went. 
Even though Susie was the fountainhead of allthis generosity, she was startingto need a little attention too. It wouldn¡¯t have taken much, accordingto her friends, just an ounce of effort on her husband¡¯s part. She disagreed that makingmoney was life¡¯s purpose. She felt impoverished denyingherself travel, museums, theater, art, and most other forms of culture because of his lack of interest. Warren praised her effusively in public but when at home or work, lapsed into his normal preoccupied state. If he would make an effort by goingto an art gallery with her now and then, or take her on a trip just because she wanted to go, it would make a difference, she said. But while he did sometimes show up when asked, if she had to ask, it was a favor, not a gift. 
Now that Susie realized that Warren was never goingto take off to Italy for weeks on end, she began to travel on her own or with her women friends, sometimes to visit family¡ªsuch as Bertie, who now lived in California¡ªand sometimes to attend personal-growth seminars. 
One day at the Chicago airport, a man stopped in front of her as she sat on a bench. ¡°Are you Susie Thompson?¡± he asked. She looked up, embarrassed to have been caught with a mouth fullof hot dog. It was Milt Brown, her high school sweetheart, whom she had not seen in years. He sat down and they began to get 
reacquainted.20 
Susie, who was always reachingout for emotional connections, would later say that her husband wasn¡¯t lackingin emotion, he was just cut off fromhis own feelings. And it certainly seemed as though his strongest emotionalbonds were with his friends and partners, to whom he felt an intense obligation, and with whom he had created a de facto family. The other Buffetts could not help but notice the way he lit up in their company, in contrast to the dutiful but preoccupied manner he displayed while attendinghis own family events. 
Thus, even now that he was preparingto close the partnership that had consumed most of his wakinghours for the last thirteen years, he remained fully engaged with his partners and seemed a little reluctant to let go of his connection to them. He went to extremes to help themplace their money in good hands, writingthem another letter describingtheir options in meticulous detail. 
Explaininghis dedication to them, he says, ¡°The question of finding other advisers is a tough one. When I wound up my partnership, I had these partners that had counted on me and I was going to be distributing a lot of money. I felt an obligation to at least suggest some alternatives for them.¡± 
This was unusual behavior for a money manager, to say the least. Even Ben Grahamhad only said, ¡°Oh, buy AT&T,¡± when asked, and mentioned Buffett offhandedly to a few people. But Buffett made elaborate efforts to shepherd his partners on to their future investinglife. Some of themwere already in the Munger partnership, and Buffett sent one or two more to him. But Munger was queasy about the market. ¡°Who wants to be around people when you¡¯re disappointingthem?¡± he says. ¡°Particularly when you sucked them into the relationship?¡± He also lacked Buffett¡¯s genius for promotion. 
¡°I recommended two people to the partners whom I knew were exceptionally good and exceptionally honest: Sandy Gottesman and Bill Ruane. I¡¯d been around the investment world for a long time at that point, and I¡¯d gotten to know them over the years. So I not only knew their results, but I knew how they¡¯d 
21 
accomplished their results, which was terribly important.¡± 
So the richer partners would go to Gottesman at First Manhattan. But Sandy didn¡¯t want the small-fry, so Buffett sent the rest to Ruane, who was now leavingKidder, Peabody to set up his own investment advisory firm¡ªRuane, Cunniff & Stires¡ªwith two partners, Rick Cunniff and Sidney Stires, and creatingthe Sequoia Fund specifically to take on the smaller accounts. They hired John Harding, who would be out of a job when the partnership dissolved, to run an Omaha office for the new company. John Loomis, the securities salesman who was Carol Loomis¡¯s husband, and Buffett¡¯s trusty researcher Henry Brandt also went to Ruane, Cunniff ¡ªgivingit in effect a full staff. These connections also kept Harding, Loomis, and Brandt in Buffett¡¯s extended ¡°family.¡± 
Buffett brought Ruane to Omaha and promoted the Sequoia Fund to the partners. He endorsed Ruane in typically mathematicalterms. Unremarkably, even though he had known Ruane for years, he still felt it necessary to leave a small escape hatch, fearingblame in case things didn¡¯t work out, and wrote: ¡°There is no way to eliminate the possibility of error when judging humans¡­[but] I consider Bill to be an exceptionally high-probability decision on character and a high-probability one on investment 
22
performance.¡± 
Yet while Buffett made arrangements to close the partnership, the first signs appeared that the market¡¯s sparks were goingto cool. By July 1969, when U.S. troops began withdrawingfromVietnam, the Dow had dropped nineteen percent. Even though the triumphant moon landingthat summer gave the country a lift, WallStreet did not feel it. Exotic stocks like National Student Marketingand Minnie Pearl¡¯s Chicken System, Inc.¡ªwhich had garnered a huge followingin a market where half the money managers and brokers had 
been workingin the business for no more than seven years¡ªwere startingto collapse.23 
Blue Chip Stamps, the trading-stamp stock painstakingly accumulated by Buffett, Munger, and Guerin, now became a strikingexception to the generaltrend. The three of themhad been bettingon whether the company could settle its antitrust lawsuit with Sperry & Hutchinson. When a settlement was reached, this stock¡ªwhich the Buffett partners didn¡¯t know they owned¡ªshowered nearly $7 million in profit on themin 
return for a $2 million investment less than a year ago. 24 Now Blue Chip decided to have a public offering, and Buffett elected to sell the partnership¡¯s shares as part of that deal.25 It seemed that the partners were goingto have a splendid finalyear in 1969. 
That October, Buffett called another meetingof the Grahamites, includingthose who had gathered in San Diego the year before, sans Ben Grahamhimself. This time the wives were also invited, and although they did not join the meetings in which the men talked about stocks, their presence made the atmosphere more festive, like a vacation. Buffett delegated the planningto MarshallWeinberg, who lived in New York City and liked to travel. But Weinberg, who also liked to shave a dime and had no more experience of the jet-set life than Buffett, asked around and then made the unfortunate choice of the Colony Club, a PalmBeach, Florida, resort, where they were treated like rubes and snooted at even by the bellboys. 
Ruane reported at the first night¡¯s dinner that the bellhop had handed himback his five-dollar tip with a sneer, saying, ¡°You need it more than I do.¡± BillScott had given his bellhop a handful of the dimes he always carried in his pocket to make phone calls for Buffett. The bellhop threw the change all over the floor in the hallway on his way out. 
For the next five days, as the group enjoyed bad food, small rooms, high winds, and lashingrains, the men sat classroom style, with Buffett most often in his usual place at the front. They batted thoughts back and forth in an encoded shorthand derived frommany years of conversation and a closely shared set of concepts and 
values.26 ¡°Charlie told some horror stories,¡± Buffett wrote later, and ¡°I drew the same gloomy conclusions, [while Walter Schloss] said that two mislocated steel companies with obsolete plants were still below book 
27 
value so all was not lost.¡± 
Buffett posed the Desert Island Challenge. If you were stranded on a desert island for ten years, he asked, in 
what stock would you invest? The trick was to find a company with the strongest franchise, one least subject to the corrodingforces of competition and time: Munger¡¯s idea of the great business. As Henry Brandt took copious notes on the various answers, Buffett delivered his own choice: Dow Jones, owner of the Wall Street Journal. His interest in newspapers was growingand would only become more intense, yet curiously he did not actually own this stock. 
The gatheringended much as it had begun, with more displays of rudeness from the hotelstaff, who had no 
idea they were hostinganythingother than a third-rate group of stockbrokers at a time when the market was falling.28 The staff had officiously shooed the Grahamites away from the jewelry cases on the hotel mezzanine. On the last day, as the group was departing, Ed Anderson approached the front desk, and asked how best to get to the airport. Most of our guests go by limousine, he was told, but for you folks we¡¯ll call a 
cab.29 
Buffett would go on to describe the Colony Club as ¡°a friendly family hotel¡ªthat is, friendly if you were the Kennedy family.¡±30 It was a ¡°low-class performance by a high-class place,¡± says Anderson. Later, when 
a Fort Lauderdale businessman who held the mortgage on the Colony Club asked Buffett to advise him on a financingdeal, Buffett told the man he would be happy to do it without takinga fee, but ¡°if you ever have a chance to foreclose on them, do it.¡±31 
One of those Buffett had invited to the Colony Club was Hochschild-Kohn¡¯s Louis Kohn. Buffett had grown fond of Kohn and his wife, and he and Susie had vacationed with them in Cozumel. But invitingthemto the Colony Club gatheringproved awkward, since no sooner had the meetingbeen planned than Buffett and Munger started to realize that Hochschild-Kohn was not goingto work out for them. 
¡°Retailis a very tough business,¡± says Charlie Munger. ¡°We realized that we were wrong. Practically every great chain-store operation that has been around longenough eventually gets in trouble and is hard to fix. The dominant retailer in one twenty-year period is not necessarily the dominant retailer in the next.¡± Their experience had given thema deep wariness of retailing¡ªone that would only grow, not lessen, over time. 
They wanted businesses that would marmalade themwith money, businesses that had some sort of sustainable competitive advantage and could outwit the natural cycle of capitalcreation and destruction as longas possible. Not longafter the meetingin Florida, Munger and Buffett sold Hochschild-Kohn to 
Supermarkets Generalfor about what it had cost them.32 Buffett wanted to act fast in order to unload the company before windingdown the partnership and distributingthe assets. And alongwith the company, the Kohns disappeared from the Buffetts¡¯ lives.33 
Diversified Retailinghad issued unsecured debt (¡°debentures¡±) to finance the Hochschild-Kohn purchase. Buffett had taken special care with this, his first public financing, and insisted to his underwriters that the bonds have several unusual features. The bankers had objected that a novel structure would make the bond harder to sell. 
¡°I said, ¡®Well, but bonds should have this in there.¡¯ That was the first bond issue I ever sold, and I put a few things in there that the underwriters had no interest in whatsoever. But I had thought a lot about bond issues over the years. And I had thought about how bondholders got taken.¡± 
Bondholders historically earned less than stockholders because they gave up the potentially unlimited opportunity of a shareholder in favor of lower risk. But Buffett knew that in the real world this was not necessarily true. 
¡°One of the things I put in was that if we didn¡¯t pay the interest on the bond for any reason, the bondholders took over voting control of the company, so they didn¡¯t have to get Mickey Moused by bankruptcy and all that kind of stuff.¡± Ben Graham had written about this in Security Analysis, with as much passion as he mustered on any subject, describinghow courts rarely allow bondholders to seize the assets that back those bonds unless the assets are nearly worthless. Unsecured bondholders¡¯ interests were worked over in receivership through a stranglingprocess that delayed payment almost to the point of irrelevance. Thus, DRC¡¯s debenture also provided that the company could not pay dividends while the debentures were outstanding, meaningthat equity investors could not siphon off profits while interest on the bonds was in arrears. 
The second unusual provision was that the debentures paid eight percent but, dependingon the earnings of the company, could pay up to an additional one percent. 
And Buffett added a third provision. Because he felt that the bonds would be sold mainly to people who knew him or his reputation, he wanted the bonds to be redeemable if he sold enough stock in DRC that he was no longer the largest shareholder.34 
¡°And nobody had ever stuck anything like this in a covenant. I said, ¡®You know, they¡¯re entitled to have this in there. They may not want to redeem them, but they¡¯re entitled if they want to. They lent money to me, basically.¡¯¡± When his own banker, Nelson Wilder, protested that such clauses were unprecedented and 
unnecessary, Buffett overruled him.35 
Now that interest rates had risen, and banks were newly reluctant to lend, the debentures suddenly became a valuable formof cheap financing, a powerful consolation prize. Nevertheless, since Buffett thought of a dollar today as the fifty or hundred dollars that it could become someday, it was as if he had lost many millions on Hochschild-Kohn because of the forgone opportunity to use the money more effectively. He drew a conclusion that he would later state as: 
Time is the friend of the wonderful business, the enemy of the mediocre. You might think this principle is obvious, but I had to learn it the hard way¡­. After endingour corporate marriage to Hochschild-Kohn, I had memories like those of the husband in the country song ¡®My Wife Ran Away with My Best Friend and I Still Miss Him a Lot.¡¯¡­It¡¯s far better to buy a wonderfulcompany at a fair price than a fair company at a wonderful price. Charlie understood this early; I was a slow learner. But now, when buyingcompanies or common stocks, we look for first-class businesses accompanied by first-class managements. That leads right 
into a related lesson:Good jockeys will do well on good horses but not on broken-down nags. 36 
Even as Buffett and Munger were workingon the sale of Hochschild-Kohn in the fallof 1969, Forbes hit the newsstand with a story about Buffett titled ¡°How Omaha Beats Wall Street.¡± The article opened in such an arrestingmanner that other writers coveringBuffett would copy it for decades afterward.37 
¡°$10,000 invested in his Buffett Partnership in 1957,¡± Forbes said, ¡°is now worth $260,000.¡± The partnership, which now had assets of $100 million, had grown at an annualcompounded rate of thirty-one percent. Over that twelve-year period, ¡°it hasn¡¯t had one year in which it lost money¡­. Buffett has accomplished this through followingconsistently fundamentalinvestingprinciples.¡± The anonymous columnist for Forbes then wrote one of the more insightfulstatements ever made about Buffett: 
¡°Buffett is not a simple person, but he has simple tastes.¡± 
This not-simple Buffett with simple tastes had insisted on total secrecy in his stock dealings when he ran his partnership, and was never once profiled in an interview. Now, however, when secrecy was no longer important, he had cooperated with a high-profile article about himself. 
The article did not print, or even whisper, his net worth. The reporter did not know that since Buffett closed the partnership to new partners in 1966, his fees, reinvested, had quadrupled his net worth to $26.5 million in just three years¡ªnor that, with no money comingin from new partners to dilute him, his share of the partnership¡¯s assets had risen fromnineteen percent to twenty-six percent. The story cited his ¡°ramblingold 
Omaha house¡± 38 and the lack of computers and vast staff in his unimpressive office. True, the man with simple tastes still chugged four or five bottles of Pepsi a day, asked for it instead of wine at dinner parties, and ate only the dinner rolls if anythingmore complicated than a steak or hamburger was served. A helpless captive of whoever happened to be doingthe laundry at home, he stillsometimes turned up in public looking little better than a hobo and barely noticed the condition of his clothes. He would have been happy in a two-room garage apartment; the money was just his scorecard. It was Susie who cared about livingwell, and it was she who thought that money was pointless unless used for some purpose. 
Nonetheless, the Buffetts had for some time lived the life of a well-to-do couple¡ªthough not, of course, a life as luxurious as they could have afforded. Susie had even upgraded Warren to a Cadillac like her own, but only the most stripped-down version with no extra features, and after she had called every dealer within miles to get the cheapest deal. People found the contrast between his homespun tastes and his ever-growing fortune refreshing. His genialmanner, self-deprecatingwit, and air of calmput themat ease. He had shed some of his earlier gracelessness and most of his arrogance alongwith the more obvious signs of insecurity ¡ªthough his tolerance for criticismhad not increased. He was learningto hide his impatience. He showed great loyalty to longtime friends. People were especially struck by his fundamentalhonesty. 
Those who spent longperiods in his presence, however, found the unleashed whirlwind of his energy exhausting. ¡°Insatiable,¡± they whispered, and sometimes felt a guilty relief when his attention lapsed. He inhaled information and was prone to deluginghis friends with mountains of clippings and readingmaterial that he thought would interest them, before realizingwith a start that they had fallen months behind his pace. His conversations were less casual than they seemed. They always seemed to have a purpose, however obscure it might be to those on the receivingend. People sometimes realized he was somehow testingthem. Buffett vibrated with an inner tension that belied his outwardly casualstyle. 
It was hard to imagine what he was goingto do with allthat energy and intensity without the partnership. Many of the partners found it hard to imagine what they were goingto do without him. Many of themhad become his trainbearers and were reluctant to let go. Their reluctance struck an ironic note next to the fate of the other Buffett family business. Concurrent with its centennial, Fred Buffett threw his hands in the air and gave up on the Buffett grocery store. Neither of his sons wanted to take over, and even though it had a half million dollars a year in sales, when he tried to find a buyer, there were no takers. The grindingwheel of capitalism had spoken. 
*** 
The Buffetts were not socialites and had never thrown a really large party. But with both the store and the partnership closing, they celebrated with a bash one night duringthe last weekend of September 1969. Nearly two hundred people of all ages and races poured into their house. Businessmen, society matrons, poor adopted ¡°clients¡± of Susie¡¯s, teenagers, friends who were now rich from the partnership, Susie¡¯s women pals, assorted priests, rabbis, and ministers, and local politicians made their way through a stringof flashinglights, past the three-foot Pepsibottles in the windows. Susie had chosen a New York theme¡ªStage Door Deli food and decor¡ªand told people to dress in ¡°casual kosher.¡± They showed up in everythingfrom culottes to cocktail dresses. A half-cut beer barrel burst with chrysanthemums in her favorite color, sunshine yellow. A table was set up like a deli cart, covered with pastrami sandwiches and cheeses and hungwith sausages and a real plucked chicken, in keepingwith the theme. A piano player next to the beer kegin the sunroom encouraged guests to singalong. The aroma from a popcorn machine outside the racquetball court welcomed guests into an impromptu basement movie theater. The court¡¯s ceilingbobbed with giant heliumballoons; films with W. C. Fields, Mae West, and Laureland Hardy ran all eveninglong. In the solarium, the elderly Fred Buffett ¡°protected¡± two bikiniclad models as the guests covered them with body paint. 
¡°I had such a good time that I hate to think it¡¯s over,¡± Susie said afterward.39 
PARTFOUR SusieSings 

34 CandyHarry 
Omaha . 1970¨CSpring 1972 
Two months after the Stage Door Deli party, as Buffett took the formalsteps to unwind the partnership, the Dow broke 800 on the downside. A month later, in January 1970, his friend Carol Loomis highlighted his spectacular performance over the course of the partnership¡¯s history¡ªand his dour view of the prospects for stocks¡ªin an article on hedge funds in Fortune.1 Shortly before the article appeared, as the market started to snowplow downhill, he sent the partners a letter explainingwhat they owned. 
. 
Berkshire Hathaway, which he said was worth about $45 per share.2 Of this, about $16 was tied up in textiles, a business that he said was not satisfactory and had an even smaller chance of beingso in the future. But even though that was one-third of the value, he would not liquidate it to free the cash. ¡°I like the textile-operatingpeople,¡± he wrote. ¡°They have worked hard to improve the business under difficult conditions¡ªand, despite the poor return, we expect to continue the textile operation as longas it produces near-current levels.¡± Berkshire Hathaway also owned the much more profitable insurer, National Indemnity. 

. 
Diversified Retailing, which he valued at $11.50 to $12 per share. DRC consisted of only the scroungy Associated Cotton Shops and cash and notes fromthe sale of Hochschild-Kohn, which he planned to use ¡°for reinvestment in other operatingbusinesses.¡± He did not specify what these might be, implicitly requiringthe departingpartners to trust his judgment, just as they had when they joined the partnership. 

. 
Blue Chip Stamps, revealed for the first time. Buffett told the partners he would probably cash themout of this investment because the company was planninga sale of stock around the end of the year. 

. 
Illinois National Bank & Trust Company of Rockford, Illinois, also owned by Berkshire Hathaway. 

. 
Sun Newspapers, which he described as ¡°not financially significant.¡±3 


The departingpartners were floored to find that through their ownership of Berkshire Hathaway, they owned a trading-stamp company, a bank, and an insignificant newspaper. 4 Now they had to decide whether to hold these cards or trade them, because they could have all cash instead. 
¡°He would cut the pie and you would be able to get the first choice on the pieces,¡± says John Harding. This 
was a brilliant move on Buffett¡¯s part. He, of course, wanted them to choose the cash, leavingthe Berkshire Hathaway and Diversified Retailingstocks for himself. Nevertheless, he was honest with them. In a letter of October 9, 1969, he made a market forecast, which he had previously declined to do. With the market at such heights, ¡°¡­[f]or the first time in my professional life,¡± he wrote, ¡°I now believe there is little choice for the average investor between professionally managed money in stocks and passive investment in 
bonds¡±5¡ªalthough he did allow as how the very best money managers might be able to squeeze out a few percentage points over the earnings of bonds. Nonetheless, the departingpartners shouldn¡¯t have high hopes for what they could do with the cash. 
Two months later, on December 5, he gave a prediction about how these two stocks would do, alongwith tellingthe partners what he was goingto do himself. ¡°My personal opinion is that the intrinsic value of DRC and B-H will grow substantially over the years¡­. I would be disappointed if such growth wasn¡¯t at a rate of approximately ten percent per annum.¡± That was an important statement. He was tellingthem that Berkshire and Diversified would not only do better than bonds, but better than he had said in October the partners could expect fromeven the very best money managers. 
¡°I think both securities should be very decent long-term holdings and I am happy to have a substantial portion of my net worth invested in them¡­. I think there is a very high probability that I will maintain my 
6
investment in DRC and B-H for a very long period.¡± 
Separately, Buffett wrote the partners a dissertation on how to invest in bonds, again extendinghimself considerably more than a typical money manager would ever do. Even so, ¡°I had four people panic when I closed down. All four were divorced women. They trusted me, and they didn¡¯t trust anybody else. They had had bad experiences with men, and they didn¡¯t feel they could make it again if they lost what money they¡¯d gotten. They would call me in the middle of the night and say, ¡®You¡¯ve got to keep earning me money,¡¯ and 
7
all this sort of thing.¡± 
But he refused to act as what he considered to be a fiduciary if he could not performto his high standards. ¡°Basically, if I¡¯m the guarantor, I just can¡¯t do it, knowing how hard it was on me once,¡± he says, harkening back to what he had felt at age eleven when Cities Service Preferred had disappointed his sister. 
He continued workingon the partnership dissolution over Christmas in Laguna Beach. He had bought his Christmas gifts with his usualefficiency. As with most things, he had a system:He went to Topps, the best dress shop in Omaha, and gave thema list of the different sizes for all the women in his life. 
¡°I would go over, and they¡¯d wheel out the dresses. I¡¯d make a variety of decisions and buy presents for my sisters, Susie, Gladys, and so forth. I kind of enjoyed it. Bertie¡¯s more conservative, so I¡¯d move her up a notch in style, and she¡¯d accept it from me but nobody else. 
¡°You know, clothing holds its value better than jewelry.¡± 
On December 26, after the exchange of Christmas gifts, he sent the partners another longletter, goingout of his way to answer at length a number of their questions.8 A few of the partners had been challenginghim. They were decidingwhether to hold the Berkshire stock. If it was such a lousy business, why not get rid of the Berkshire Hathaway textile mill? 
¡°I have no desire to trade severe human dislocations for a few percentage points additional return per annum,¡± he wrote, echoingwhat he had said to themin his letter of January 1969. But since the whole point of his business was to eke out a few additionalpercentage points per annum, this kind of rationalization would have been unthinkable earlier in his career. 
What is Sun Newspapers? they asked. It¡¯s worth a buck a share, he replied, kind of skippingthe rest of the economics. Then he added some famous last words. ¡°We have no particular plans to expand in the 
9
communication field,¡± he wrote. 
Why didn¡¯t you register the Berkshire Hathaway and Diversified stock so that it could be freely traded? 
Berkshire was so closely held that it traded ¡°by appointment¡±¡ªwhich made it hard for anyone to know what the stock was actually worth. Diversified did not trade at all. 
A long, complicated explanation followed, in which Buffett argued that a freely traded and liquid public market for these stocks would be less efficient and less fair and ¡°the more sophisticated partners might have an important edge over the less sophisticated partners.¡± And it was certainly true that the more naive of his departingpartners would be kept from the clutches of the manic-depressive Mr. Market, who might at times have valued the stock at a severely discounted price. It lowered the odds that a pack of brokers would talk them into sellingjust to buy IBM or AT&T. But it also meant that Buffett was limitinghis partners¡¯ options ¡ªmakingit harder for themto buy and harder for them to sell¡ªand, if they did sell, makingit more likely that they would sell to him. 
As general partner of the partnership, he was used to havingtotal control of these two companies. Lettinggo and givingup control to the anonymous Mr. Market¡ªhe just couldn¡¯t do it. Moreover, as soon as he handed these stocks to his departingpartners, for the first time his own self-interest and theirs might be at odds. This complicated rationale to justify keepingthe stocks unregistered danced a little do-si-do around the fact that Buffett was the most sophisticated partner of all. It was he who would have the most important edge over his former partners. No matter how honest his intentions, the decision widened the potential conflict between his interests and theirs. The painfully earnest tone of Buffett¡¯s letter sounds like someone who has had to talk himself into thinkingthat he is doingthe right thing. But the conflict was guaranteed to cause hard feelings. Anyone who sold to him and was later sorry could look back with hindsight and think: He had an edge on me. 
Still, the Howard in Warren demanded that he present their options with scrupulous honesty. The way he answered the next question told the departingpartners exactly what to expect. 
Should I hold my stock? they asked. 
Buffett gave as clear and direct advice as he would ever give in public about a stock. 
¡°All I can say is that I¡¯mgoingto do so,¡± he said, ¡°and I plan to buy more.¡±10 
The departingpartners were also goingto have a third stock to deal with. In this same letter of December 26, Buffett told themthat the Blue Chip stock sale had fallen through.11 The stock had plunged in a short time from a high of $25 to $13 a share because Safeway Stores had dropped Blue Chip stamps, its customer base was eroding, and no buyer was in sight for the one-third of the business that the Justice Department had 
mandated it sell. Two new lawsuits had been filed against it in the U.S. District Court in Los Angeles, one by Douglas OilCompany and the other by a group of fillingstations, who said Blue Chip had broken the antitrust laws¡ªthat it was a monopoly¡ªand asked for treble damages and attorneys¡¯ fees.12 
Yet even as Blue Chip¡¯s problems multiplied and the price fell, Buffett had been buying the stock instead of selling. He had bought it for Diversified Retailingand for NationalIndemnity. He had bought it for Cornhusker Casualty and National Fire & Marine, two little insurance companies that Berkshire had acquired. He had also bought it for himself and for Susie. 
Now the partners knew that Buffett wouldn¡¯t sell, and indeed planned to hoover up more of all these stocks. They would get whichever they wanted¡ªstock or cash. If they took the money, he would get the stock. If they kept their stock, they would still be his partners, in a sense. 
In his anxiety over whether people accepted and liked him, Buffett valued loyalty more than almost anything. He looked for loyalty in allof his relationships. The dissolution of the partnership had elements of a loyalty test, as his behavior afterward would make clear. 
When the partnership unwound, Buffett had more money to buy even more stock, for even while holdingon to his shares¡ªhe personally owned eighteen percent of Berkshire Hathaway, twenty percent of Diversified, 
and two percent of Blue Chip Stamps13¡ªhe and Susie had hauled home roughly $16 million in cash by the end of 1969. Duringthe ensuingyear, the shares of Berkshire and Diversified quickly began to change hands, as though a giant were shufflinga deck of cards. As he had promised¡ªbut on a scale that might have staggered his partners, had they known¡ªBuffett used the cash he got from the partnership to buy still more Berkshire and Diversified for his own account. He used Berkshire¡¯s cash to buy its own stock, and for DRC, offered to buy the company¡¯s stock fromsome people in exchange for a DRC note that paid interest at nine 
percent.14 He bought from people rangingfromhis former brother-in-law Truman Wood to his first investor, Homer Dodge, and his son Norton.15 Those who rejected these offers had to be willingto ride alongand let Buffett reinvest the earnings without ever payingout a dime¡ªa show of trust that was important to him.16 
Forever after, he would feel a loyalty to those who kept the stock¡ªa loyalty of such depth and strength that the standard-model modern CEO would find it completely incomprehensible. Berkshire, he would later reflect, is still ¡°like a partnership. You basically have the closest thing to a private business with shareholders who identify with you and who like to come to Omaha.¡± He thought of partners as people who had come together out of a complex set of shared values and interests, not out of short-termeconomic convenience. He often said that he tried to treat his partners the way he would his family. His partners were people who trusted him, people to whomhe owed a specialduty. In return, he expected loyalty fromthem. 
Yet people made their decisions for all sorts of reasons. Some needed money. Others simply invested in the Sequoia Fund after listeningto Bill Ruane. Many people¡¯s brokers urged themto sell the stock of a money-gobblingtextile mill. Some listened, some didn¡¯t. Some professionalinvestors had other options and thought they were better off without these humdrumstocks. When Warren went to the West Coast in person and offered the DRC note, Estey Graham¡¯s sister Betty sold her stock; Estey didn¡¯t. Rhoda Sarnat, Ben Graham¡¯s cousin, and her husband, Bernie, decided not to sell, tellingthemselves, Warren¡¯s buying, and if it¡¯s good 
enough for him, it¡¯s good enough for us. 17 When he offered the note to his sister Doris, she refused it, thinking, If he¡¯s buying, why would I sell? 
A few partners quizzed Buffett more closely in person for his opinion of how the stocks would do. He said, carefully, that he thought they would do well, but it could take a longtime. People like Jack Alexander and Marshall Weinbergparsed those words, considered the fact that they were good investors themselves, and sold him part of their stock. 
Munger would later call Buffett an ¡°implacable acquirer,¡± like John D. Rockefeller in the early days of assemblinghis empire, who let nobody and nothingget in his way. 18 With hindsight, some people felt hard done by, enticed, or even misled. Others said to themselves, in effect, Well, that¡¯s just Warren. I should have known. 
By the end of 1970, many of the former partners had cashed out while Warren continued buyingmore stock. His and Susie¡¯s ownership of Berkshire had shot from eighteen percent to almost thirty-six percent. Their ownership of DRC had nearly doubled, to thirty-nine percent. As a practicalmatter, Buffett now controlled 
both.19 He had also bought more Blue Chip, takinghim fromtwo percent to over thirteen percent ownership of its stock. 
But it was clear to Susie Buffett that Warren¡¯s gyrations to get controlof Diversified and Berkshire 
Hathaway meant that her husband¡¯s second ¡°retirement¡± would be similar to his first. One reason was that Blue Chip was in the same sort of trouble as Berkshire Hathaway.20 The business was no longer just shrinking, it was dying, so he and Munger would have to buy somethingnew to springboard its capital. 
In late 1971, after President Nixon abandoned the gold standard, the price of oil skyrocketed and half the country¡¯s oil companies suddenly stopped issuingtradingstamps. With prices of everythingleapfroggingday by day because of inflation, the classic retailingmethod of enticingcustomers into a store through a panoply of services and giveaways was thrown overboard. People wanted the lowest price, and retailers headed to a 
discount model.21 Any chance that housewives would plan their shoppingto collect enough books of trading stamps to get an electric fryingpan evaporated. 
Then one day Buffett got a callfromBill Ramsey, Blue Chip¡¯s president, sayingthat a localLos Angeles company, See¡¯s Candies, was for sale. Buffett had carved out a tiny subspecialty of studyingcandy 
companies, keepinga file on Fanny Farmer22 and lookinginto the company that made Necco Wafers. But candy companies were expensive. So far, he had never bitten. ¡°CallCharlie,¡± he said.23 Munger was in charge of Blue Chip, their West Coast business. 
See¡¯s, founded in 1921 by a Canadian candy salesman, competed by usingthe finest quality butter, cream, chocolate, fruits, and nuts, painstakingly prepared to ¡°See¡¯s Quality,¡± which was better than ¡°top quality.¡± DuringWorld War II, rather than dilute its recipes to stretch rationed ingredients, See¡¯s had put signs in its 
distinctive black-and-white stores: ¡°Sold out. Buy war bonds for Christmas.¡±24 The company became a California institution. 
¡°See¡¯s has a name that nobody can get near in California,¡± Munger told him. ¡°We can get it at a reasonable price. It¡¯s impossible to compete with that brand without spendingall kinds of money.¡± Ed Anderson thought it was expensive, but Munger was overflowingwith enthusiasm. He and Buffett went through the plant, and Munger said, ¡°What a fantastic business. And the manager, Chuck Huggins¡ªboy, is he smart, and we can 
keep himon!¡±25 
See¡¯s had a tentative deal on the table already and wanted $30 million for assets worth $5 million.26 The difference was See¡¯s brand, reputation, and trademarks¡ªand most of all, its customer goodwill. Susie Buffett, for example, was crazy about See¡¯s, which she had discovered in California. 
They decided that See¡¯s was like a bond¡ªworth paying$25 million for. If the company had paid out its earnings as ¡°interest,¡± the interest would average about nine percent. That was not enough¡ªowninga business was riskier than owninga bond, and the ¡°interest rate¡± was not guaranteed. But the earnings were 
growing, on average twelve percent a year. So See¡¯s was like a bond whose interest payments grew. 27 Furthermore: 
¡°We thought it had uncapped pricing power. See¡¯s was selling candy for about the price of Russell Stover at the time, and the big question in my mind was, if you got another fifteen cents a pound, that was two and a half million dollars on top of four million dollars of earnings. So you really were buying something that perhaps could earn six and a half or seven million dollars at the time, if just priced a little more aggressively.¡± 
They had to negotiate to buy the company fromtwo people: first, Charles B. See¡ªor ¡°Candy Harry,¡± as Buffett, Munger, and Guerin called him¡ªwho was managingthe estate of his recently deceased older brother, Larry See. The two brothers were partners, but Larry had run the business. 
¡°Candy Harry really didn¡¯t want to run See¡¯s. He was interested in wine and girls. He wanted to chase after girls. But, of course, he got cold feet about selling at the last minute. Rick and Charlie went to see him, and Charlie gave one of the great lectures of all time on the advantages of grapes and girls, how the highest and best use of Candy Harry¡¯s time was chasing after women.¡± 
The other person involved was ¡°Numbers Harry,¡± Harry W. Moore, the company¡¯s finance chief and a director. Through its lawyers, Blue Chip set about courtingNumbers Harry through the financialadvantages of the deal, while suggestingto Candy Harry that a sale would relieve himof potential conflicts of interest 
that arose fromservingas his brother¡¯s executor.28 
At the price Blue Chip offered, $25 million, the $4 million it was earningpretax would give Buffett and Munger payback of nine percent after-tax on their investment fromthe first day they bought it¡ªnot factoring in future growth. Addingin the $2 to $3 million of price increases they thought See¡¯s could institute, the return on their capital would rise to fourteen percent:a decent levelof profitability on an investment, although it wasn¡¯t a sure thing. The key was whether the earnings would continue to grow. Buffett and Munger came close to walking. The pickings had been so easy until now, and they had such an ingrained habit of underbidding, that it was like swallowinglive guppies for them to pay the askingprice. 
¡°You guys are crazy,¡± Munger¡¯s employee Ira Marshall said. ¡°There are some things you should pay up for¡ªhuman quality, business quality, and so forth. You¡¯re underestimatingquality.¡± 
¡°Warren and I listened to the criticism,¡± says Munger. ¡°We changed our mind. In the end, they came to the exact dollar limit of what we were willingto pay.¡±29 
While the deal was beingstruck, Buffett discovered that Tweedy, Browne already owned a thousand shares of See¡¯s. Buffett ordered the firmto tender its stock to him. The Tweedy, Browne partners knew how valuable See¡¯s was and thought the price was too low. They resisted and debated the issue briefly with Buffett. They did not see why they should give him their See¡¯s stock. He insisted he needed the stock more 
than Tweedy, Browne did. Buffett won. They gave him the stock.30 
The instant that the deal was inked and the trio of Buffett, Munger, and Guerin joined the board, Buffett threw himself into the candy business with an enthusiasm he had never displayed with companies like Dempster and Berkshire Hathaway, where he had appointed proxies. He sent boxes of See¡¯s to his fellow Grahamites. Within days, he wrote a detailed letter to Chuck Huggins, executive vice president, explaining that he had been talkingto shopping-center owners around the country about openingnew See¡¯s stores in locations like Colorado Springs, Fayetteville, and Galveston. He suggested that Huggins avoid Iowa, because 
the shopping-center executives had told himthat ¡°Iowans are generally not candy enthusiasts.¡±31 He gave Huggins permission to stop sendingmonthly boxes of candy to the longlist of women whom Candy Harry had designated as his specialfriends. He started followingsugar futures and cocoa futures, which at 58 cents 
a pound were approachingprices unheard of since the year of the Rockwood cocoa caper. 32 
Buffett suggested experimentingwith prepackaged candy. He wanted to see results, budgets, and lots and lots of financialinformation. He wrote Huggins about a store in Las Vegas: ¡°It¡¯s interestinghow many more dollars we can take out of a community when we get the right sort of location. You are doinga first-class job of extendingour ringof preeminence.¡± Buffett suggested that Huggins ¡°play around with¡± advertisingslogans and try to come up with one alongthe lines of Coca-Cola¡¯s ¡°pause that refreshes,¡± or the ¡°Rocky Mountain 
springwater¡± of Coors beer.33 It was as if, over his breakfast cornflakes, Huggins could dream up an advertisingslogan as compellingas Coca-Cola¡¯s.34 One longtime employee described Buffett¡¯s Dale Carnegie management style this way: ¡°He¡¯d always praise you while he gave you more to do.¡±35 
As the bar subtly rose an inch or two with each new accomplishment, and the hurdler was reassured that he could surely leap to ever-higher heights, the effect was like a tiny streamof water: Its gentle, unrelenting pressure felt wonderful until it finally drove its recipient mad. Thus, when Buffett¡¯s attention broke, as it inevitably did, it could seemlike a relief. Deceived by the initialgush of enthusiasm, Huggins signed up Buffett for severalcandy-industry trade magazines. Eventually, Buffett, turninghis attention to some newer interest, asked for a cease-and-desist. ¡°Charlie may have visions of becominga candymaker someday,¡± he 
wrote, ¡°but I will continue to just read the statements.¡±36 He had discovered that he liked owning a candy company, not running one. 
It was much the same at home. Buffett would tell someone with great sincerity, ¡°Please come visit, I really want to see you,¡± then bury his head in a newspaper when they arrived, apparently satisfied with their presence. But there was also the odd chance that he wanted to talk and talk, and they might go away exhausted. Susie had seen his enthusiasms come and go. 
Warren was stillbesotted with his wife, praised her constantly in public, and cuddled her on his lap. But at home, as always, he withdrew into his private pursuits and wanted to be taken care of. Susie referred to him as an ¡°iceberg¡± to one of her friends. However, nothinghad really changed in their relationship since the beginning¡ªexcept her feelings. He was content. He reasoned that because she loved to give, by receivinghe served her. Based on their past and her behavior with people in general, and with himin particular, there was no reason for him to think otherwise. But Susie¡¯s own desires were changing. She, the emotionalvending machine, was now takingcare of many more people than Warren alone; recently she had watched over Alice Buffett as she succumbed after a painful battle with cancer. Yet this time, Susie was developinga yearningto be taken care of herself. 
Thus, while her husband pursued his new businesses away from Omaha or sat sunk in thought in his office, Susie spent less and less time at home, goingto lunch, to dinner, or to jazz clubs in the eveningwith friends, and travelingmore widely. She now had a number of new friends much younger than she. They admired her and returned her generosity and tenderness with openly expressed feelings that ranged fromwarmhearted affection to outright adoration. But they were less like adopted children and more like genuine friends, albeit friends who, like all her friends, needed her. 
At home, Susie had begun payingattention to Peter, her quiet son, in a different way, treatinghim, too, as friend, confidant, and source of emotionalsupport, now that he was growingup and about to enter high school. 
Susie Jr. was livingin Lincoln, havingenrolled at the University of Nebraska. Howie, who had broken the family record for gettinggrounded, was in his junior year of high school and Susie now devoted herself to launchinghiminto college; she took him to debate meets and helped him corral his energy and burnish his high schoolrecord. Warren, as usual, was happy to delegate all these responsibilities to her. 
Susie did succeed in enticingWarren to really pitch in and get involved¡ªrather than simply write checks ¡ªwhenever business intersected with a cause to which he could lend his expertise. Her friend Rodney Wead and other leaders in the black community had gotten the idea of startinga minority-owned bank to enhance community pride and economic development on the North Side. Promoting ¡°black capitalism,¡± they came to 
Buffett and his friend Nick Newman, the man who had sponsored Warren in local civil-rights activities.37 
Wead was a respected figure in Omaha, and Buffett liked banks. He had just joined the board of Omaha National Corporation, the biggest bank in town, a long-held ambition.38 He had an automatic¡ªand rational ¡ªpredisposition toward any business where people gave money to the business faster than the company disbursed it. So he was willingto listen to Wead, but wanted to know if a minority bank was viable. Since the 
hope was that Community Bank would attract a diverse group of customers, he hired Peter and one of his friends to sit outside another minority bank to count how many people went inside and to classify them by race. 39 Peter¡¯s tally made Warren optimistic, so he joined an advisory board of directors for the Community Bank of Nebraska and also got John HardingfromRuane, Cunniff on the board.40 Buffett told the founders 
that if they could raise $250,000 in stock fromthe black community, the advisory board would raise money to match it.41 The bank set up its office in a trailer. ¡°You¡¯re really hittingbottom, Warren,¡± said Joe Rosenfield, ¡°when we¡¯re askingpeople to put their money into somethingyou can drive off in the middle of the night and take the whole bank with it.¡± 
Most of the managers and the board of directors¡ªwhich included Buffett¡¯s baseball player friend Bob Gibson¡ªwere black, and most were financial tender-foots. To stave off disaster, Buffett went into his teachingmode and tried to educate the founders on the need for stronglendingstandards. The bank, he stressed, was not a charity or social-services agency. He attended monthly board meetings that stretched late 
into the night, but, as with the companies he owned, he was never involved in the day-to-day management.42 Harding, however, spent every day at the bank, makingsure its numbers balanced. ¡°The management from the community was well-intentioned,¡± Hardingsays, ¡°but not financially savvy.¡± Asked for more money to cover bad loans, Buffett said no. Wead felt Buffett ¡°didn¡¯t understand the cycle of poverty¡± and ¡°never 
understood his role as a wealthy man in our beleaguered community.¡±43 But Buffett understood the numbers; he knew the bank wouldn¡¯t help anyone by relaxingits lendingstandards and makinguncollectible loans, which would only teach the wrongfinanciallesson. So the bank limped alongfor years without growing. 
He got a chance to help in another way when Hallie Smith, a friend of Susie¡¯s, began to bringher the names of black kids who needed money because they couldn¡¯t pay for college. Susie started givinga thousand 
dollars here and there. ¡°I¡¯ve got to ask Warren,¡± she said over and over. ¡°Susie, you have money; why don¡¯t you just pay for it?¡± Smith asked in amazement. ¡°No, I can¡¯t,¡± Susie always said. ¡°It has to go through Warren.¡± Smith found it incredible that someone as rich as Susie allowed her husband to make every decision 
involvingmoney.44 
Thus, while Susie was in charge of the family foundation, they worked together on fundingand donations. She would have given away huge sums had Warren not put on the brakes. The foundation made small grants to education, and it didn¡¯t have professionalmanagement. To do a proper job of managingit required thinkingforward: What was goingto happen to allthat money someday when it ended up in the foundation? Warren felt that someday was far away. Susie had a passionate desire to help in the here and now, but someone needed to strategize for the future. 
A year before, Warren had had what for many forty-year-olds would have been a wake-up call. Duringa dinner at the Sarnats¡¯in California, one of his fingers started to swell. He had taken a double dose of delayed-action penicillin earlier that day for a minor infection. Bernie Sarnat, a surgeon, suspected an allergic 
reaction. He gave Warren antihistamines and advised him to get to a hospital.45 
Buffett didn¡¯t want to go to the hospital. He had already had enough of sickness in 1971, after a recent bout of salmonella.46 Besides, said Susie, he was a bad patient and had a palpable horror of doctors and hospitals, sickness and medicine.47 He had Susie drive himback to the house they were rentingfor the summer. But as 
he continued ballooningand grew dizzy and sick, she began an urgent search for a doctor who could see Warren in a hurry. The one she finally reached insisted that they go to an emergency roomimmediately instead. By then Buffett was barely conscious, and the emergency roomteamstarted workingto save his life. 
Three days later, he was still in the hospital. He was lucky, the doctors told him. His penicillin allergy was so severe that if he took it again, he would be dead. As he recovered, Roy and Martha Tolles tried to cheer him up by bringinghim a copy of Playboy magazine, but he was too weak to hold it himself and had Susie turn the pages for him. Warren complained, however, that she flipped the pages too fast. 
Yet even after this encounter with his own mortality, back home in Omaha he remained as fixated on business as ever. Retirement, in Buffett¡¯s specialsense, meant no longer actingas a fiduciary. He would be investingas longas he was breathing. He could not help but be competitive¡ªso much so that recently, when six-year-old Jonathan Brandt, son of his friends Henry and Roxanne Brandt, had taken himon in chess, Warren couldn¡¯t bear it when it looked as though he was losing. As the game neared its conclusion, he began 
Buffettinglittle Jonny untilhe won. 48 
By the time her husband had vanquished little Jonny Brandt, Susie had cultivated an attitude of ironic 
detachment about Warren¡¯s stubbornness. ¡°Whatever Warren wants, Warren gets,¡± was her way of describingthe man who, as his little sister Bertie had observed allthose years ago, always got his way. 49 On a visit to Des Moines with a friend to hear the writer and Holocaust survivor Elie Wiesel speak at one of the localsynagogues, Susie had spent hours talkingto Milt Brown, who now lived there, at a dessert party at 
somebody¡¯s house.50 For some time she had been filled with feelings of regret about that interrupted relationship; she now wondered openly to close friends whether it was too late to go down a different path. While she rarely talked about her problems or showed self-pity, she acknowledged beingdepressed about the state of her marriage. But despite her unhappiness, she made no move to address her issues directly or to leave; rather, she rekindled her relationship with Milt. And increasingly she seemed drawn to California. She had ¡°fallen in love¡± with the place they had been rentingat Emerald Bay in Laguna Beach, perched fifty feet 
above the ocean amonga group of other luxury vacation homes.51 
Warren particularly disliked buyinghouses, consideringmoney spent on themas lyingfallow, not earningits keep. Susie needled himabout money. ¡°If we were rich,¡± she said, ¡°you would just go up to that house, and ask the owner how much she wants for it, and pay however much she asked. But I know we¡¯re not rich.¡± In their perpetual tug-of-war, however, Susie was usually able to dislodge the cash fromhimin the end. Buffett eventually sent Roy Tolles¡¯s wife, Martha, a canny bargainer, to negotiate for the house. She dickered the owner down to $150,000,52 and when Roy Tolles called to tell Warren, he said, ¡°I have bad news. You bought it.¡± 
35 
TheSun 
Omaha . 1971¨C1973 
Susie set to work decoratingthe place in Emerald Bay with casual rattan furniture. She installed a separate telephone line for Warren, who spent most of the time when he was in California watchingbusiness news on television and talkingon the phone. 
The ¡°personalconcerns¡± and Joe Rosenfield were drawingher husband in the opposite direction from California¡ªtoward Washington, and electoralpolitics. The Buffetts hosted a dinner in Omaha for Senator George McGovern, the 1972 Democratic candidate for President. And Warren had given money to Allard Lowenstein, a former Congressman known as the ¡°pied piper¡± of liberals, who resembled Gene McCarthy in his power to galvanize youngpeople into activismover civil rights. He had also backed John Tunney, the 
¡°Kennedyesque¡± son of heavyweight boxer Gene Tunney, in his successful Senate run in California;1 Tunney¡¯s golden-boy political career became inspiration for the movie The Candidate, about a charismatic politician who is ¡°too young, too handsome, too liberal, too perfect¡± to win, so can afford to tweak the Establishment. ¡°The Candidate¡± was the kind of politician for whom Buffett consistently fell¡ªmen with the ineffable magnetismof Hollywood stars, men whose presence stirred voters¡¯ emotions¡ªexcept that he wanted his candidates to win. 
He had an idea that he thought would be helpfulto politicians, about what he called the ¡°discomfort index¡±¡ªthe inflation rate plus the unemployment rate¡ªwhich he passed on to Harold Hughes of Iowa, to whom Rosenfield had introduced him.2 
¡°Hughes had been a truck driver and a drunk. He was big physically, had a big voice, and was one of the most significant orators in decades. He looked a lot like Johnny Cash and had that kind of voice. He arose sort of from nowhere as a truck driver to become governor of Iowa and prominent in the Democratic Party. Joe was a good friend of his, and he had become a big force in the Senate. So we were helping him and gave modest amounts of money to a presidential exploratory effort. The war was his big issue; he was very anti-Vietnam, very eloquent.¡± 
A college dropout, messianic Christian, and reformed alcoholic who was sometimes described as the ¡°Iowa Populist,¡± Hughes would skip a scheduled meetingat the drop of an empty vodka bottle to help someone with a drinkingproblem through a crisis. Several times he had successfully saved colleagues from suicide, and once¡ªto his deep regret¡ªhe had failed. With a magnetic personality, he was considered both a dark horse and a risingstar, the kind of candidate who would attract the young, the blue-collar voters, and the insurgent liberals who had voted for McCarthy; in other words, he was the great hope for a populist resurgence among a field of uninspiringcandidates. At the time, no other Democratic candidate was attractingsignificant 
support. McGovern, the leader of the pack, was gettingonly five points in national opinion polls.3 
In the springof 1971, Hughes summoned ¡°six of his closest advisers and aides,¡± includingBuffett and Joe Rosenfield, and directed themto present every possible argument why he should or should not seek the nomination.4 
¡°At the end of May 1971, we had this meeting in a hotel in Washington. They were ready to go ahead on a 
big scale, although it was one of those meetings where it¡¯s already predetermined what you¡¯re going to do, but you have to hold it to get organized and feel good, rally the troops. 
¡°About a month before this meeting, Hughes had been on Meet the Press. At the very end of the show Larry Spivak said, ¡®Senator, there has been some talk about your interest in extrasensory perception and the occult. Would you clarify your beliefs on this?¡¯ Hughes had just started to answer, and then the program 
5 
got cut off. 
¡°So when the Washington meeting was just about done I said, ¡®Senator, I watched that program about a week ago. If you ever get asked a question like that again, I would suggest that initially, before you even answer, point out to the questioner that there¡¯s a significant difference between ESP and the occult. Don¡¯t let the questioner, by linking those two things, nail you, so that by answering, six months from now they¡¯ll say you talked about the occult when you were really talking about ESP.¡¯ 
¡°The floodgates opened. Hughes said, ¡®Ten years ago, I woke up in a bathtub in a fine hotel. I didn¡¯t know where I was. Didn¡¯t know where my family was. I didn¡¯t know how I¡¯d gotten there, and I was of no use to anybody. Then on this earth, at that moment, I became aware, and that¡¯s what made me want to feed the hungry.¡¯ Then he said, ¡®That experience came from visions that I have.¡¯ 
¡°He went on, ¡®I believe in precognition. My daughter had a vision of the spots on these kittens before they were born, and she described them to me. And they were born that way. And somebody else had seen a remote vision of a fire that was happening.¡¯ 
¡°I said, ¡®Now, Senator, if I¡¯m Larry Spivak, the next question I¡¯m going to ask you is this. If your daughter tells you she has a vision of Soviets preparing to launch ICBM missiles at the United States, are you going to order a preemptive strike against the Soviet Union?¡¯ 
¡°And he said, ¡®I would have to give that serious consideration.¡¯ 
¡°I said, ¡®Now, Senator, I¡¯m Larry Spivak, and you¡¯re sitting there at that table, and you¡¯ve got that glass of water in front of you, and I say, ¡°Do you believe somebody can make that glass of water move across the desk through the powers of their mind standing some feet away?¡±¡¯ And he said, ¡®Yes, I believe that can be done.¡¯ 
¡°There were these people around the room¡ªsome of them who had their whole careers invested in the guy, like his chief of staff¡ªand they saw themselves in the White House. And they started denying what they were hearing. They were waving their hands and saying it didn¡¯t mean what it meant. As I kept going, they were just dying. They were bursting in and saying, ¡®That isn¡¯t what he¡¯s saying,¡¯ and, ¡®Don¡¯t worry about this; it can be taken care of,¡¯ and that Abraham Lincoln had believed some of the same things. Obviously they knew some of this already. The whole thing was going down the tubes. I have never seen anything like it. It was just fascinating because of the years of preparation and these guys who had been dreaming of working for a U.S. President. 
¡°Finally, at one point, Joe said, ¡®Senator, tell Warren if he asks another question like that, you¡¯re going to make him disappear.¡¯ 
¡°So, I said, ¡®Senator, lookit. There are all kinds of phonies in American politics. You know, they profess to believe in God, and they say they go to church every Sunday and everything. They don¡¯t believe a damn word of it, you know. But it works. You, on the other hand, believe something very sincerely, and you¡¯ve got your reasons for it, you know, but I will promise you that there¡¯s ten percent of the normal Democratic vote or some significant percentage of the votes that you can¡¯t have, just because of something you honestly believe, whereas the other guy is getting the vote because of something he doesn¡¯t believe. That¡¯s just a reality.¡¯ Meanwhile, all these guys are saying ¡®Don¡¯t pay any attention. What does he know?¡¯ But Hughes 
said that he would go away and when he came back, he would do something that would end his candidacy.¡± 
And so it came to pass that ten days later Hughes gave an interview to the Des Moines Register in which he 
said that he had recently spent an hour talkingto his dead brother through a medium.7 Thus ended the presidentialambitions of Senator Harold Hughes.8 
*** 
The episode with Harold Hughes would prove to be the peak, the nadir, and¡ªthanks in part to Richard Nixon¡¯s eventual reelection¡ªfor many years the end of Buffett as would-be kingmaker. But throughout it, Buffett paid careful attention to the overwhelminginfluence of media in politics; he wanted some of that. A childhood throwingnewspapers, his friendship with Fortune reporter Carol Loomis, the purchase of the Sun, a search for other newspapers to buy, and his investment in the Washington Monthly¡ªBuffett¡¯s interest in publishinghad grown and compounded. He had seen the overwhelmingpower of television to capture attention throughout the tumultuous 1960s, fromthe JFK assassination to the VietnamWar to the civil-rights movement. Now, as the profitability of television became apparent, he wanted a piece of that business too. 
Then BillRuane set himup at a dinner in New York with an acquaintance, TomMurphy, who ran Capital Cities Communications, a company that owned broadcastingstations. 
Murphy, the son of a Brooklyn judge, had grown up in the spicy chowder of New York politics before joining the Harvard Business Schoolclass of ¡¯49. Jowly, balding, easygoing, Murphy had started by managinga bankrupt TVstation in Albany so frugally that he painted only the sides of the buildingthat faced the road. Then he started to buy broadcasters, cable companies, and publishers, creatinga media empire. Before long he moved to New York and recruited another HBSclassmate, Dan Burke, brother of Johnson & Johnson CEO Jim Burke. 
After their dinner, Murphy strategized with Ruane about how to get Buffett on his board of directors. Ruane said the way to Buffett¡¯s heart was to visit himin Omaha. Murphy promptly made the pilgrimage. Buffett plied himwith a steak dinner, then drove himhome to meet Susie. She must have known by now what to expect:Her husband had met another new object of infatuation. Buffett liked to show new people his totems: the office, Susie, and sometimes the train set. After the tour he and Murphy played a couple of games of racquetball in the Buffetts¡¯ basement court, Murphy runningaround in his oxford dress shoes. Buffett saw where he was headed before Murphy could pop the question. ¡°You know, Tom,¡± he said, ¡°I couldn¡¯t become 
a director because I¡¯d have to have a major position in your company, and your stock is too high.¡±9 Even though the rest of the market was stumblingdownhill, investors were excited about television stocks. Cable television was new, and localfranchises were consolidatinginto newly visible public companies, whippingup investors¡¯ excitement about the medium. ¡°Lookit,¡± he said, ¡°you can have me for nothing, you don¡¯t need 
me on the board.¡±10 
So Murphy started callingBuffett every time he made a deal. Buffett, just over forty, was flattered and made unlimited time for Murphy, then in his mid-to late forties, even though he thought, ¡°This guy is old.¡± But ¡°he understands the whole world,¡± and ¡°I was in awe of Murph,¡± Buffett says. ¡°I thought he was the ultimate businessman.¡± One evening, Murphy phoned himat home and offered him first shot at a Fort Worth TV 
station that was for sale.11 Buffett was interested but, for reasons he doesn¡¯t recall, turned Murphy down¡ªwhich he later called one of his greater business mistakes.12 
What Buffett really wanted was to be a publisher. In fact, he thought he had a hot scoop, but when he gave the editors at the Washington Monthly the idea, they pooh-poohed it. ¡°I¡¯mjust sure in my heart,¡± says Charles Peters, the Monthly¡¯s publisher, ¡°that the editors were offended at the idea of havingan investor call them up and tellthemto do a story.¡± They told Peters it was ¡°no real story for the Monthly¡± and Peters did not push back. Then Buffett turned to the Omaha Sun, which might not have a nationalplatformbut was better than no newspaper at all. As matters turned out, says Peters, ¡°I could have shot everybody on my staff.¡± 
What Buffett had heard was that Boys Town, one of Omaha¡¯s sacred cows, had turned into a hog. A refuge 
for homeless boys, Boys Town was founded in an old mansion near downtown in 1917 by Father Edward Flanagan, an Irish priest who wanted to save orphans and rejected children fromwasted lives as drifters, criminals, or addicts. ¡°Father Flanagan was famous around town for getting five bucks at a time,¡± says Buffett, ¡°and as soon as he got it, he spent it on a kid. Then he got ninety dollars and he put twenty-five kids 
in a house.¡±13 In its early years, Boys Town had always struggled financially, but it grew nonetheless. By 1934 it occupied a 160-acre campus ten miles west of Omaha complete with a school, dormitories, a chapel, a dininghall, and athletic facilities. With help from Howard Buffett, Boys Town set up its own post office in 
1934 to assist in fund-raising.14 It became an incorporated village in 1936. Then a 1938 Oscar-winningfilm starringSpencer Tracy and Mickey Rooney brought it national fame. 
When Ted Miller, a professional fund-raiser, saw the movie, he recognized how to transformBoys Town¡¯s fund-raisingappeals into a huge national campaign. Every year at Christmas time, Boys Town, which now called itself ¡°The City of Little Men,¡± sent out millions of letters that began, ¡°There will be no joyous Christmas season this year for many homeless and forgotten boys¡­.¡± and bore the picture the movie made famous of a street urchin carryinga tot with the legend ¡°He ain¡¯t heavy, Father¡­He¡¯s m¡¯brother.¡± 
People sent in as little as a dollar, but even smallamounts comingfroma tiny percentage of the tens of millions of letters that had been sent out added up to a lot of money. 15 Boys Town, then awash in contributions, expanded to a 1,300-acre campus with a stadium, a souvenir shop, a farm where the boys worked as hired hands, and vocational trainingfacilities. Father Flanagan died in 1948, but the money kept rollingin under his successor, Monsignor Nicholas Wegner. It was now a virtual shrine that was the state¡¯s biggest tourist attraction. 
¡°I used to hear these stories about how the U.S. National Bank put on extra people for weeks and weeks before Christmas just to handle the Boys Town money that was coming in. Meanwhile, of course, I saw the boy count coming down.¡± 
In its early years, Flanagan had searched court records and taken in a certain number of hard-core delinquents, even a few murderers. But by 1971, the home screened out the emotionally disturbed, mentally retarded, and serious juvenile offenders; it tried to limit its occupants to ¡°homeless¡± boys who had no other 
significant problems.16 Built to house a thousand, Boys Town now employed some six hundred people to 
care for its six hundred and sixty-five boys.17 However, its gigantic institutional approach of housingboys in a same-sex facility, isolated fromthe surroundingcommunity, with a custodial, even prisonlike atmosphere, had begun to seem out of date.18 The boys moved to the signal of bells: They prayed at the first bell in the 
giant ¡°chow hall,¡± sat down to the second, ate at the third, put down their forks at the fourth whether they were finished or not, stood and prayed at the fifth, and dashed out of the chow hallat the sixth. Their mail was censored and they were allowed only one visitor a month, chosen by the staff, not themselves. They worked at menial jobs and had little recreation and no contact with girls. Boys Town emphasized low-grade vocational training: pickingbeans and makingbirdhouses. 
So one eveningin July 1971, at a meetingat the Buffetts¡¯ house, Warren and Sun editor Paul Williams discussed the Boys Town rumors and decided to commission a story on how the institution raised and spent its money. The Sun had already made a couple of runs at this story and was told by Boys Town, ¡°We don¡¯t 
discuss our finances.¡±19 Now Williams took three city reporters, Wes Iverson, DougSmith, and Mick Rood, and set themto work on the confidential ¡°Project B,¡± planningan elaborate investigative reportingproject. 20 
Havingnoticed that the Boys Town marketingmaterialsaid it got no money fromany church or fromthe state or federal government, reporter Mick Rood pawed through records at the Nebraska state capitol in Lincoln and found out that this was false.21 That made themsuspicious of Boys Town¡¯s other claims. 
Through other basic reporting, they got the institution¡¯s property-tax records, educationalrecords, and articles of incorporation. They found out that Boys Town had a history of strained relations with the state welfare department; Monsignor Wegner, who currently ran Boys Town, had refused to participate in program 
reviews by outside agencies despite the advice of his own staff.22 Williams used a Congressional source to get a report on the Boys Town post office and learned that it sent between thirty-four and fifty million pieces of fund-raisingmail a year. This was a staggeringnumber; fund-raisers for other organizations told them that, 
based on such numbers, Boys Town must be takingin at least $10 million a year. Usinghis financial knowledge, Buffett figured out that its operatingcosts could be no more than half of that.23 Boys Town was accumulatingmoney faster than it could possibly spend it. It had undergone a major expansion in 1948. Assumingit had piled up $5 million a year ever since, Buffett thought it must have at least $100 million in excess funds. But so far, there was no proof. 
Buffett had joined the board of the local Urban League, and from that connection knew Dr. Claude Organ, a localsurgeon, the only black man on the Boys Town board. Buffett thought the doctor was a decent guy. 
¡°We had breakfast over at the Blackstone Hotel right across the street. And I talked and talked and I tried to get him to tell me. He wouldn¡¯t give me details, but he also told me I wasn¡¯t wrong. He did even better than that. He let me know there was a story there, although I couldn¡¯t get any numbers from him.¡± 
Dr. Organ began quietly steeringthe reportingteam, helpingthemstay on track without disclosing 
confidentialinformation.24 The reporters had started talkingto people around town but were not getting anywhere; most of the Boys Town employees were too afraid to talk. Buffett, playingnewshound, roamed Omaha in his beat-up old tennis shoes, moth-eaten sweater, and pants covered with streaks of chalk.25 ¡°It 
was a high,¡± he says. ¡°Whatever was the male equivalent of Brenda Starr, Girl Reporter, well, that was me.¡± By now Warren had also adopted Susie¡¯s friend Stan Lipsey, who remained the Sun¡¯s publisher, as one of his new people, goingjoggingwith himand playingracquetballin the Buffetts¡¯ basement. 
Then Warren had a brainstorm. He knew that Congress had passed a law that, amongother things, required nonprofit organizations to file a tax return with the IRS. 
¡°I was sitting there in the family room doing the Form 990 for the Buffett Foundation, and it just hit me¡ªif 
26 
I had to file a return, maybe they did too.¡± 
The reporters tracked down the Form990 to the IRSin Philadelphia and waited impatiently for twenty days for the IRSto digit out of its files.27 
Two days later, the package arrived in Omaha. Paul Williams had hired Randy Brown, a new assistant 
managingeditor, in part to help coordinate the Boys Town story, bringingthe teamto four reporters. ¡°My first day at work, this 990 plopped down on my desk,¡± says Brown.28 Buffett, who had just bought See¡¯s and was still mailingout boxes of candy to friends allover North America, nonetheless was so enthralled by Boys Town that he threw himself into helpingBrown figure it out. Sure enough, Boys Town had a net worth of $209 million, which was risingat the rate of about $18 million a year, four times faster than the amount it spent to fund its operations. Buffett was elated. Allhis life, he had been waitingfor a nun to commit a crime so he could expose the culprit by whippingout her fingerprints. Now he had used a tax return to nab a monsignor red-handed. 
They moved desks, file cabinets, and three phones into Williams¡¯s basement recreation room. In the end, ¡°we tracked everything,¡± says Lipsey, ¡°except, I think, two accounts in Switzerland. We couldn¡¯t break through those.¡± The Sun¡¯s reporters were stunned to find that Boys Town had an endowment three times the size of the University of Notre Dame. Conservatively stated, it was worth more than $200,000 per boy. Mick Rood took to callingit the ¡°City of Little Men with a Large Portfolio.¡±29 The money machine was bringingin $25 million a year and could easily cover its costs out of investment income without raisinganother nickel.30 As 
the story came together, the reportingteamheld a meetingin a room at the Blackstone Hotel, across the street fromBuffett¡¯s office. Coincidentally, the Boys Town board was meetingat the same time in a room down the hallway. The reporters tiptoed in and out, hopingthey weren¡¯t seen. 31 The intrigue heightened as 
they worked on the obvious questions: What was Boys Town goingto do with allthat money?Why did it need to keep raisingmore?The last phase of the investigation meant to find that out. 
As administrator of Boys Town, seventy-four-year-old Reverend Monsignor Nicholas H. Wegner was in 
charge of fund-raising. The monsignor knew by then that the Sun was askingquestions; Boys Town had already started puttingtogether a hasty programof reforms. But the reporters were confident that as yet he had no idea they had obtained Boys Town¡¯s tax return. Their fear was losingthe story to the Omaha World-Herald, which might swoop down with its greater resources once it realized that a juicy bit of news was waitingto be served up to the readership. An even greater risk was that Boys Town might work cooperatively 
and exclusively with the World-Herald to launch a preemptive strike with a friendlier story.32 
The reporters plotted how to get to Wegner and to Archbishop Sheehan, his superior in the archdiocese. Rood, a thirtyish badass with shoulder-length wavy hair and a handlebar mustache, went to see Wegner. His first reaction was pity for Wegner, whose bald, wrinkled skullcraned fromhis cassock like the head of an ancient tortoise. The monsignor was obviously frail, the survivor of fifteen surgeries, some of themmajor. As the interview proceeded, however, he rambled on incautiously and also denied receivingstate funds. Asked to justify the exhaustive fund-raising, he said, ¡°We¡¯re so deep in debt allthe time.¡± Knowingthat nothingof the sort was true, Rood went straight back to Williams¡¯s basement with the tape of the interview. After it was transcribed, Williams put it in a safe-deposit box. 
While Rood was interviewingWegner, Williams was tryingto nailthe archbishop. They had tried to schedule his interview simultaneously with Wegner¡¯s but were unable to get both on the same day. Sheehan¡ªpossibly cued in at that point¡ªconfirmed statements Wegner had made but declined to add anythingmore. With confirmation in hand, however, the team, accompanied by photographers, showed up at the fund-raising office, which was a separate operation located in an Omaha buildingmarked ¡°Wells Fargo¡± rather than in Boys Town. They walked in the door uninvited and snapped photos of longrows of women typingsolicitation letters and thank-you notes to donors. They also managed to talk to some of the fund-raisers, who said, ¡°Please don¡¯t mention the fund-raisingoperation in your article. It¡¯s easy for the public to get the wrongidea. 
People will think we¡¯re rich,¡± and ¡°We want people to think the boys send out the letters.¡±33 
Meanwhile, the other reporters descended on the board of directors. It was made up mostly of people with little incentive to tip over the sacred cow. They included the banker who ran the Boys Town investment portfolio, the son of the architect who built the place and who ran the firmthat stood in line to do any current buildingwork, the retailer who supplied all the boys¡¯ clothing, and the lawyer who handled Boys Town¡¯s legal affairs. Apart fromthe financial interests many of themhad in it, all the directors enjoyed the prestige of sittingon the board of Nebraska¡¯s most respected institution while doingvery little work on its behalf. Wegner considered thema nuisance and had told Rood, ¡°They¡¯ve never been of much help,¡± and ¡°They 
don¡¯t know anythingabout socialwelfare¡­they don¡¯t know anythingabout education.¡±34 Accordingto 
Williams, whatever they may have actually known, the board¡¯s reactions to the reporters¡¯ questions ranged from ¡°dismay to innocence or downright ignorance.¡±35 Another Boys Town official would later put it this way with hindsight: ¡°The board has not been all that good in servingFather Wegner¡­. The board could have 
advised himabout slowingdown on the fund-raising.¡±36 
And that was indeed the irony. It was Boys Town¡¯s background of Depression-era poverty that had probably led Wegner to accumulate money as if the ¡°wolf was at the door,¡± as Randy Brown put it.37 This same background had very likely lulled the board into overseeingWegner¡¯s activities without questioningwhether 
they made sense. But Warren Buffett, a product of the very same environment, who had the very same impulses, was goingto bust themfor it. The crime, in his eyes, was not just accumulatingthe money. It was pilingit up mindlessly without a plan to use it. Boys Town didn¡¯t even have a budget.38 The sin to Buffett 
was an abdication of fiduciary responsibility, the failure to manage money responsibly on others¡¯ behalf. 
The reporters worked feverishly on the story all weekend, Buffett and Lipsey readingcopy as it progressed. ¡°We were this little nothing weekly paper,¡± says Buffett, but they intended to meet the journalistic standard of a top nationaldaily. Finally they alltrooped over to PaulWilliams¡¯s livingroom, spread everythingout on the floor, and tried to figure out headlines and captions. The story¡¯s banner lead asked: ¡°Boys Town: America¡¯s Wealthiest City?¡± An eight-page specialsection with sidebars, it led off with a kicker in the form of a Bible verse, Luke 16:2¡ª¡°Give an account of thy stewardship.¡± 
On the Wednesday afternoon before publication, Williams sent the story to the Associated Press, UPI, the Omaha World-Herald, and television stations. The next day, March 30, 1972, would be recalled by Buffett as one of the greatest of his life. The story not only fulfilled his wish to run a business as a church, but the section opened with a Bible-quotingheadline about a favorite concept, stewardship¡ªthe lens through which he now viewed duty, moralobligation, and the responsibility that went alongwith a position of trust. By the end of that week, the wire services had broken the Boys Town story across the country and exposed a 
national scandal.39 On Saturday, the Boys Town board held an emergency meetingand decided to cancel all fund-raising, includingthe springmailingfor which envelopes had already been partly stuffed.40 In a new era 
of investigative reporting, the drama was of such magnitude that it gave an immediate push to reforms in the way nonprofits were governed allover the United States. The story was picked up by Time, Newsweek, Editor & Publisher, and the LA Times, amongothers.41 An informal survey of twenty-six boys¡¯ homes 
showed that immediately after the expos¨¦, more than a third of them said that their fund-raisingefforts were affected.42 
But Monsignor Francis Schmitt, an understudy of Wegner¡¯s who had begun assumingsome of his duties, quickly circulated a letter to Boys Town supporters callingthe Sun ¡°a kind of Shopper¡¯s Guide.¡± It said, ¡°There can only have been yellow journalism, prejudice, jealousy, and, for all I know, bigotry involved in the story,¡± suggestingthat the motive was anti-Catholic bias. In fact, the reporters had bent over backward to avoid such a bias. Moreover, Schmitt said, the story was full of ¡°snide innuendos¡± that cut into his vitals all 
¡°because of a cheap editor of a cheap paper, whose owner is himself a millionaire many times over.¡±43 
Wegner also remained unrepentant. ¡°Boys Town,¡± he said, ¡°will still be here when that yellow rag, what¡¯s it called¡±¡ªthe Sun¡ª¡°is forgotten.¡±44 To people who wrote askingabout the Boys Town story, Wegner was sendingout a form letter sayingthe Sun story was spreading ¡°sensational views of localissues,¡± and that while at the present time, Boys Town was not seekingdonations, as ¡°our properties and facilities have 
multiplied in value¡­SO HAVE OUR COSTS.¡±45 The letter was printed on the usual stationery, with ¡°your contribution is an allowable income tax deduction¡± and ¡°we employ no solicitors or fund-raising organization¡ªwe pay no commissions¡± at the bottom. 
*** 
A couple of months after the Sun¡¯s coverage appeared, the Omaha Press Club put on its annual show. A team of singers got up and entertained the Who¡¯s Who of Omaha (and more than a few fromout of town). Their songsatirized Monsignor Wegner and Boys Town: 
We started up a home for boys, ¡¯Bout fifty years ago; We asked for contributions And the dough began to flow. We asked for allthe charity The traffic would allow; Our homeless waifs were finally Quite liberally endowed. But then we had a tragedy, Our bankroll was exposed, And thanks to Warren Buffett Allthose pocketbooks were closed. 
(chorus) 
Who threw the monkey wrench In Father Wegner¡¯s poor box? Now we¡¯re as popular As if we had the smallpox. It¡¯s a dirty trick, you know, 
Why did Warren Buffett throw The monkey wrench in Father Wegner¡¯s poor box? 
Some folks came out fromHollywood, To make a movie show; Mickey Rooney showed the people Where their cash should go. Spencer Tracy played his part With Roman piety; We made enough off popcorn sales To buy AT&T. We passed the tin cup all around To land on Easy Street; Then Warren Buffett came along And read our balance sheet. 
We built palatial cottages, To give our boys some class; Instead of fish on Friday We had pheasant under glass. We talk a lot of poor mouth But we¡¯re never in the red; It figures out to something Like 200 grand a head. Buffett blew the whistle On a spiteful, jealous whim; He must have figured we were getting 
Just as rich as him!46 
Buffett had never had so much fun readinga tax return, and wanted to keep the momentumgoingto make 
sure that, contrary to the monsignor¡¯s prediction, the Sun would not be forgotten. The thought of a Pulitzer, the grandest prize in journalism, ¡°started my adrenaline flowing,¡± he said.47 He got Paul Williams workingon the paper¡¯s submission for the prize. Williams prepared a detailed outline for Buffett, who had some strategic thoughts of his own, drawn from a longhistory with the newspaper business. ¡°In a country where economics inevitably lead to one-daily towns,¡± Buffett wrote, the Sun¡¯s submission should stress ¡°the necessity for another printing press.¡± Another paper, even a weekly suburban, adds ¡°value in terms of worrying 
Goliaths¡±¡ªwhereas the dominant paper may fear to do so, because it ¡°may look silly.¡±48 
Mick Rood wrote a follow-up piece about Boys Town¡ªa good story that was also meant to keep worrying the Goliath¡ªthat drew on some racially bigoted comments Father Wegner had made in his interview, as well as certain disclosures he had made about the boys growingmarijuana at Boys Town down by the lake. Paul Williams spiked it, sayingthe Sun had to take the high road, in part not to jeopardize future stories and in part to avoid lookinganti-Catholic. Also, at this time the Pulitzer was pending. ¡°Too bad,¡± wrote Rood in a note 
to himself.49 
The Sun teamknew it had strongcompetition for the Pulitzer. It would be up against the series of articles penned by Washington Post investigative journalists CarlBernstein and Bob Woodward, who had followed what appeared to be a minor burglary inside the Watergate offices of the Democratic NationalCommittee duringthe 1972 Nixon-McGovern election campaign, and uncovered what turned out to be an enormous political spyingand sabotage operation. But the Sun would fare very well in the prizes awarded for 1972 journalism. 
In March 1973, Sigma Delta Chi, the national journalism society, gave the Sun its highest award for public service; the Washington Post won for investigative reporting. Duringthe cocktailhour before the awards ceremony, as Stan and Jeannie Lipsey milled amongthe guests, waitingto catch a glimpse of Woodward and Bernstein, Jeannie nudged her publisher husband in the ribs and said, ¡°I¡¯ll make you a bet. I¡¯llbet you a hundred dollars that you¡¯llwin the Pulitzer.¡± A few weeks later came the phone call. The Sun had won a Pulitzer for local investigative specialized reporting, sendingthe newsroominto a jubilation of cheers and 
applause.50 This time it had swapped awards with the Washington Post, which won the Pulitzer for public service. Susie Buffett threw a party to celebrate, fixingan oversize pretzelthat spelled out ¡°Sun Pulitzer¡± to the panelingin the family room. In part they were also celebratingsome tangible results. Boys Town had started throwingmoney at projects and quickly announced a center for the study and treatment of children¡¯s hearingand speech defects. It was something, and it would do some good. Boys Town fromnow on would have a budget and would disclose its financial status publicly. 
Instead of the annual Christmas fund-raisingletter that year, there was only a Christmas card expressing thanks, as well as a letter fromArchbishop Sheehan, announcingwith ¡°deep regret¡± that Monsignor Wegner would retire ¡°due to his failinghealth.¡± While he was genuinely frailand ill, some cynic at the Sun circled 
this before filingit and added, ¡°due to somethinghe read.¡±51 
The followingEaster, 1974, Jet Jack Ringwalt sent Warren a copy of the letter he had received fromFather (no longer Monsignor) Wegner. Instead of whiningthat there would be no joyous Christmas for the homeless, abandoned boys, the letter talked at length of the costly new projects that Boys Town had just built and was 

goingto build and the experts who had been hired ¡°to assist us in planningfor our future.¡±52 While down from previous highs, the contributions that rolled in after the letter was sent came to $3.6 million, never mind the scandal. 
Thus, the story ended as such things usually do: a mixed triumph with a certain amount of ass-coveringand reforms that came about because of public embarrassment rather than an institutionalchange of heart. While Boys Town eventually turned over its board of trustees and management, it did not happen easily or overnight, and the conflicts of interest on the board also did not disappear, at least not immediately. 
And even the Sun¡¯s glory proved short-lived. It was failingfinancially, and its muckrakingeditor, Paul Williams, retired not longafter the Pulitzer. One by one the investigative reporters dispersed to other papers and the wire services. Unless Buffett was willingto run it as a money-losinghobby, the economics of the Sun couldn¡¯t support a future like its past. And the Washington Monthly had already proven that¡ªeven for great journalism¡ªBuffett would not do that. In a sense, the Sun was one of his cigar butts, fromwhich he had been able to enjoy one huge personal puff. 
In another sense, the temporary boost of fame he had gotten fromthe Sun was a sidebar compared to somethingelse. Buffett had recently exploded in investors¡¯ minds for a different reason. Under the pen name Adam Smith, a writer named George Goodman had published Supermoney, a fire-and-brimstone critique of 
the 1960s stock-market bubble, which sold more than a million copies.53 It demonized the fund managers who had ascended to the stratosphere almost overnight and then crashed, in a parabola as dramatic as if their engines had suddenly run out of rocket fuel. They were featured as devil-horned, pitchfork-bearingtempters of the ordinary Joe Investor. But when it came to Ben Graham and his prot¨¦g¨¦ Buffett, Goodman knew he had met a couple of very different characters, and he devoted an entire chapter to the two of them, in which he captured thembrilliantly. 
Goodman respected the Latin-and French-spoutingGraham and had been highly entertained by him, but when Graham was quoted in Supermoney, he sounded painfully affected, speakingin a style that bordered on self-satire. Buffett, however, appeared as a blue-ribbon, All-American, Pepsi-quaffing, investing fundamentalist, one who plied his trade in glorious solitude, far fromthe Lucifers of WallStreet. Presented alongside Grahamthis way, Buffett came across like a two-inch-thick T-bone next to a dab of goose liver pat¨¦ on a plate. Everyone went for the steak. 
One hundred percent of the book¡¯s reviewers mentioned Buffett. John Brooks, dean of the WallStreet writers, described himas a ¡°Puritan in Babylon¡± amongthe ¡°greedy, sideburned youngportfolio wizards.¡±54 Overnight, he was a star. 
Even in Omaha, Supermoney created a minor sensation. Buffett had been crowned as the kingof investors in a best-sellingbook. After fifteen years, the jury had come in. He was now ¡°the Warren Buffett.¡± 
36 
TwoDrownedRats 
Omaha and Washington, D.C. . 1971 
Buffett had craved a niche in the publishingbigleagues for quite some time. Since newspapers, which were mostly family-owned businesses, had recently gone through a spasm of sellingthemselves and now looked cheap, he and Charlie Munger had worked ceaselessly to buy one. They had tried, unsuccessfully, to buy the Cincinnati Enquirer from Scripps Howard,1 and Buffett had tried to buy another Scripps company, the New 
Mexico State Tribune Company, which published the Albuquerque Tribune,2 for Blue Chip, but that bid failed too. 
In 1971, Charles Peters, publisher of the Washington Monthly, had gotten a call fromBuffett, askinghimto introduce Buffett and Munger to Washington Post publisher Katharine Graham. Buffett said that he and Munger had bought some stock in the New Yorker and wanted to buy the whole magazine. They had talked to Peter Fleischmann, chairman of the New Yorker and a large shareholder, who was willingto sell, but they wanted a partner in the purchase and thought the Washington Post might be the right choice. 
Peters wasn¡¯t surprised to get the call. Aha, he thought, Buffett must be interested in the Post stock now that the Grahamfamily is takingthe company public. Perhaps all the recent public offerings of newspapers were why he continued to own the Washington Monthly. If the Monthly turned out to be an entry point for making a killingon the Post, then the failed investment could be justified financially. 
On the brink of the Post¡¯s initial public offeringin 1971,3 Peters set up the meetingto explore a partnership to buy the New Yorker. Buffett had never bought public offerings, which he felt were overhyped and overpromoted; they were the opposite of the unloved cigar butts or great-company-at-the-right-price choices like American Express or See¡¯s Candies that he and Munger sought. So Buffett had no plans to buy Post stock, but he and Munger flew to Washington and went to meet Kay Graham at the Washington Post headquarters, a monolithic eight-story 1950s white buildingwith the paper¡¯s name in its distinctive Gothic-style typeface above the door. 
Though publisher of the Post, Kay Graham had come late in life to runninga newspaper. When she took it over eight years earlier, at age forty-six, she was a widow with four children and had never worked in a business. Now she found herself preparingfor the challenge of runninga public company under the unremittingscrutiny of investors and the press. 
¡°Charlie and I met her very, very briefly, for twenty minutes. I had no idea what she was like. The idea that she¡¯d be frightened of her own business¡ªI didn¡¯t know any of that. It was raining like hell, so we came in looking like a couple of drowned rats, and you know how we dress anyway.¡± 
As they sat in her office, ¡°She couldn¡¯t have been nicer to us. Then she suggested we go see Fritz Beebe, the chairman of the board, who was really the guy kind of running the place up in New York, which we did. But we weren¡¯t going anyplace with it.¡± 
At the time, Grahamhad no interest in the New Yorker purchase that had prompted the visit¡ªand there was nothingin the meetingto suggest that she and Buffett would one day be great friends. He made no impression 
on her whatsoever. For his part, he did not find her particularly attractive¡ªeven though she was a handsome woman¡ªfor she lacked the soft femininity and caretakingqualities of his ideal, Daisy Mae. Moreover, their backgrounds were worlds apart. 
Katharine Graham, born just before the twenties started to roar, was the daughter of a rich father, investor and Post publisher Eugene Meyer, and a self-absorbed mother, Agnes¡ª¡°BigAg,¡± as the family called her behind her back because of her imposingstature and, as the years passed, increasinggirth. Agnes, who had married her Jewish husband at least in part for his money, was passionate about Chinese art, music, literature, and other cultural interests, but indifferent to her husband and their five children. The family shuttled among their pinkish-gray granite mansion in Mount Kisco, overlookingWestchester County¡¯s ByramLake; their full-floor apartment on Fifth Avenue in New York City; and a large, dark, red-brick Victorian house in Washington, D.C. 
Katharine spent her early years under the rule of Agnes at the Mount Kisco estate, which the family referred to as the ¡°farm¡± because it contained a large orchard, garden, dairy, and an old farmhouse where the farmhands lived in bachelor quarters. Every vegetable and piece of fruit on the diningtable came fromthe surroundingfields and orchards. Kay ate meat fromthe farm¡¯s own pigs and chickens and drank milk from its Jersey cows. Lavish bouquets of flowers appeared on the tables of each of the family¡¯s houses every day, even in Washington, sped there fromthe Mount Kisco gardens. The Westchester mansion¡¯s walls were covered with magnificent Chinese paintings; it boasted every status symbol of the era: an indoor swimming pool, a bowlingalley, tennis courts, a massive pipe organ. 
Kay chose her ridinghorses froma stable of steeds handsome enough to draw Cinderella¡¯s carriage and was taken on incredible vacations, once visitingAlbert Einstein himself in Germany. When Agnes took the children campingto teach themindependence, they roughed it accompanied by five ranch hands, eleven saddle horses, and seventeen packhorses. 
But the children had to make an appointment to see their own mother. They gobbled down their meals because Agnes, served first at the longdining-room table, began eatingas the footmen moved around serving everyone else¡ªand had the others¡¯ plates snatched away the instant that she herself had finished. By her own admission, she did not love her children. She left themto be raised by nannies, governesses, and riding instructors; she sent themoff to summer camps, boardingschools, and dancingclass. Their only playmates were one another and the servants¡¯ children. Agnes drank heavily, pursued flirtatious and obsessive (although apparently platonic) relationships with a number of famous men, and treated all other women as inferior, her own daughters amongthem. She compared Kay unfavorably to America¡¯s sweetheart, Shirley Temple, the 
singing, dancing, smilingchild star with golden blond ringlets.4 ¡°If I said I loved The Three Musketeers,¡± 
Graham recalled, ¡°she responded by sayingI couldn¡¯t really appreciate it unless I had read it in French as she had.¡±5 Kay was trained like a hybrid orchid, beautifully pampered, savagely critiqued for her show potential, and otherwise largely ignored. Still, by the time she reached the Madeira School in Washington, D.C., she had somehow managed to learn the skills of popularity and was elected head of her class¡ªmost surprisingat that time and in that place because she was half Jewish. 
In Protestant Mount Kisco, the family had been socially shunned. Since at Agnes¡¯s insistence the children were raised as Protestants¡ªalbeit nonobservant ones, for the most part¡ªand were not even aware that their father was Jewish, Graham did not understand the reason for their isolation. Indeed, she would later be stunned at Vassar when a friend apologized because someone had made a bigoted remark about Jews in front of her. She reflected with hindsight that this clash in her bloodlines ¡°leaves you either a good survival 
capacity or a totalmess.¡±6 Or, perhaps, both. 
From her mother, Kay learned to be ungenerous about small things, fearfulof beingcheated, unable to give 
things away, and certain that people were tryingto take advantage of her. By her own description, she also grew up inclined to be bossy.7 Yet others saw in her qualities of naivet¨¦, candor, generosity, and open-heartedness that she herself seemed unable to acknowledge. 
She felt closer to her awkward, distant, yet supportive father. To Eugene Meyer, she attributed her zeal for 
tiny economies¡ªcompulsively turningout lights, never wastinganything. Her father¡¯s talent for such economies, alongwith great infusions of time, money, and energy, had been crucialin keepingthe ailing Washington Post alive while Kay was growingup, when the paper ranked fifth in a field of five in the capital 
area, far behind the dominant paper, the Washington Evening Star.8 But when Meyer began thinkingof retiringin 1942, Kay¡¯s brother, Bill, a doctor, had no interest in runningan unprofitable newspaper, so the duty fell to Kay and her new husband, Philip Graham. Kay was besotted with Phil, and so convinced of her own lowliness that she accepted as a matter of course her father¡¯s decision to sellPhil nearly two-thirds of the Post¡¯s votingstock, givinghimabsolute control. Meyer did it because, he said, no man should have to 
work for his wife. Kay got the remainder.9 
Despite Meyer¡¯s zeal in keepingthe paper alive, when PhilGrahamtook it over, matters were out of hand. Certain people in the newsroom and the circulation department spent most of the day playingthe horses and drinking. When Meyer was out of town, the first thingthe office boy did every morningwas bringone man a 
half pint of booze and the Daily Racing Form.10 
Phil Graham got the place shipshape, gave it an identity by fosteringvigorous political coverage, and stamped its editorial page with a strongliberal voice. He bought Newsweek magazine and severaltelevision stations, and proved to be a brilliant publisher. But over time, drinkingbinges, a violent temper, unstable moods, and a cruelsense of humor showed themselves, with particularly devastatingeffects on his wife. When Katharine gained weight, he called her ¡°Porky¡± and bought her a porcelain pig. She thought so little of herself that she found the joke funny and put the pigon the porch for display. 
¡°I was very shy,¡± she said. ¡°I was afraid to be left alone with anybody because I¡¯d bore them. I didn¡¯t speak when we went out; I let himspeak¡­. He was really brilliant and funny. Marvelous combination.¡±11 
Her husband played on her fears. When they were out with friends, Philwould look at her in a certain way when she was talking. She sensed that he was tellingher that she was goingon too longand boringpeople. She was convinced that she occupied some lesser sphere and could never meet the expected¡ªbut impossible ¡ªstandard of livingup to Shirley Temple. No wonder that, over time, she ceased speakingin public and let 
Phil take center stage.12 She grew so insecure that she vomited before parties. And by some accounts, the way Phil treated her in private was even worse. 13 Her four children grew up seeingtheir father tear their mother apart. He would drink and build up to a violent rage; then she froze and shut down. 
She never confronted Phil, even when he embarked on a series of affairs with other women that supposedly included swappingmistresses with Jack Kennedy.14 Instead, she defended him, swept away by the force of his personality, wit, and brains. The more cruelly he behaved, the more she seemed to want to please him.15 ¡°I thought that Phil literally created me,¡± she said. ¡°My interests were better. I was surer of myself.¡±16 He 
thought she was lucky to have him, and she did too. When he finally left her for Newsweek staffer Robin Webb, she was stunned by the response of one of her friends, who said, ¡°Good!¡± It had never occurred to her that she might be better off without Phil. But then he began tryingto take the paper away fromher, since he controlled two-thirds of the stock. Kay was terrified that she would lose her family¡¯s newspaper. 
In 1963, in the midst of her battle to keep the paper, PhilGrahamsuffered a spectacular public breakdown, was diagnosed with manic depression, and committed himself to a mental institution. Six weeks later, he talked his way out of the hospitalfor a weekend leave. He came home to Glen Welby, the Grahams¡¯ sprawlingrural Virginia farmretreat. On Saturday, after eatinglunch with Kay, he shot himself in a downstairs bathroom while she was upstairs takinga nap. He was forty-eight. 
His suicide left Kay with the paper, no longer threatened with its loss. She dreaded beingin charge, but even though some suggested that she sell, she was absolutely determined to keep it; she saw her stewardship as a holdingaction until the next generation was ready to take over. ¡°I didn¡¯t know anythingabout management,¡± she said. ¡°I didn¡¯t know anythingabout complicated editorialissues. I didn¡¯t know how to use a secretary. I 
didn¡¯t know bigthings and small things and, worse still, I couldn¡¯t tell them apart.¡±17 
While Grahamcould project a determined confidence at times, at work she began to rely on other people as she constantly rethought and questioned her own decisions. ¡°I just kept tryingto learn the issues from the men who were runningthings,¡± she wrote. ¡°And of course, they were allmen.¡± She never trusted themor anyone else¡ªbut, of course, no one close to her had ever treated her in a trustworthy way. She would tentatively extend her confidence to someone, then second-guess herself and pullback. Alternately enthused, then disenchanted with her executives, she gained a fearsome reputation in the office. And allthe while, she never stopped seekingadvice. 
¡°As decisions would come alongin the course of a day where she was very uncertain how to proceed,¡± says her son Don, ¡°she was literally reinventingthe wheel. She would be called upon to be a top manager of a company when she¡¯d never been a bottom manager of a company. She hadn¡¯t watched people who were CEOs, except the way you watch your husband or your dad. 
¡°And so she had the great habit, when she faced what she thought of as a difficult decision¡ªit usually was a difficult decision¡ªshe would calldirectors, she would call friends whom she thought might have a relevant experience. It was partly gettingadvice to help her handle the problem. And it was partly tryingout the 
friends as advisers to see who seemed to make sense and whom she¡¯d call the next time.¡±18 
Early on, Grahambegan to lean on FritzBeebe, a lawyer and the chairman of the Washington Post Company, findinghima strongsource of support as she struggled with her new job.19 By then, the Post was the smallest of three remainingWashington newspapers, with $85 million in yearly revenues and $4 million in profits. 
Gradually she grew into her role. She and her managingeditor, Ben Bradlee, had a vision of a nationalpaper that would set a standard to rival the New York Times. Bradlee, born the WASPiest of Boston WASPs, a Harvard graduate whose Brahman of a first wife was the daughter of a U.S. Senator, had worked closely with intelligence agencies before turningto journalism. He was funny, brilliant, had an unexpected saltiness that belied his background, brought out the best in Graham¡ªand encouraged reporters to thrive in an informal atmosphere of ambition and competition. Before long, the Post had developed a reputation for solid journalism. Three years after takingover the paper, Graham made Bradlee executive editor. 
In 1970 Kay was freed from the tyranny of her mother, Agnes, who died in bed while Kay was visiting Mount Kisco on Labor Day weekend. Kay went up to her mother¡¯s bedroomto check on her after the maid told her that Agnes had not rungfor her breakfast, and found her in bed, ¡°weirdly inert and already cold,¡± Graham wrote in her memoir. She did not cry; while superficialbooks and movies could turn her into ¡°a weeper¡± and she sometimes cried when angry or hurt¡ªas she explained in her book¡ªshe never cried when 
anyone died.20 And while the death of Agnes Meyer relieved Grahamof a burden, it did not cure her insecurities. 
In March 1971, amid continuingprotests of the Vietnam War, the New York Times was leaked a copy of the 
Pentagon Papers¡ªa top-secret and ruthlessly honest history of the decision-makingthat led the country into and through Vietnam that had been commissioned by former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara.21 Comprisingforty-seven volumes totalingseven thousand pages, the Pentagon Papers showed conclusively that the government had perpetrated a vast deception on the American public. The Times published its account of the scheme on Sunday, June 13. 
On June 15, about two weeks after Buffett and Munger had gone down to Washington to meet Grahamin her office, a federaldistrict court enjoined the Times from publishingmost of the Pentagon Papers. It was the first time in history that a U.S. judge had restrained publication by a newspaper, raisinga major constitutional question. 
The Post, mortified at havingbeen scooped, was determined to get its hands on the Pentagon Papers. 
Through informed guesswork and contacts, an editor tracked down their source, DanielEllsberg, an expert on the Vietnam War. The editor flew to Boston with an empty suitcase and brought the Pentagon Papers back to Washington. 
By then Graham had mastered some of the basics of beinga publisher, though she remained deferential and ill at ease. Further, ¡°we were in the middle of goingpublic [but] we hadn¡¯t sold the stock,¡± she recalled. ¡°It was a terribly sensitive time for the company, and we could have been very badly hurt if we¡¯d been to court or criminally enjoined¡­. The business people were all sayingeither don¡¯t do it or wait a day, and the lawyers were sayingdon¡¯t do it. And the editors were on the other phone sayingyou¡¯ve got to do it.¡± 
¡°I would have had to quit if we hadn¡¯t published it,¡± says Ben Bradlee. ¡°A lot of people would have quit.¡± 
¡°Everybody knew we had those papers,¡± Grahamwrote later. ¡°It was terribly important to maintain the momentumafter the Times had been stopped, because the issue was the government¡¯s ability to prior-restrain newspapers. And I felt what Ben said, that the editors would really be demoralized, that the news floor would be demoralized, that a great deal depended on our doingit.¡± 
Notified on the terrace of her Georgetown mansion that beautiful June afternoon that she had a call, Graham went into her library and sat down on a small sofa to pick up the phone. Post chairman FritzBeebe was on the line. He told her, ¡°I¡¯mafraid you are goingto have to decide.¡± Graham asked Beebe what he would do, and he said that he guessed he wouldn¡¯t. 
¡°Why can¡¯t we wait a day?¡± said Graham. ¡°The Times discussed this for three months.¡± Now Bradlee and other editors joined the call. The grapevine, they said, knows we¡¯ve got the papers, journalists inside and out are watchingus. We¡¯ve got to go, and we¡¯ve got to go tonight. 
Meanwhile, in the library, PaulIgnatius, president of the Post, was standingat Graham¡¯s side, saying, ¡°each time more insistently¡ª¡®Wait a day, wait a day.¡¯ I had about a minute to decide.¡± 
So she parsed Fritz Beebe¡¯s words and his lukewarmtone when he said that he guessed he wouldn¡¯t and concluded that he would back her if she chose a different course. 
¡°I said, ¡®Go ahead, go ahead, go ahead. Let¡¯s go. Let¡¯s publish.¡¯ And I hungup.¡±22 
In that moment the woman who reached for the advice of others on every decision realized that only she could choose; when forced to reach inside to formher own opinion, she found that she did know what to do. 
Before the afternoon was out, the government filed suit against the Post. The followingday, June 21, Judge Gerhard Gesell ruled in the newspaper¡¯s favor, refusingto grant an order restrainingit frompublishingthe Pentagon Papers. Less than two weeks later, the Supreme Court upheld him, sayingthe government had not met ¡°the heavy burden¡± required to justify, on the grounds of nationalsecurity, restrainingpublication. 
With the Pentagon Papers, the Post transcended its status as a decently run business that produced good local journalismand began its transformation into a great paper of national importance. 
¡°Her skill,¡± wrote reporter Bob Woodward, ¡°was to raise the bar, gently but relentlessly.¡±23 
37 Newshound 
Washington, D.C. . 1973 
Nearly two years later, the Post was deep into reportingthe Watergate story, while in Omaha, the Sun¡¯s reporters were baskingin the glow of the Boys Town expos¨¦. Reportingon Watergate, which began in June 1972 when the break-in occurred, had gradually picked up steamas Woodward and Bernstein linked a check made out to one of the burglars to the Nixon re-election campaign. The scandal unfolded over many months as a secret FBI informant, Mark Felt¡ªcode-named ¡°Deep Throat¡± and known to no one but Bob Woodward until thirty-three years later¡ªfunneled information to themabout CREEP, the Campaign to Re-elect the President, and about various CIA and FBI officials involved in fundingand aidingthe burglars. But other papers largely ignored the scandal, as did the public. Nixon was re-elected by a huge majority that fall, having vehemently denied any knowledge of or involvement in the break-in. The Nixon White House, which was already actively hostile to the Post because of the Pentagon Papers episode, dismissed Watergate as ¡°a third-rate burglary attempt¡± and kept up a barrage of threats and harassment against the paper. Attorney General John Mitchell, who had managed Nixon¡¯s election campaign, told Woodward and Bernstein that ¡°Katie Graham¡¯s gonna get her tit caught in a bigfat wringer¡± if the Post continued to report the story. A WallStreet friend with administration contacts advised her ¡°not to be alone.¡± 
In early 1973, a Republican fund-raiser who was a friend of Richard Nixon challenged the renewal of the 
Post¡¯s two Florida television licenses. The challenge, which was probably politically motivated, threatened half of the company¡¯s earnings, an attack on the heart of the business.1 In response, WPO stock plunged from a high of $38 to as low as $16 a share. 
Yet even with a Pulitzer in hand, the Watergate burglars convicted and sent to prison, and a growingbody of evidence linkingtop Nixon administration officials to the break-in, Grahamkept second-guessingherself 
about whether the paper was beingset up or misled.2 Most of her time and attention now went to fighting these fires. Her chairman, Fritz Beebe, was ill with cancer and decliningrapidly,3 and stillin need of an authority figure to rely upon, she increasingly turned toward another of her board members, Andr¨¦ Meyer, senior partner of the investment bank Lazard Fr¨¨res. 
Vindictive, ruthless, secretive, snobbish, and sadistic, Meyer ¡°crushed other people¡¯s personalities.¡± He was known as ¡°the Picasso of Banking¡± and a man with ¡°an almost erotic attachment to money,¡± and called the greatest investment banker of the twentieth century, ¡°a genius of the art of acquisitiveness,¡± accordingto his 
colleagues.4 He was also the well-connected man who had warned Graham duringWatergate not to be alone. 
He ¡°had an ability to relate to people at times of distress in a way that created loyalty and exposed him to grand opportunities in the future,¡± said a former Lazard executive.5 He soon took up Graham socially as well and was seen with her at restaurants, parties, and the theater. 
Beebe died on May 1, 1973, and a week later his lawyer, George Gillespie, who was also Graham¡¯s personal lawyer and one of her advisers, began settlinghis estate. Gillespie got wind that a biginvestor out in Omaha had been buyingPost stock, so from his summer house in Maine, he called Buffett and offered a block of fifty thousand of Beebe¡¯s shares that needed to be sold. Buffett snapped it up. 
If he could, at the right price, Buffett would have bought almost any newspaper in sight for Berkshire Hathaway. When the bankers fromAffiliated Publications, publisher of the Boston Globe, were strugglingto place its deal, Buffett broke his unwritten rule against buyingpublic offerings and took four percent of Affiliated at a discount price. Berkshire wound up its largest shareholder. He grabbed stock in Booth Newspapers, Scripps Howard, and Harte-Hanks Communications, a San Antonio¨Cbased chain. The Sun¡¯s elevated status as a Pulitzer Prize winner enabled him to network his way through the newspaper world, talkingwith publishers as one of their peers. He chatted up the owners of the Wilmington News Journal, hopingto buy the paper. Alas, while newspaper stocks were cheap because investors failed to see their value, newspaper owners were not so blind. Competingwith them, Buffett and Munger¡¯s efforts to buy whole newspapers had all come to naught. 
Still, by late spring1973 Buffett had accumulated more than five percent of the Washington Post stock.6 He 
now sent a letter to Graham. She had never lost her terror that somehow her company would be taken away 
from her, even though Beebe and Gillespie had structured the Washington Post¡¯s stock in two classes so that an unfriendly buyer could never do that.7 Buffett¡¯s letter told her that he owned 230,000 shares and meant to buy more. But instead of legalistic boilerplate, he wrote a highly flattering, personalmissive that linked their common interest in journalismand stressed the Sun¡¯s Pulitzer. The letter began: 
This purchase represents a sizable commitment to us¡ªand an explicitly quantified compliment to the Post as a business enterprise and to you as its chief executive. Writinga check separates conviction from conversation. I recognize that the Post is Graham-controlled and Graham-managed. And that suits me fine.8 
Nonetheless, Grahampanicked. She reached out for advice. 
¡°At times,¡± JimHoagland, one of her reporters, wrote, Grahamwas ¡°capable of beingtaken in by 
mountebanks of the moment,¡± and ¡°particularly if they were adroit at a certain kind of kiddingflattery.¡±9 She was a ¡°pretty dreadfulsnob¡± and ¡°too easily impressed by people with bigtitles,¡± accordingto another reporter.10 Moreover, while she instinctively pursued women¡¯s equality¡ªshe had given the seed money to 
Gloria Steinemfor Ms. magazine, she was known to chide men for referringto professionals as if all members of the class were men, and she once hurled a paperweight at a Post executive who refused to allow girls to deliver papers¡ªdeep inside she still thought that only men knew anythingabout business. Thus, when Andr¨¦ 
Meyer was ¡°irate¡± and told her that Buffett meant her no good, she took himseriously.11 And it also carried weight when another of Graham¡¯s acquaintances, Bob Abboud, a fellow trustee at the University of Chicago, warned her away. 
¡°Andr¨¦ Meyer really wanted to think he controlled everything. And it was easy when he got a woman like Kay¡ªhe would make her feel like she¡¯d better not go to the bathroom without checking with him. He had that style. Andr¨¦ kept referring to me as her new boss because I bought this stock. You had all these guys who could see their power being diluted if I got in the inner circle. 
¡°She was very sensitive to the idea that anyone would manipulate her, for political purposes or for the paper, which is understandable. She was used to everybody in the world trying to use her. But what you could do with Kay is you could play on her fears. If you wanted to work her over, you could make her feel so insecure. And she knew you were doing it to her, but she couldn¡¯t resist it.¡± 
¡°She would second-guess herself,¡± says fellow Post board member Arjay Miller. ¡°She would fall in and out of love with people. She could be bullied. She would get overwhelmed by certain people in business. She would meet somebody and be sort of dazzled with them for a little while and think they knew allthe answers. She thought men knew all about business and women didn¡¯t know anything. At the bottom, that was the real 
problem. Her mother told her that and her husband told her that, over and over and over and over again.¡±12 
Graham tried to find out what she could about Buffett. She barely remembered himfromtheir brief encounter two years earlier.13 She and her colleagues bought copies of Supermoney and devoured the chapter on him, wonderingwhat the man fromNebraska had in store for them. Those unfriendly to Buffett made sure she also saw an unsigned article in the September 1 issue of Forbes about Buffett¡¯s purchase of stock in San Jose Water Works, which cast a shadow on the sunny portrait that Supermoney had painted of the mystery man. 
This Forbes piece struck a very different tone than the glowingarticle the magazine had published two years before. It described a San Jose Water Works shareholder who wanted to unload his stock. He went to a company director who sent himto Buffett. The article insinuated that Buffett must have known that a deal was brewingfor the city to take over the water works at a higher price than he was payingfor the stock¡ª simply because a director had referred a seller to him. He had connections, so he must have known something ¡ªright? The article ended: ¡°¡­the American Stock Exchange and the San Francisco office of the Securities 
Exchange Commission are makinginquiries and askingquestions.¡±14 
But there was nothingillegalabout a director referringa seller of stock to a buyer.15 Indeed, no dealever 
took place. Yet to anyone checkinghimout, this would be the most prominent, public, recent mention of his name apart from Supermoney.16 Buffett felt like a cat¡¯s scratchingpost. If this cascaded into a series of expandingstories, it could wreck his newly gilded reputation even though the story had no substance to it. He was not the type to storm and shout, however, but to brood and plan. Thus, while angry, he was too clever to confront the magazine and denounce its nameless reporter. He wanted retribution and vindication, so he used the opportunity to bringhimself to the attention of magazine publisher MalcolmForbes, writinghiman artfully worded letter in which he talked of the pitfalls of journalism, complimented himon the magazine¡¯s good ¡°battingaverage¡± in investigative reportingover the years¡ªto which the article on San Jose Water 
Works was some kind of unfortunate exception¡ªand mentioned the Sun¡¯s Pulitzer.17 On the same date he wrote a crisper letter, sans the flattery, to the editor, statingthe facts to support his innocence. 
Sure enough, Forbes ran a correction. Buffett knew, however, that corrections were rarely read and had no 
impact as compared to the initial story. So he also sent one of his proxies, the loyalBill Ruane, to talk to the editors, not to complain but to position Buffett as an expert who could write an article about investing.18 The attempt failed, at least initially. 
Buffett now had a new cause¡ªoutrage at bias in news reporting¡ªwhich wound itself around his sense of justice and his interest in journalismin general. That a reporter could lie by inference or omission without any accountability drove himwild. He knew that even well-intentioned news publications flew into a state of high dudgeon and defended their reporters¡¯ dubious behavior on the premises of newsroommorale and press independence. This stance, he would later learn, was referred to at the Washington Post as the ¡°defensive 
crouch.¡±19 
Eventually, he would end up helpingto fund the NationalNews Council, a nonprofit organization that arbitrated complaints of journalistic malpractice. The council¡¯s position was that media had become dominated by monopolies and concentrated in a few hands; this lack of competition meant that the First Amendment¡¯s right of freedomof the press gave publishers ¡°power without responsiblity.¡± The council offered redress to victims who had been ¡°traduced, misquoted, libeled, held up to unjustified ridicule, or whose legitimate views have been ignored in a one-sided report.¡± Unfortunately, those very monopolies and the few publishers who dominated the media had no interest in publishingthe News Council¡¯s rulings, which exposed their biases and the carelessness and incompetence of their reporters. The News Council eventually folded after its findings were spiked, time and time again, by the free and independent press that was 
supposed to publish them.20 
The National News Council was a worthy crusade, indeed perhaps ahead of its time, like many of the causes on which Buffett spent his energy. But by 1973, Susie Buffett had seen himexpend a tidal wave of energy on each new crusade or obsession, sometimes changingentire coastlines in his wake. While many people shift their interests over time, the shy, insecure man she had married seized on one obsession after another. From his childhood hobby of collectinglicense-plate numbers to reformingthe jiggery-pokery of journalism, three roles invariably interested him. The first was the relentless collector, expandinghis empire of money, people, and influence. The second was the preacher, sprinklingidealismfromthe lectern. The third was the cop, foilingthe bad guys. 
The perfect business would allow himto do allof these at once:preach, play cop, and collect money to ring the cash register. The perfect business, therefore, was a newspaper. That was why the Sun had been a sliver of somethingthat he wanted more of, much, much more. 
But he and Munger had struck out at tryingto buy major city newspapers. Now here was Katharine Graham, unsteady on her feet when it came to business, manipulated by those around her, flailing, seekinga lifesaver ringfrom anyone she could find. Yet despite her insecurities and vulnerabilities, because of her position at the helmof the Washington Post, she had become one of the most powerful women in the Western Hemisphere. And Buffett had always had a strongattraction to powerfulpeople. 
Graham was afraid of him. She asked George Gillespie whether he was crooked. She could not afford to 
make a mistake. For several years the Nixon administration had been wagingan all-out war to discredit the Post. The Senate Watergate Committee was holdinghearings. Woodward and Bernstein had unearthed Nixon¡¯s ¡°enemies list.¡± A set of newly discovered tapes implicated the President, who had refused to hand over information he claimed was privileged, information that could answer the question of what happened and who was involved. Grahamlabored every day over the Watergate story. In a sense, she had staked the Post¡¯s franchise on it. 
She relied heavily on the opinion of the devoutly religious, utterly respectable Gillespie. He had served the Graham family ever since, as a twenty-eight-year-old trust lawyer at Cravath, Swaine & Moore, he had drafted Eugene Meyer¡¯s finalwill, witnessingthe signature of the fadingold man. ¡°He¡¯s goingto take over the Washington Post,¡± she said about Buffett. ¡°Kay, he can¡¯t take over the Post,¡± Gillespie said. ¡°Forget it. It¡¯s not possible. It doesn¡¯t make any difference how much B stock he owns. He has no rights. Allhe could do would be to elect himself to the board if he owned the majority of the B stock.¡± 
Gillespie had called a San Jose Water Works director and was convinced that Buffett had had no inside information. He made it clear that he disagreed with the powerfulAndr¨¦ Meyer, goingout on a limb, given Meyer¡¯s position and connections. He told her to talk to Buffett, that he would be good for her to know.21 
Graham wrote Buffett, quakingas she dictated the letter, suggestingthat they get together in California, where she would be travelinglate that summer on business. He agreed eagerly, and when she arrived at an office provided by the Los Angeles Times, the Post¡¯s West Coast news-service partner, she looked exactly as she had two years before: impeccably tailored shirtdress, her pageboy hairdo lacquered into place, lips pursed in a smallsmile. When she saw Buffett, Grahamsaid, his ¡°very appearance surprised¡± her. 
¡°The great blessingand curse in my mother¡¯s life,¡± says her son Don, ¡°was she had very high standards when it came to taste. She was used to travelingin high-falutin circles. She thought there was one right way to dress and eat and one circle of people to be paid attention. Warren violated allher standards when it came to these 
things, yet he didn¡¯t care.¡±22 Wearinga suit that looked tailored for some other man, the hair no longer crew-cut and beginningto float up slightly at the ends, ¡°he resembled no Wall Street figure or business tycoon I¡¯d ever met,¡± she later wrote. ¡°Rather, he came across as cornfed and Midwestern, but with that extraordinary combination of qualities that has appealed to me throughout my life¡ªbrains and humor. I liked 
him from the start.¡±23 
But at the time, that certainly didn¡¯t show. Instead, she came across as frightened, unsure of both him and herself. 
¡°When I first met with Kay, she was wary and scared. She was terrified by me, and she was intrigued by me. And one thing about Kay was that you could tell. She was not a poker-face type.¡± 
Buffett could see that Grahamknew nothingabout business and finance and that she thought her board and managers outclassed her in runningthe business despite what was by now a decade of experience. He told her he thought WallStreet did not see the value of the Post. Graham relaxed her guard slightly. In her patrician accent, she invited himto meet with her in Washington a few weeks later. 
Warren and Susie arrived November 4, the eveningbefore the meeting, drove up in a taxito the Madison Hotel, directly across the street fromthe Post headquarters, and, as they were checkingin, found that the newspaper was in the middle of a printers¡¯ union work stoppage. Federal marshals were evictingthe mutinous printers amid rumors of pressmen carryingguns. Commotion, glaringlights, and television cameras carried on until dawn. Given what was happeningin the political sphere, it would be hard to find a worse time to shut down a newspaper, which of course was exactly what the union intended. Vice President Spiro Agnew had been under criminalinvestigation but suddenly pleaded ¡°no contest¡± less than a month ago to a tax-evasion charge, then resigned. The Watergate scandal had reached an explosive crisis. Two weeks after Agnew¡¯s resignation, U.S. Attorney General Elliot Richardson and Deputy Attorney GeneralWilliamRuckelshaus resigned in protest rather than execute President Nixon¡¯s order to fire special prosecutor Archibald Cox¡ªwho had been appointed to investigate the unfoldingscandal¡ªand abolish his office. Nixon did so anyway, in what became known as the ¡°Saturday Night Massacre.¡±24 The President¡¯s interference in the supposedly independent judiciary branch of government marked a turningpoint in the Watergate affair by shiftingpublic opinion decisively over the course of the past two weeks against him. Pressure was mounting rapidly on Congress to impeach. 
The morningafter the Buffetts¡¯ arrival, Graham, exhausted from workingwith most of her managers until six 
a.m. to get the paper out, was embarrassed at the introduction her new shareholder had received to her paper and nervous about how the day¡¯s meetingwould proceed. But she had arranged lunch for Buffett with Ben Bradlee, MegGreenfield, Howard Simons, and herself. 
Graham considered MegGreenfield her closest friend, yet referred to her as ¡°a lone fortress¡­no one ever really got to know Meg.¡± Editorial-page editor of the Post, Greenfield was a short, chunky woman with cropped dark hair and a plain no-nonsense face. She exemplified humor, honesty, toughness, good manners, 
and modesty.25 
Howard Simons, the Post¡¯s managingeditor, was known for his sharp-witted way of twittingGraham. ¡°Howard Simons used to say that you don¡¯t have to be dead to write obituaries. He was a great guy, but he 
26 
was wicked. He used to tease Kay so much. 
¡°We were eating lunch, talking about acquisitions and media properties. I could see that even though she had all the A stock, she was afraid of me. I mean, they had spent their whole life dreaming up and putting defenses around the stock. So I said something about how the amortization of intangibles made it harder for the media companies, because they paid so much for goodwill, which caused problems if they were 
conscious of valuation.¡±*27 Buffett was tryingto reassure Grahamthat it was hard to take over media companies because the accountingmade it burdensome to would-be acquirers. ¡°And Kay was showing off. She said, ¡®Yes, the amortization of intangibles caused us a problem¡¯ or something like that. Howard looked her right in the eye, and he said, ¡®Kay, what is the amortization of intangibles?¡¯ 
¡°And at that moment, I mean, I loved it. She was just frozen. She was paralyzed. Howard was enjoying it. So I jumped in and explained what amortization of intangibles was to Howard. And when I got through with this description, Kay said, ¡®Exactly!¡¯¡± 
Buffett loved outthinkingSimons, short-circuitingthe game, and coming¡ªindirectly and subtly¡ªto Graham¡¯s defense. Graham¡¯s tight little smile began to ease. ¡°From that point forward, we were the best of friends. I was Sir Lancelot. That was one of the greatest moments of my life. Turning defeat into triumph 
27 
for her.¡± 
After lunch, Buffett met with Grahamfor about an hour, then he reassured her in writing. ¡°I said, ¡®Kay, George Gillespie¡¯s arranged for the A shares to give you control. But,¡¯ I said, ¡®I also know that it is so important to you in this world that you¡¯re going to worry about it no matter what you¡¯ve got. It¡¯s your whole life.¡¯ And so I said, ¡®I¡¯m telling you that even though these teeth look like Little Red Riding Hood¡¯s wolf fangs to you, they really are baby teeth. But we¡¯ll just take them out. Just have the orders come up this 
afternoon, and we¡¯ll white out *28 some things, and I¡¯ll never buy another share of stock unless you¡¯re okay with it.¡¯ I knew that was the only way that she would ever be comfortable.¡± That afternoon, Buffett¡ªwho had spent $10,627,605 to buy twelve percent of the company¡ªsigned an agreement with Grahamnot to buy any more of the Post stock without her permission. 
In the evening, the Buffetts were due at Graham¡¯s for one of her famous dinners, this one for forty guests honoringWarren and Susie. Despite Graham¡¯s personal insecurity, she was considered Washington¡¯s greatest hostess, above all because she knew how to help people relax and enjoy themselves. This evening, despite her exhaustion and the temptation to cancel, ¡°She had a little party for me. That was her way of reciprocating. And when she had a party, she could get anybody she wanted. Anybody¡ªthe President of the United States, anybody.¡± 
¡°She traveled widely in the world, so found occasions to give dinners,¡± says Don Graham. ¡°If she had gone 
to Malaysia, when the prime minister came to town, she¡¯d give a dinner for him. The ambassador would look up what they did last time, and there was always a meal at Mrs. Graham¡¯s house, so there would be another one. Someone would publish a book, someone would have a birthday, and she¡¯d give a dinner because she loved to give a dinner.¡± Grahamused the dinners as a way of makingnew friends and as a way of getting 
people to know one another. ¡°She would sort of adopt people in different administrations,¡± says Don.28 This particular administration, however, was Richard Nixon¡¯s. Graham had made few friends there, other than Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, and he had to defend socializingwith her. 
¡°So all of a sudden I¡¯m at the Madison Hotel with Susie, and about five o¡¯clock somebody slips something under the door and it describes the party, which I had been invited to weeks before. At the bottom it says ¡®black tie.¡¯ Well, I didn¡¯t have that, needless to say. So here¡¯s this pathetic guy from Nebraska, and he shows up with a business suit. He¡¯s going to a black-tie dinner in his honor and he¡¯s going to be the only one without black tie. So I called her secretary, panicked. 
¡°Her secretary is a very nice gal. She says, well, let¡¯s put on our thinking cap. While I¡¯m trying to cross the street to find a store that was open to rent me something, and nothing was open,¡± Graham¡¯s assistant, Liz Hylton, called another local store, however, and found somethingsuitable.29 
The Buffetts left the Madison Hoteland were driven past mansion after mansion on Embassy Row. The taxi turned onto Q Street, past the historic Oak HillCemetery where Phil Graham was buried. Around the corner, they passed a row of historic nineteenth-century town houses with tiny manicured gardens. It was early November; the leaves glowed with traces of russet, amber, and gold. The taxi¡¯s passage into Georgetown was like crossinga border into a Colonial-era town. Tucked into the corner of the cemetery and sprawlingdown its tree-swagged hillstood Dumbarton Oaks, the ten-acre Federal estate where the conference at which the 
United Nations had been planned took place.30 
The taxi swiveled left at the corner, between a pair of stone gateposts. The sight ahead was breathtaking. As the taxibegan to crunch its way up the wide sweep of white pebbled drive, the Buffetts saw in the distance a dignified three-story cream-colored Georgian mansion with a green mansard roof. The broad lawns that surrounded it lapped all the way to the top of Georgetown¡¯s Rock of Dumbarton, so that the house looked down on the cemetery. To the right, down the hill past a deep colonnade of trees, were the neighborhoods leadingto the old Buffett house in SpringValley not far away, and just beyond that, Tenleytown, where Warren had delivered papers at The Westchester and stolen golf balls from Sears. 
The Buffetts were ushered through Graham¡¯s front door to join the other guests, who were havingcocktails in the livingroom. Asian art fromher mother¡¯s collection hungeverywhere on eggshell-white walls swagged with blue velvet curtains, alongwith a Renoir paintingand Albrecht D¨¹rer engravings. Grahambegan to introduce the Buffetts to her other guests. ¡°She told them nice things about me,¡± Buffett says. ¡°Kay was doing everything in the world to make me comfortable. [Yet] I was so uncomfortable.¡± 
He had never attended a gatheringof such formality or grandeur. When the cocktail hour ended, crossingthe hallway to the huge diningroomwhere Grahamheld her famous parties, its paneled walls lit by the glow of tapered candles in bronze sconces, did nothingto make Buffett feel more at home. This settingintimidated even more than the livingroom. Crystalcandlesticks and armorialporcelain gleamed on the round walnut diningtables, although the guests whomGrahamhad invited outshone the splendor of the surroundings. The room at any given time could be filled with a selection of U.S. Presidents, foreign leaders, diplomats, administration officials, Congressional members of both parties, senior lawyers in town, and people chosen 
from her group of perennial friends¡ªEd Williams, Scotty Reston, Polly Wisner,31 Roy Evans, Evangeline Bruce, Joseph Alsop, alongwith people like the Buffetts who, for one reason or another, suited the occasion or were interestingto her. 
Buffett found himself seated next to Edmund Muskie¡¯s wife, Jane, an obvious dinner partner, since the Buffetts had entertained her husband in Omaha. On his other side was Barbara Bush, whose husband was the 
U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations but would soon become the Chief of the U.S. Liaison Office in Peking, with the important role of steeringthe United States through the delicate process of renewingits 
diplomatic ties with China. Grahampressed a button to signalthe kitchen, and waiters began to move around the antique Georgian tables and serve. Warren tried not to gape at the protocol. ¡°Susie¡¯s over there sitting next to some senator. And he¡¯s trying to make out with her, he¡¯s got his hand on her leg and all these things. But me, I¡¯m dying, because I don¡¯t know what to talk to these people about. Barbara Bush could not have been nicer. She could see how ill at ease I was.¡± 
The waiters began to follow an American version of service ¨¤ la russe, servingthe first course followed by a fish course, then the main course, all borne on trays from which the diners served themselves. On and on the courses went as wine was poured to the sound of Washington chatter. The waiters added and removed unfamiliar sterlingimplements like fish knives. As they offered himfood that he would never eat and wines that he would never drink, he found the meal increasingly more complex and intimidating. Graham¡¯s other guests were relaxed and comfortable, but by the time dessert was served, Buffett was thoroughly cowed. Then came coffee he did not drink. His discomfort increased to terror when, as at the end of every evening, Graham stood up and read an articulate, witty, polished, personal, and original toast to her guest of honor that she had obviously put considerable thought into writing, however lackingin confidence her delivery. The guest of honor was supposed to stand and toast his hostess in kind. 
¡°I didn¡¯t have the nerve to stand up and offer a toast, which you¡¯re supposed to do. I blew it totally. I was so uncomfortable. I even thought I might throw up, actually. I could not stand up there in front of half the cabinet and talk. I wasn¡¯t up to it.¡± All he wanted to do was escape. Afterward, as he and Susie made their goodbyes, they had the feelingthat the hicks fromNebraska would be the talk of Georgetown longafter they left. 
¡°This Senator was still trying to score with Susie as we were leaving and was so concentrating on explaining how she should come down to the Senate and see his offices as we were leaving that he opened the door to a closet and walked in. That was my introduction to Washington.¡± 
Yet while it was true that the formal, glitteringsociety that surrounded the powerful Mrs. Grahammay have unnerved Buffett and made him ill at ease, he had never been one to hide his enthusiasms. And so it must have soon become obvious to Susie Buffett that her husband wanted more of this world. 
38 
SpaghettiWestern 
Omaha . 1973¨C1974 
By the time he dined with Katharine Grahamin 1973, Buffett was no longer just an investor who was buying newspaper stocks. He was becominga business mogul on a small scale. Berkshire Hathaway and Diversified were his bailiwick. Charlie Munger was the czar of Blue Chip Stamps. 
The interlockingownership of these three companies had tightened the business relationship between Buffett 
and Munger, and resembled the embryo of an empire built by another investor whomBuffett in particular admired, Gurdon W. Wattles.1 His company, American Manufacturing, was like a Russian doll; open it and inside was another company and another and another: Mergenthaler Linotype, Crane Co., Electric Auto-Lite. These stocks were all publicly traded, because though Wattles controlled them, he did not own one hundred percent of any of them. Fromearly in his investingcareer, Buffett admired the Wattles model. He considered how best to profit from the same stocks Wattles was buying. He talked about Wattles all the time to his 
friends. ¡°The only way to go is coattail-riding,¡± he would say. 2 
¡°Wattles had this little closed-end investment company called Century Investors, which had to report to the 
SEC. He did this chain thing where he would be buying stock in a company at a discount, which would be buying stock in another company at a discount, which would be buying stock in another company at a discount. The big company at the end of the thing was Mergenthaler Linotype, which was two-thirds owned by American Manufacturing. In those days, you didn¡¯t have to file with the SEC to publicly reveal that you were buying, so nobody knew and he just would keep buying until he got control. He bought control of Electric Auto-Lite, partly through Mergenthaler, and he was doing the same thing with Crane Co., not the stationery but the plumbing supply. Somewhere in the chain was Webster Tobacco. They were all cheap statistically. Everything sold at a discount, and you could just keep buying all of them and make more money every time you made a purchase. Usually I would buy some of all of them. I owned Mergenthaler, I 
3
owned Electric Auto-Lite, I owned American Manufacturing. What would cause the value to come out, that was always the question. But you just had a feeling you were with a smart guy and eventually it would.¡± 
Early on, he went to see Wattles at his office at White, Weld & Co. in Boston.4 
¡°I was a little apprehensive and said something like, ¡®Mr. Wattles, I hope I can ask you some questions.¡¯ And he said, ¡®Shoot.¡¯ Right away, I had to start thinking of questions. He was very good with me. For ten or fifteen years I followed him. He was very Graham-like. Very Graham-like. Nobody paid any attention to him except me. He was sort of my model as to what I hoped to do for a while. It was so understandable and so obvious and such a sure way of making money. Although it didn¡¯t make you huge money necessarily, you 
knew you were going to make money.¡±5 What interested Warren about the Wattles model: the way one company could legitimately buy cheap stock in another. ¡°You don¡¯t have to think of everything, you know. It was Isaac Newton who said I¡¯ve seen a little more of the world than others because I stand on the shoulders 
6
of giants. There¡¯s nothing wrong with standing on other people¡¯s shoulders.¡± 
Eventually Wattles had merged his empire into one company, Eltra Corporation, created through the merger of Mergenthaler Linotype and Electric Auto-Lite. This stock was now a favorite of BillRuane¡¯s, because the company¡¯s earnings were compoundingat fifteen percent a year. 7 
The Buffett-Munger companies were beginningto look a little like Eltra before its combination: Berkshire Hathaway was Diversified¡¯s largest shareholder and also owned Blue Chip stock. Each of themalso acted as a holdingcompany for businesses that were not traded publicly. Most notably, Blue Chip owned See¡¯s Candies, which was so profitable that it more than offset the losses from the rapidly shrinkingtrading-stamp business. Munger now followed up by buyingtwenty percent of a near-defunct investment firm, Source Capital, for Blue Chip. ¡°We bought it at a discount from its asset value,¡± says Munger. ¡°And there were two assholes who were the sellers. We had a no-asshole rule very early. Our basic rule has always been that we won¡¯t deal with assholes. And so Warren, when he heard about Source Capital, said, ¡®Now I understand the 
two-asshole exception to the no-asshole rule.¡¯¡±8 
Twenty percent is influence, not control. Munger went on the board of Source Capital with a new set of talented managers who were not assholes, JimGipson and George Michaelis, and started straighteningout its portfolio. 
Source Capital, however, was smallchange. Buffett and Munger were both always on the lookout for anythingnew they could acquire, especially somethingbigger that would give Blue Chip the kind of boost that See¡¯s Candies had. They had found a sleepy West Coast savings-and-loan company, Wesco Financial. When a broker called Buffett offeringsome cheap Wesco stock, after a brief conversation with Munger, they 
grabbed it¡ªand bought the shares for Blue Chip Stamps.9 Then Wesco announced that it was goingto merge 
with FinancialCorporation of Santa Barbara. Santa Barbara was a hot stock, with an aggressive approach that WallStreet liked. Analysts thought Santa Barbara was payingtoo much for Wesco.10 Yet Buffett and Munger saw the opposite. They thought Santa Barbara¡¯s stock was overpriced, and Wesco was handingover 
its stock too cheap.11 Buffett went nuts. He read the terms and couldn¡¯t believe them. ¡°Have they lost their minds?¡± he asked.12 
Founded by the Casper family, Wesco was located in Pasadena, Munger¡¯s hometown. It owned Mutual 
Savings, a savings and loan that had prospered when the GIs came home fromthe Asian theater duringthe post-WWII buildingboom. Even so, Wesco had never exploited its opportunities for growth. But it was extremely profitable because it kept its costs so low.13 
Betty Casper Peters, the only member of the foundingfamily both interested and able to serve on the board, 
felt that Wesco¡¯s managers condescended to her and dismissed her suggestions that they could grow the company. Instead, they used her family¡¯s legacy as a ticket to ride at the head of the Rose Bowlparade.14 Peters, an elegantly dressed, high-cheekboned former art history student, had school-age kids, no business background, and spent much of her time tendingthe family vineyard in Napa. Now she drove back and forth to Pasadena on Wednesdays to attend board meetings. Runninga savings and loan, she found, was hardly a black art. She subscribed to everythingrelevant she could get her hands on and sat down and read and figured it out. 
As Peters¡¯s frustration grew, she pushed for a merger. She knew the Santa Barbara offer wasn¡¯t great, but all of the company¡¯s executives were in their mid-forties and they were bright and aggressive. Although they hungaround the country club too much for her taste, they were vigorous, acquiringbranches and doingthings that she thought should be done. 
Blue Chip already owned eight percent of Wesco when the merger was announced. Munger thought that if it kept buyingWesco, it could accumulate enough stock to defeat the Santa Barbara deal. But then he discovered that it would take fifty percent of the stock, a much higher obstacle. Munger had a greater incentive than Buffett to keep going, since Blue Chip was his partnership¡¯s most important investment. He 
urged goingahead; Buffett thought fifty percent was too high a threshold and held back. 15 
Soon thereafter, Munger went to see Wesco¡¯s CEO, Louis Vincenti, and tried to persuade himto abandon the Santa Barbara deal.16 And Vincentibrushed Munger off like a flake of dandruff¡ªnot an easy thingto do. 
Munger and Buffett had no intention of launchinga competinghostile bid, however. Further, Munger could not imagine that such a thingmight be necessary. He wrote Vincenti, appealingto his higher values.17 Surely his superior reasoningcould bringVincenti around. It was wrong that Wesco should sell itself too cheap; 
Vincenti should simply see that. So Munger told Vincentithat he liked Wesco¡¯s management and that Vincenti was Buffett and Munger¡¯s sort of fellow. He told Vincenti somethinglike, ¡°You¡¯re engaged to this other girl, so we can¡¯t talk to you, but if you were free, you¡¯re the kind of man we would like.¡±18 
Munger¡¯s old-fashioned, Ben Franklinesque sense of ethics and his noblesse oblige notion that gentlemen in business should agree upon the right conduct amongthemselves must have sounded like Sanskrit to Vincenti. But at least Vincentidid let slip that Betty Peters was the shareholder pushingfor the merger. 
Munger sent Don Koeppel, CEO of Blue Chip, down to see Peters. She viewed himas a minion and sent him back empty-handed.19 So it was time for the biggun. Within ten minutes of Koeppel¡¯s departure, Buffett called her. Peters had just finished readingthe chapter on himin Jerry Goodman¡¯s Supermoney, which her husband had given her for Christmas. ¡°Are you the same Warren Buffett that¡¯s in Supermoney?¡± she asked. Buffett admitted that he was the man who, accordingto Jerry Goodman, represented the triumph of straight thinkingand high standards over flapdoodle, folly, and flimflam. Peters willingly agreed to meet Buffett with her three children at the TWA Ambassador Lounge at the San Francisco airport twenty-four hours later. 
At the meeting, Buffett, with Pepsi in hand, underplayed his talent and record while askingquestions in a warm, unthreateningmanner. They talked for three hours, mostly about Omaha, where Peters¡¯s mother had grown up. They talked about politics. Peters, a lifelongDemocrat, was pleased by Buffett¡¯s views. Finally he said, with considerable understatement, ¡°Betty, I think I can do better with Wesco than this merger. Inasmuch as you¡¯re givingup the company, why don¡¯t we give it a try?¡± 
Peters was taken with Buffett and thought he might be right about doingbetter than the fast youngmen from Santa Barbara. In fact, her concern now became that somethingmight happen to Buffett if she swungher 
vote to him. He told her he had a partner, however, someone who would be in charge of Berkshire and the Buffett family¡¯s stockholdings if the proverbial truck mowed himdown. 
On her next trip to Pasadena, Peters sat down to breakfast with Buffett and Munger at the grand old Huntington Hotel so that she could get to know this mysterious partner. The two of themasked for a meeting with the Wesco board. Peters then did somethingbrave, allowingherself to look capricious in front of the board rather than let the company make a serious mistake. She went to the next board meetingand asked the board to reverse course and meet with Buffett and Munger. The board waved her off, however, and voted at a special meetingto ¡°use every effort to complete the merger with FinancialCorporation of Santa 
Barbara.¡±20 
Forgettingwho actually owned the company was their mistake. Peters now took Munger and Buffett to meet her brothers to secure their votes. By the time the board met again a week later and reaffirmed their position, Peters had made a decision and, behind the scenes, brought her whole family around to votingagainst the Santa Barbara deal. 
¡°And then my task,¡± says Peters, ¡°was to go back into that little hermetically sealed Pasadena boardroom and tellall these buttoned-down gentlemen, includingthe management, that we¡¯re not goingforward with the Santa Barbara savings deal.¡± When she returned to the Spanish-style building, she was thinkingabout the plaza outside the boardroomwindows with its tile-lined fountain. ¡°If the windows had been open,¡± she says, ¡°they would have thrown me out of them. I knew that what was goingon in everyone¡¯s mind was ¡®My God, 
is this what happens when you let a hormonal woman on the board?¡¯¡±21 
WallStreet thought so; it sent Wesco stock nosedivingfrom a high of above $18 to $11 on the news. Wesco¡¯s management was ¡°old and not very aggressive,¡± one analyst said. Another claimed Santa Barbara was payingtoo much for Wesco, a ¡°sleepingcompany for years, with old management.¡± Another referred to 
it as ¡°garbage.¡±22 
For her courage, Buffett and Munger now felt indebted to Peters.23 They had also decided they wanted to own Wesco themselves and felt it would be possible to engage Vincenti and win his cooperation. However, by then it must have been apparent that Lou Vincenti would not gambolalongbehind themlike a lamb after its mother. Accordingly, they loosened the purse strings and told their brokers, for once, to bid liberally on the stock. Blue Chip paid $17 for Wesco shares¡ªthe price at which they had traded before the dealfell through. 
¡°I will admit we were eccentric,¡± says Munger. ¡°We deliberately paid more than we had to, but we felt we¡¯d scuttled the damn merger and we didn¡¯t like takingadvantage of it by buyingat the market price. We thought it was kind of the right thingto do. Well, nobody could understand that. They thought somethingmust have been dishonorable about doingthat. We really thought we¡¯d make a better impression on Louie Vincentiif we didn¡¯t scuttle the merger, then buy the stock cheap. That would look pretty God-knows-what, and we 
wanted Louie to be our partner for the longterm. We were tryingto behave well.¡±24 
By March 1973, Blue Chip owned a quarter of the Wesco stock. And Buffett, who had never stopped buying Blue Chip, continued his drive to get hold of more. The year before, he had exchanged Diversified¡¯s Thriftimart shares for still more Blue Chip stock. Includingthe thirteen percent of Blue Chip he owned outright as well as his share of the stock owned by Berkshire and Diversified, which owned another thirty-five percent, Buffett was now effectively the largest Blue Chip shareholder. Blue Chip began to 
formally tender for Wesco¡¯s shares, this time paying$15 a share in cash, until it owned more than half.25 
Within weeks, Munger outlined for Lou Vincenti a vision for the company 26 that, not surprisingly, resembled the way Buffett thought about Berkshire Hathaway and Diversified. Wesco, with Munger as chairman, would be another new doll amongthe rest27¡ªthis one residinginside Blue Chip. 
Then, no sooner had Blue Chip bought the majority of Wesco than the whole stock market fell apart.28 Buffett¡¯s stake in the Washington Post lost a quarter of its value.29 Ordinarily he would have bought more. 
However, he had promised Grahamthat he wouldn¡¯t. Instead, he recommended it to his friends.30 
So instead of buyingmore Post stock, Buffett¡ªwho had always believed in concentration¡ªlooked for new opportunities and began fillinghis basket faster than an Easter egghunt with huge quantities of a handfulof other stocks: National Presto, maker of pressure cookers and popcorn poppers, 31 and a huge chunk of Vornado Realty Trust, which put himon its board.32 
Buffett had a set of legacy shareholders at Berkshire Hathaway who understood his investingapproach and would never question his judgment. Thus he had earned the luxury of ignoringMr. Market, which had marked down the value of his portfolio to a fire-sale price. Others were not so lucky. Bill Ruane¡¯s Sequoia Fund was headed for a terrible year, and Ruane¡¯s main financial backer, Bob Malott, was apparently unhappy. Malott knew Ruane fromHarvard and they had shared an apartment when Ruane was workingat Kidder, Peabody in New York. But Malott was sold on Buffett¡¯s approach and track record; he asked for Buffett¡¯s help with the pension fund of FMC Corporation, the company he now headed. So Buffett went to San Diego and spent several days interviewinginvestment managers and explaininghis thinkingto FMC¡¯s investment people. In the process, he converted them to Grahamites with what would eventually become powerful results. At first he said no to the request of managingthe portfolio himself¡ªthen eventually agreed 
to manage a portion.33 Alongwith his acceptance, however, he gave a warning: FMC would come last among his priorities, after Berkshire and Diversified, and Warren and Susie Buffett. The canny Malott jumped at the opportunity anyway, not mistakingthe larger point: That Buffett was willingto do it at all meant that he 
34 
would do it well. 
*** 
Between his duties at FMC, Vornado, Blue Chip, and Wesco, and regular trips to New York, Buffett was now travelingmuch of the time. He was also busy courtingKatharine Grahamand had made such a good impression on her that she began to callhimfor advice. Susie made the rounds of Omaha, busy with the board of the Urban League, still givingout her scholarships, and takingon her latest crusade, the Future 
CentralCommittee, which was tryingto save her alma mater, Central High School, fromforced busing.35 
As 1973 progressed, even Hamilton the dogmust have noticed the silence and emptiness descendingon the 
Buffetts¡¯ crazy, noisy home.36 Howie was two hundred and seventy-five miles away from Omaha at Augustana College. Susie Jr., unhappy with Lincoln, had transferred to the University of California, Irvine, where she was majoringin criminaljustice.37 Peter, the child who had never required attention, was now a 
sophomore in high school. Thinkingof movingto California, Susie had taken himto look at schools in Orange County. They stayed in Omaha, however, and now Peter spent much of his time in the basement, where Susie, who had gotten himinterested in photography, had built hima darkroom.38 
Often now Susie stayed up late at night alone, listeningto music that transported her to some different place.39 She loved the jazz guitar of Wes Montgomery and great soul music, like the Temptations, who sang of a world in which it was men who felt all the longing.40 She read books like I Know Why the Caged Bird 
Sings, Maya Angelou¡¯s autobiographical account of overcomingthe forces of racism, sexual abuse, and repression that made her early years a prison. ¡°The idea of beingconfined in a place not of your choosingran deep for her,¡± Peter says¡ªnot surprisingafter her childhood shut away in a sickroom, and growingup with a sister who was disciplined by beinglocked in a closet. Susie longed for romance, but now knew that she and Milt were never goingto get married. Nevertheless, she could not bringherself to give up her connection to Milt. 
She was also spendingmore time with her tennis crowd of younger people at Dewey Park. One, John McCabe, a coach with a subdued personality, a sadness somewhat like her own, and a certain fragility, resembled most of her other lonelyhearts, but she seemed particularly drawn to him.41 Now that Susie had 
reasons to be away fromthe house most of the time, the hubbub began to dim, her hangers-on hungout with Susie elsewhere, and the rhythmof the house slowed from its all-day carnival atmosphere. Peter, never much attuned to his parents¡¯ lives, noticed only the growingsilence, not its cause. When he got home fromschool, 
he petted Hamilton, made somethingfor himself for dinner, and headed downstairs to the darkroom.42 
Warren¡¯s conception of his marriage had never changed, even though the marriage itself was changing inexorably. When he was home, Susie stillseemed just as devoted to him as ever. He saw how active and busy she was and wanted her to be fulfilled, as longas she continued to take care of him¡ªwhich he assumed was fulfillingto her. As far as he knew, the balancingact that had always worked for themstill did. 
*** 
The ¡°retired¡± Warren was investingat fullthrottle ahead in late 1973, in the midst of a market swoon. Between Cap Cities and the Washington Post and his growingfriendship with Kay Graham, his interest in media over the past few years had permutated into a deep understandingof the subject at all levels. One night at dinner in Laguna Beach, he and Carol Loomis started strafingBuffett¡¯s friend Dick Holland, who worked in advertising, with questions about the advertisingbusiness. ¡°Whenever he did that,¡± Holland recalls, ¡°I always knew somethingwas cooking.¡± The four of them talked business while Susie and Mary Holland, in purdah, entertained themselves. Sure enough, as a secondary way to play media, Buffett got on the phone to his trader and plunked down almost $3 million for the stocks of advertisingagencies Interpublic, J. Walter Thompson, and Ogilvy & Mather, stocks so distressed he paid less than three times their earnings. 
While he was buying, however, most of the stocks that Buffett had accumulated were faltering. As 1974 began, stocks for which he had paid $50 million had lost a quarter of their value. Berkshire, too, started to slide, down to $64 per share. Some of the former partners who had kept the stock began to worry about whether they had made a mistake. 
Buffett saw it just the opposite way. He wanted to buy more Berkshire and Blue Chip. But ¡°I¡¯d run out of gas. I had used all the $16 million of cash I got out of the partnership to buy stock in Berkshire and Blue Chip. So all of a sudden I woke up one day and had no money at all. I was getting $50,000 a year salary 
43 
from Berkshire Hathaway and some fees from FMC. But I had to start my personal net worth over again from zero.¡± 
He was now very, very rich but cash-poor. The companies he controlled, especially Berkshire Hathaway, had 
cash to buy stocks, however. To move some of Berkshire¡¯s money to Diversified, Buffett set up a reinsurance company¡ªa company that insures other insurers44¡ªin Diversified. This company, Reinsurance Corp. of Nebraska, agreed to take part of National Indemnity¡¯s business, receivingpremiums and coveringlosses. Because National Indemnity was so profitable and generated so much ¡°float¡±¡ªpremiums paid ahead of claims, i.e., cash¡ªsendingpart of its business to Diversified was like sendinga pipeline into a river of money. 
As time passed, it would give Diversified millions more dollars to invest.45 
Buffett began to buy stocks for Diversified. Principally he followed the Wattles model and bought stock in Blue Chip and Berkshire Hathaway. Soon, Diversified owned ten percent of Berkshire. It was almost as though Berkshire was buyingback its own stock¡ªbut not quite. Diversified¡¯s owners and Berkshire¡¯s weren¡¯t the same. Buffett still forbade his friends to buy Berkshire¡ªwhereas he, Munger, and Gottesman 
were partners in Diversified.46 
At the time, even though the three did each other business favors and swapped stock ideas on occasion, their interests didn¡¯t necessarily align. Asked later under oath if he was Buffett¡¯s ¡°alter ego,¡± Munger said no. He acknowledged similar mannerisms and ways of speech. But ¡°I¡¯ve never chosen a role of beinga junior 
partner,¡± he said. ¡°I like the idea of havinga sphere of activity¡± of my own. 47 On one occasion, Munger said, he had found a block of Blue Chip stock that he and Gottesman wanted to buy for Diversified. Buffett wanted to take the block away from themand buy it for Berkshire Hathaway. After ¡°a discussion¡±¡ªclearly 
about who needed it more¡ªthe combined strength of Munger and Gottesman had somehow overpowered Buffett, and Diversified got the stock.48 At least that way they kept a little share. 
Still, Buffett did own forty-three percent of Diversified, so its purchases of Berkshire had added almost five percent to his personalownership. Buyingthrough Diversified was particularly attractive in that it tended not to ratchet up Berkshire¡¯s stock price. Hardly anybody was payingattention.49 
But why did he want it at all? 
¡°Berkshire was not worth more than forty bucks as a business. You couldn¡¯t have sold the textile mills and insurance business for more. And half the money was in a lousy business, I mean a really lousy business: twenty bucks a share of the forty bucks. And I didn¡¯t know what I was going to do, I literally didn¡¯t. I mean, I was rich enough already. But in effect, I was betting that I could do something. I was betting on myself. And though it sounds egotistical, anybody who might have thought it was worth more than forty bucks was purely paying for me. Because the company was not worth that.¡± 
He didn¡¯t know what he was goingto do, except invest. Verne McKenzie, who had returned fromNew Bedford to become Berkshire¡¯s controller, thought that to Buffett, it simply ¡°looked like an interestinggame. Allhe was doingwas solidifyinghis control.¡± That he was, and doingso in the manner in which he always approached investing¡ªas a collector, one who bought in secrecy to avoid tippingoff other bargain hunters. But as the chairman of Berkshire Hathaway and Diversified, he was once again mostly buyingfromsellers who had been his former partners. Although perfectly legal, it was not exactly sportingconduct. But their willingness to sell, in his mind, ended his special obligation to them. 
Buffett had also been buyingBlue Chip Stamps allalong, though so far, Blue Chip had remained primarily Munger¡¯s province. It owned the best of the businesses, however, namely See¡¯s. Now Buffett began to pursue Blue Chip stock like a great white shark after a well-fed seal. Since he had far greater financial resources, Buffett¡¯s ownership percentage of Blue Chip quickly surpassed the combined interest of his partners in that stock, Munger and Rick Guerin¡ªMunger¡¯s associate fromthe Pacific Coast Stock Exchange, who now ran an investment partnership of his own. 
Buffett bought Blue Chip wherever he could get it. He bought from Blue Chip¡¯s management and from other directors. One of these, Z. Wayne Griffin, asked $10.25 to Buffett¡¯s bid of $10. Reachingan impasse on the phone, Buffett recalls that Griffin suggested they flip a coin. He was taken aback by Griffin¡¯s willingness to do this, sight unseen. From that fact alone, Buffett realized not only that Griffin trusted him, but that he had already Buffetted himself. Griffin called it heads. Obviously, if he made such a bet, he was willingto take the ten bucks, which he did. 
Buffett¡¯s accumulation of allthese stocks, however, differed fromhis buyingin the era of cheap cigar butts. Two large question marks hungover Blue Chip, Diversified, and Berkshire. As Buffett solidified control, all that money pouringin to both Berkshire and Diversified from the insurance business would have to be put to good use. And the bet on Blue Chip¡¯s legal problems would have to work out. 
By year-end 1973, Blue Chip had settled eleven lawsuits.50 All that remained was the Justice Department¡¯s rulingthat it divest one-third of its business. That would not be easy because ¡°the President¡¯s freeze on food prices is another knee in the groin for us,¡± Don Koeppel wrote. ¡°The grocers are screaming, predictinghuge 
losses, bankruptcy in some cases.¡±51 Inflation had run rampant, President Nixon had frozen prices on commodities to try to halt it, and commerce had entered a new era of tryingto match risingcosts to frozen consumer prices. 
The stamp business was dead, but Buffett, the implacable acquirer, had his stock. After this series of trading gyrations, Blue Chip had Wattled its way into the set of Russian dolls. ¡°It was the same principle,¡± Buffett says. Includingallthe pockets in which he had bought shares indirectly, he owned more than forty percent of Berkshire and more than twenty-five percent of Blue Chip Stamps. Even though these stocks traded at depressed prices, he could fund more deals and buy more stocks because all of the dolls had their own self-chargingbatteries, ¡°float,¡± cash that could be invested in advance of payingclaims. This innovation dramatically improved the deal. 
The operatingbusinesses themselves had also improved since the dismaldays of windmills and fire maps. Alongwith See¡¯s, Berkshire owned not only the whoppingfloat-generator NationalIndemnity but also a clutch of little insurance companies that Buffett hoped would eventually turn into smallpower-houses, even though he was strugglingto whip theminto shape. Meanwhile, the deadweight of Hochschild-Kohn had disappeared and Buffett kept shrinkingthe textile mills. 
But in the bigger picture, what Berkshire, Diversified, and Blue Chip really possessed were two things. The first was the homeostatic business model¡ªthe idea of graftingfloat onto a holdingcompany so that it could respond internally to the changingenvironment. The second was the power of compounding, as float and investments doubled and redoubled over time. 
The novelty and strength of Buffett¡¯s modelcannot be overstated. Nothingelse like it existed, or would for years to come. ¡°That was the golden period of textbook capital allocation,¡± he says. 
The timingwas stupendous. Capitalfromthe insurance companies was pouringinto Berkshire and DRC at the same time that the market was collapsing, the environment that Buffett liked best. While he had not yet decided exactly what to do with the collective enterprise he had built by the end of 1974, of two things he was certain. One was the business model¡¯s power, and the other his skillin usingit. Above all, he had confidence in himself. 
¡°Always,¡± he says. ¡°Always.¡± 
39 
TheGiant 
Omaha and Los Angeles . 1973¨C1976 
Howard Buffett was one of those rare people who prospered in the aftermath of the 1929 stock market 
crash. Now his son¡¯s star was risingduringthe second great crash of the century.1 But the world had changed; stardom, even in business, now meant fame. Buffett had closed his partnership duringa media explosion in the United States in which cable had transformed television, newspaper companies were going public, and advertisingwas stillin a golden age of sellingto a monolithic audience in which virtually the whole nation sat down together on Tuesday nights and watched Happy Days. 
Buffett had entered the media world as an investor drawn to the business by a naturalaffinity. But as he embarked on a new, post-partnership phase of life, through the publicity he got fromthe Forbes story in 1969 and then fromthe Supermoney profile, he began to enjoy the fruit of the discreet use of profile-raisingpress. Now he was a subject of media interest, not just a media investor; and no less a personage than Katharine Graham was payinghimattention and takinghim seriously, which had brought himinto the orbit of one of the most important newspapers in the United States. 
As was her habit with powerfulmen, Grahamreached out to himfor help. Buffett needed little encouragement. 
¡°The first time she was going to speak to the New York Society of Security Analysts, I went over there to her apartment in New York on a Sunday morning to help her write her speech. She was a basket case. She was terrified that all these men were going to be there and she was going to have to stand up in front of them. 
Public speaking was something that was very hard for her always. The funny thing is, she had a great sense of humor, she was smart, but she tended to freeze in front of a crowd. Particularly if she thought they were going to question her about numbers.¡± 
As Robert Redford had said in an interview after first meetingher to discuss the Watergate movie All the 
President¡¯s Men, Graham had a ¡°tight-jawed, blue-blooded¡± quality that demanded that her privacy not be invaded. Why, therefore, Redford asked himself, ¡°did she keep makingspeeches and acceptingawards?¡±2 ¡ªparticularly since it terrified her to do it. 
Buffett sat down in the livingroomof Graham¡¯s large apartment situated on an upper floor of the modern UN Plaza, overlookingNew York City¡¯s East River. Surrounded by Asian art and antiques fromAgnes Meyer¡¯s collection, they started to work. 
¡°She kept imagining these questions they were going to ask, like how much are you paying for your newsprint per ton? She thought it was a quiz. And I said it doesn¡¯t make any difference. You¡¯re paying what other people are paying for newsprint, so what? But that was a big thing. She was just convinced. I kept trying to get her away from trying to remember facts. Just have a theme.¡± Graham wanted to say that good journalismmakes good profits. Buffett snorted to himself over this notion and refocused her. ¡°You know, good journalism is not inconsistent with good profits, or something like that. The hell with all the other stuff. I just tried to convince her that she was a hell of a lot smarter than all those dumb males that were out there. That¡¯s what really sort of bonded us initially.¡± 
In an ironic turnabout, Buffett became Kay Graham¡¯s personal Dale Carnegie instructor. He, of allpeople, could sympathize with someone who tended to freeze in front of a crowd. Moreover, thanks to Susie¡¯s gentle tutelage over the years, he had learned a subtler way of dealingwith people. He knew how to anticipate their reactions and to phrase things in a nonthreateningway. His letters, which had always been self-conscious, were now more deftly worded and empathetic. He had learned to listen and show interest in other people and to converse on topics other than stocks. It helped that he was genuinely fascinated by Graham. 
After they finished preparingand rehearsing, Graham said she was goingto a party at the Agnellis¡¯ that night. ¡°You might find the sightseeingentertaining,¡± she said. ¡°Why don¡¯t you come with me?¡± Buffett always stressed how uncomfortable and out-of-place he felt at glamorous events and how uninterested he was in attendingthem. So he told Grahamthat, yes, he would go. That eveninghe left his room at the Plaza to pick up Graham and ride to the Upper East Side. 
¡°We were this very improbable couple¡ªher mid-fifties, me early forties, and we got to this apartment, which was more than an apartment, it was like a triplex, it was huge. And everybody was bowing and scraping to Kay. There was every character from the party scene in the film La Dolce Vita. I was the required walk-on, the potted plant. You wanted it to go in slow motion so you could see everything. Gianni Agnelli, the head of Fiat, and his wife, Marella, weren¡¯t there. It was almost like a costume party, except it wasn¡¯t.¡± 
Buffett returned to Omaha afterward havingseen a new side of Graham. As he continued gettingto know her on a personal level, he saw her as a bundle of paradoxes. ¡°Fearful but willful. Patrician but democratic. Wounded by the people she cared most about.¡± He was surprised how much she still talked about her former husband a decade after his suicide. 
¡°When you first met her, she would often get off on the subject of Phil very quickly, almost like Charlie getting off on a subject. And she described him in terms that were sort of hard to believe, considering how badly he treated her. But after I got to know her better, she told me everything about him and the relationship. She had found it impossible to conceive of herself as being in the same league as him. She felt she was a fraud, almost, even pretending to be in the same room with him. They used to hang out a lot with the Kennedys, and she just felt that she shouldn¡¯t be there. Anything he said was funny, anything he did was right. When he used to chop up the children right in front of her, she wouldn¡¯t stop him¡ªI mean, the whole thing.¡± 
That he and Graham¡ªwho showed the aftereffects of an upbringingby a cruel, neglectful mother and years of abuse by a sadistic husband with untreated bipolar disorder¡ªwould be mutually attracted seems almost a foregone conclusion given Buffett¡¯s own childhood experiences. He knew how to behave around her in a way that wasn¡¯t threatening. By the springof 1974, she began to switch her allegiance fromher other advisers to him. In turn, he seized the chance to tutor the CEO of the Washington Post Company about business as if he had been waitingto play Pygmalion all his life:his very own Eliza Doolittle. More patient than Henry Higgins, he coached her gently and sent helpful, interestingarticles to Kay and to her son Don. 
As Buffett¡¯s influence grew stronger, Grahamnoticed that the words ¡°Warren says¡± brought shudders from 
some of her board members.3 But Buffett himself was hopingto be invited onto that board. When Tom Murphy had approached himto join the Cap Cities board, Buffett told himno, he was holdingout for the Post.4 Murphy dutifully spilled this news to Graham, who ¡°felt dense¡± for not havingfigured it out herself.5 
Susie thought that instead of takingon more business responsibilities, her husband should sell some of their stock and use it for a higher cause. Ridingwith him in a taxi in Washington, D.C., she pointed out philanthropist Stewart Mott, who was runningthe Stewart R. Mott Charitable Trust, which gave money to peace, arms control, and population and family-planningcauses. The Buffetts were now richer than Mott, who had started with $25 million. ¡°Why don¡¯t you quit?¡± Susie said. ¡°Stewart Mott is doingall these other things now and he doesn¡¯t have to work every day.¡± But Warren was incapable of quitting; he fellback on his philosophy that $50 million today would be worth $500 million someday. Nonetheless, he was not entirely disengaged fromhis family nor insensitive to his wife. He had picked up some vibrations fromSusie, a sense that she wanted more fromher life. With Peter movingalongin high school, Warren told her, ¡°Susie, you¡¯re like someone who has lost his job after twenty-three years. Now what are you goingto do?¡± 
PhotoInsertTwo 

Image24 
In1945,WarrenandLouBattistone¡°lustedafter¡±Abbye¡°Pudgy¡±Stockton,thepioneerinwomen¡¯s weight-lifting. 

Image25 
Warrensangandplayedtheukuleleeverymorningbeforeworkatanemployee¡°peprally¡±inthe basementofJCPenney¡¯s,wherehesoldmenswearandmen¡¯sfurnishingsin1949. 

Image26 
WarrenpretendstopickthepocketofhisfraternitybrotherLennyFarinain1948. 

Image27 
In1951,WarrendatedVanitaMaeBrown,whowas¡°PrincessNebraska¡±inthe1949NationalCherry BlossomFestival,aswellasMissNebraska1949. 

Image28 
SusanThompsonandWarrenBuffettbeamingattheirwedding,April19,1952. 

Image29 
SusieThompsonasapreschooler. 

Image30 
Warrenposingasaprisoneronhishoneymoon,April1952. 

Image31 
AnundatedphotographofGraham-NewmanpartnersJeromeNewmanandBenjaminGraham. 

Image32 
Warrenteachingoneofhisearlyinvestingclasses,probablySoundInvestinginStocks,attheUniversity ofOmaha,1950s. 

Image33 
SusieBuffettinNewYorkCity,holdingdaughterSusieJr.duringavisitwithBenandEsteyGraham. EsteyisholdingtheBuffetts¡¯newbaby,HowardGrahamBuffett. 

Image34 
Susiewith,clockwise,Peter,Howie,andSusieJr.,inthemid-1960s. 

Image35 
CharlieMungerasababyinhisfatherAlMunger¡¯sarms,alreadywearinghistrademarkskeptical expression. 

Image36 
BuffettandhispartnerCharlieMungerinthe1980s.Buffettcallsthem¡°Siamesetwins,practically.¡± 

Image37 
Firstmeetingofthe¡±GrahamGroup¡±attheHoteldelCoronadoinSanDiego,1968.Lefttoright: Buffett,RobertBoorstin(afriendofGraham¡¯s),BenGraham,David¡°Sandy¡±Gottesman,TomKnapp, CharlieMunger,JackAlexander,HenryBrandt,WalterSchloss,MarshallWeinberg,BuddyFox(in profile),andBillRuane.RoyTollestookthephotographandFredStanbackcouldnotattend. 

Image38 
TheBuffettsinthemid-1970s.Lefttoright,Howie(holdingHamilton),Susie,Peter(behindSusie), Warren,SusieJr. 

Image39 
SusieBuffettglowsinsequinsbeforeoneofhersingingperformancesatOmaha¡¯sFrenchCaf¨¦,shortly beforeshemovedtoSanFrancisco. 

Image40 
TheBuffettscelebratethePulitzerPrizeawardedtotheSunNewspapersaftertheBoysTownexpos¨¦. 

Image41 
SusieBuffettJr.atherNovember1983weddingtoAllenGreenberg,wholaterbecameexecutivedirector oftheBuffettFoundation. 

Image42 BuffettandWashingtonPostpublisherKayGrahambeganaclose,lifelongfriendshipin1973. 

Image43 
AstridMenksin1974,age28.FouryearslaterSusieBuffettencouragedhertotakecareofWarren,and sheendedupmovinginwithhim. 

Image44 
RussianimmigrantRoseBlumkinovercamehardshiptobuildthelargestfurniturestoreinNorth America.Sheworkeduntilage103,abenchmarkWarrenoftencitesforhimself. 

Image45 
Buffettathomeinhiskitchen,wearingafavoritethreadbaresweater. 

Image46 
BuffettplayingbridgewithGeorgeBurnsin1991,atBurns¡¯s95birthdayattheHillcrestCountryClubin LosAngeles.Notshown:CharlieMungerandasignreading:¡°Nosmokingbyanyoneunder95.¡± 

Image47 
ThrowingoutthefirstpitchbeforetheOmahaRoyals¡¯homeopener,April11,2003. 
The answer, she said, was sing. Her nephew Billy Rogers had made her some instrumental guitar tracks so that she could tape herself and listen to her performances. Rogers had been playingjazzguitar at Mr. Toad¡¯s, SpaghettiWorks, and other clubs in Omaha, and alongwith him, Susie was now a familiar face in the local music scene. But when she first started practicing, ¡°I was scared, really scared,¡± she said. ¡°I was bad.¡± The last time she had performed in public was ten years before at a charity benefit at Central High. So she got 
coachingand worked on contemporary love songs and ballads. Susie first debuted as a chanteuse that July, before a friendly audience at a private party at Emerald Bay. ¡°People seemed to like it pretty well,¡± she said.6 And it thrilled her husband to see his friends applaudinghis wife¡¯s talent. 
*** 
While the Buffetts were in Emerald Bay that summer, Warren invited Grahamfor a visit in connection with a trip she was makingto speak to an analysts¡¯ meetingin Los Angeles. Sensingthat Graham was goingto talk to him about joiningthe Post board, Buffett had been dancingaround his office at Kiewit Plaza for days 
ahead of time, happy and excited as a kid on Christmas Eve.7 
The Buffetts¡¯ house at Emerald Bay, down a steep driveway set well back fromthe beach, still had the feelingof a modest rental house; it lacked most of the personal touches that spoke of a family. Warren had no sense of what kind of impression the place might make on Graham, who owned several enormous, impeccably decorated and maintained mansions, includingthe farmat Glen Welby and a vast, shingle-style waterfront estate on Martha¡¯s Vineyard. 
Apparently, however, he must have impressed upon his wife that they would have to make an unusualeffort for Graham. The first morningafter Kay arrived, Susie rose at an unheard-of hour and feigned domesticity: She cooked a full breakfast for the three of them, which both of the Buffetts pretended to eat. Her husband spent the rest of the day wrapped up in Graham, talkingto her about newspapers, journalism, politics, and bringingup every opportunity for her to invite himon the board. 
At some point, he put down his newspapers, donned a bathingsuit purchased specially for the occasion, picked up a brand-new beach umbrella bought in Graham¡¯s honor, and left the house with Grahamto walk the hundred or so yards down a steep path to the shore to join the family. Previously, his attitude toward the ocean had been: ¡°I think having the ocean nearby is an attractive feature, and fun to listen to at night, and all that kind of stuff. But actually getting in it¡ªI feel I¡¯ll save that for my old age.¡± But now, after sittingon the sand for a bit, lookingat the water, he waded gamely into the Pacific. By all reports, Susie and the Buffett kids ¡°went into convulsions of laughter¡± at the odd sight. 
What Susie thought about this extraordinary gesture is not known. But Warren¡¯s explanation of it is on record: ¡°Only for Kay,¡± he says. ¡°Only for Kay.¡± 
On Sunday morning, they dropped their company manners and Susie sleepwalked through cookingbacon and eggs for Graham, eatingnothingherself, while Warren sat nearby spooningchocolate Ovaltine froma jar.8 After breakfast, he and Graham resumed their t¨ºte-¨¤-t¨ºte. At some point, Grahamtold himthat she wanted him to join her board but was waitingfor the right time. She knew that some of her board members, such as Andr¨¦ Meyer, would not welcome Buffett. But he asked, ¡°When is the right time?¡± thus forcingher to make up her mind. And so in short order it was done; they agreed that Buffett would join the board of the Washington Post Company. He was elated. 
That afternoon, Buffett left his family at Emerald Bay and drove Grahamto the Los Angeles airport. ¡°On the way, all of a sudden, she looked at me like a three-year-old kid. Her voice changed, and her eyes, and she said, basically pleading, ¡®Just be gentle with me, please don¡¯t ever assault me.¡¯ I learned later that Phil and some people at the paper, to get their own ends or for sheer enjoyment, would push her buttons just to watch her fall apart. It was cruel on the part of Phil; it was manipulative on the part of the rest. It was very easy to do; the button still worked.¡± 
At summer¡¯s end, on September 11, 1974, Buffett officially joined the board, which catapulted himfroma star investment manager fromOmaha to official adviser at one of the most important media companies in the world. Even at that first meetinghe could see that Graham had a habit of pleadingwith the board for help. Buffett thought, This won¡¯t do. You can¡¯t put yourself in that position as a CEO. But he didn¡¯t yet know her well enough to say anything. Instead, he educated himself about the Post board, which was full of many prominent and influential people, and began to tiptoe his way through the powerful, jockeyingmen who were used to dominatingGraham. He was a quiet board member, however, and used his skills behind the scenes. 
Buffett at the time was preoccupied with far more than just Kay Graham and the Washington Post. The market, which investors had expected to rally in 1974, instead was in the fullthroes of collapse. Pension-fund managers had cut back their stock purchases by more than eighty percent. Berkshire¡¯s own portfolio looked as though someone had given it a severe hedge trimming, shearingoff nearly one-third in the second Great Crash, the kind that comes alongonly a few times in a century. 
Munger had kept his partnership open after Buffett had shuttered his. Now its value was plunging. His performance had always been more volatile¡ªin both directions¡ªthan the market¡¯s. For the past couple of years he had managed decent though unspectacular returns. But by 1974 Munger found himself in trouble, 
his partners losingnearly half of their money. 9 Like Ben Grahamhalf a century earlier, he felt obliged to make their money back. 
¡°If you¡¯re put together properly, you have a fiduciary gene like Warren and me,¡± he says, ¡°and if you¡¯ve told people, ¡®I think I can get you extraordinary results,¡¯ then you really hate the idea of not deliveringfor them.¡± 
As for himself, ¡°Certainly the quoted value of my capitalwent down. I didn¡¯t like it, but just think about how many years could go by¡ªwhat difference does it make at the end whether I have X dollars, or X minus Y? The only thingthat bothered me was that I knew how hard it was on the partners. That was what killed 
me¡ªthe fiduciary aspect of my position.¡±10 
Munger stillhad about twenty-eight limited partners, includingsome family trusts. To earn back losses of half his capital, he would have to more than double the remainingstake. The value of Blue Chip Stamps would have a significant bearingon whether he could accomplish that. 
Bill Ruane¡¯s Sequoia Fund was also in trouble. It had started with $50 million fromBuffett¡¯s former partners and invested its money well by takinglarge positions in undervalued stocks like TomMurphy¡¯s CapitalCities Communications. This was not the kind of stock that money managers who had piled into glamour television and electronics stocks a few years earlier were buyingnow. They had galloped all at the same time straight 
the other way, into the arms of the ¡°Nifty Fifty,¡± a small group of the largest, best-known companies.11 
¡°In this business,¡± Ruane said, ¡°you have the innovators, the imitators, and the swarmingincompetents.¡± The imitators and the swarmingincompetents were now at the wheel, and the stocks that Ruane and his partner Rick Cunniff had bought in 1970 had been cut in half. Compoundingtheir problems, they had bought a seat 
on the New York Stock Exchange just before prices for seats fell over a cliff.12 The timingof Sequoia¡¯s openingwas obviously inauspicious¡ªRuane had agreed to start up just as Buffett was shuttingdown due to lack of opportunities. Sequoia had underperformed the market every year¡ªcumulatively by a dramatic 
amount.13 The Sequoia Fund¡¯s worst year yet was 1973; it had lost twenty-five percent, compared to the market¡¯s loss of fifteen percent. It was on its way to another terrible year in 1974. Ruane¡¯s largest backer, Bob Malott, was incensed. He was already known as a ¡°ballbuster¡± around the halls of Ruane, Cunniff for his habit of callingto complain about minor discrepancies in his family¡¯s accounts. Now, he berated Ruane for buyinga seat on the exchange and for his poor performance with such persistence that Ruane feared he 
would pull his capital out of the firm.14 Buffett, however, remained serene in the knowledge that Mr. Market¡¯s opinion of a stock¡¯s price at any time had no bearingon its intrinsic value. He knew which stocks Ruane and his partners had bought and was confident that they had made good decisions. 
If not exactly an ego booster, because of the snooty staff, Buffett¡¯s 1969 meetingof the Grahamites at the Colony Club had at least provided mutualsupport in a challengingmarket. Since then Buffett had named them the GrahamGroup; Ed Anderson had planned the third outingin Williamsburg; Charlie Munger the fourth in Carmel, California. In 1971, Buffett made the meetings biennial. Out of loyalty, he let Ruane invite Malott¡ªa favor normally verboten¡ªand Malott and his wife, Ibby, became members for the next meetingin Sun Valley in 1973, planned by Rick Guerin. 
Malott, mightily impressed by the whole affair, stayed in Ruane¡¯s fold, even though his complaints continued at a frequency and volume that stillmade Ruane fear his defection. By the end of 1974, however, while the market was down by more than twenty-five percent, the Sequoia Fund had at least managed to produce a smaller loss than the market¡¯s. 
Nonetheless, the market¡¯s cumulative tollon the Sequoia Fund was such that Henry Brandt and John Loomis, Carol¡¯s husband, both of whom had gone to work there, feared the worst and cast off fromwhat seemed a sinkingship.15 
Forbes captured Buffett¡¯s attitude in an interview that November, which opened with a juicy quote:Asked 
how he felt about the market, ¡°Like an over-sexed man in a harem,¡± Buffett replied. ¡°This is the time to start investing.¡±16 He went on to say, ¡°This is the first time I can remember that you could buy Phil Fisher [growth] stocks at Ben Graham[cigar butt] prices.¡± He felt this was the most significant statement that he could make, but Forbes didn¡¯t include it; a generalaudience wouldn¡¯t understand the references to Fisher 
and Graham.17 When Forbes asked for specific stock ideas, instead of mentioningwhat he was buyingor had bought, Buffett turned impish and did one of his little experiments to see how well the reporter had researched himvia other Forbes articles. ¡°A water company is pretty simple,¡± he said, addingthat Blue Chip owned five percent of¡­San Jose Water Works. The reporter took the bait; San Jose Water Works went in the story with no reference to the earlier piece insinuatinghe¡¯d bought it usinginsider information. 
But despite his enthusiasmfor the market so far in 1974, he had invested at a trickle, and mostly moved money around into Studebaker-Worthington, Handy & Harman, Harte-Hanks Newspapers, and Multimedia, Inc., and added to his ColdwellBanker position. He bumped up a few of his other shareholdings by ten or twenty percent. He had also bought 100,000 shares of Blue Chip fromRick Guerin. ¡°He sold me at five bucks because he was getting squeezed,¡± Buffett says. ¡°That was a brutal period.¡± 
The ¡°harem¡± comment had a double meaning:While it was, indeed, the time to start investing, Buffett, for the most part, could look but not touch. One of National Indemnity¡¯s business partners, an aviation broker, had run amok, sellingmoney-losingaviation-insurance policies. The company had tried to stop the agent by 
revokingits authority but for several months was unable to shut it down.18 The accountingrecords were a shambles and the losses were unclear. National Indemnity had no idea how high the billfor the ¡°Omniaffair¡± would run, but worst-case estimates ran as high as tens of millions of dollars. The hope was that they were 
much less, because National Indemnity did not have tens of millions. Buffett was sweating.19 
Within a couple of months¡ªby early 1975¡ªhis problems compounded monumentally. Chuck Rickershauser, a partner from Munger¡¯s law firm, now renamed Munger, Tolles & Rickershauser, called himand Munger to say that the Securities and Exchange Commission was consideringpressingcharges against them for violating securities laws. What had seemed like a brewingbut manageable problemhad now exploded into a full-scale emergency. 
Rickershauser had first started doinglegalwork for Buffett and Munger duringthe See¡¯s transaction. More recently he had been fightinga rear-guard action, ever since an SEC staff lawyer had called himand said he had some questions. Under the assumption that the matter was routine, Rickershauser had directed the man to Verne McKenzie, Berkshire¡¯s controller. 
When McKenzie¡¯s phone rangin Nebraska, he picked it up to find the head of the SEC¡¯s Enforcement Division, Stanley Sporkin, the much-feared ¡°tough cop¡± of the business world, on the other end of the line. Sporkin looked as though he spent his evenings hunched droopy-eyed under a desk lamp, personally drafting the charges against large corporations that for the first time in American history had frightened a remarkable 
number of theminto settlingwith the SEC without ever settingfoot in court.20 On the phone, he interrogated McKenzie on a wide range of subjects, fromWesco to Blue Chip to Berkshire and beyond. His tone was not friendly, but this, McKenzie had assumed, was simply his modus operandi. On the other hand, McKenzie did 
get the impression that Sporkin thought if you were rich, you must have done somethingwrong.21 
When Rickershauser heard that Sporkin, rather than a staff lawyer, had personally called and grilled McKenzie at length, he nearly had a heart attack. Sporkin¡¯s battingaverage had made his jowly profile amongthe most recognizable in American business. In a practicalsense he had more power than his boss, the chairman of the SEC. 
What seemed to have drawn the SEC¡¯s attention was a project of nearly two years in which Buffett and Munger were tryingto delicately untangle the many strands of spaghettithat connected the several companies they owned. Their first step had been to try to merge Diversified, the least essential piece, into Berkshire Hathaway. By 1973, Diversified had become little more than a vehicle for buyingBerkshire and Blue Chip stock. But the Securities and Exchange Commission¡ªwhose approvalwas required¡ªhad delayed the Diversified deal. Munger had told Buffett that this was not anythingserious. He directed Rickershauser to ¡°invite anyone in the SEC¡± who had questions to call him directly, ¡°if this willexpedite his work and 
clearance of our papers.¡±22 
Instead, over the next eighteen months, the SEC staff seemed to have nosed around lookingat Blue Chip Stamps and other investments; it concluded that Buffett and Munger had smashed up the Wesco¨CSanta Barbara deal deliberately by offeringa high price for a quarter of the stock for the purpose of takingover the rest. At least, that must have been how it looked to Santa Barbara, for it had apparently turned in Blue Chip 
to the SEC.23 
For the first time they allrealized that Blue Chip was in trouble.24 No sooner had Buffett achieved the glory of joiningthe Post board than his and Munger¡¯s need for legal services was about to grow with stunning rapidity. Rickershauser, who already knew what it was like to work with Buffett, had once explained to a 
colleague that ¡°The sun is nice and warm, but you don¡¯t want to get too close to it.¡±25 He would spend the next couple of years testingwhat could be called Rickershauser¡¯s Law of Thermodynamics. 
In February 1975, the SEC issued subpoenas and launched a full-blown investigation of Blue Chip¡¯s purchase of Wesco: ¡°In the Matter of Blue Chip Stamps, Berkshire Hathaway Incorporated, Warren Buffet [sic], HO-784.¡± The commission staff speculated that Buffett and Munger had committed fraud: ¡°Blue Chip, Berkshire, Buffet [sic], singly or in concert with others¡­may have engaged in acts which have, directly or indirectly, operated as a device, scheme, or artifice to defraud; or included an untrue statement of a material fact or omitted¡­¡± 
The commission¡¯s lawyers zeroed in on a theory that Blue Chip had planned fromthe beginningto take over 
Wesco Financial but had not disclosed that fact; that Blue Chip¡¯s purchases of stock after the Santa Barbara deal dissolved must have been ¡°tender offers¡± that were never registered with the SEC.26 This latter charge was most serious and carried with it the risk that the SEC would file, with great fanfare and publicity, civil fraud charges not only against Blue Chip but also against Buffett and Munger personally. 
In consideringaction against a target, Sporkin had a choice. He could prosecute or settle. A settlement was a way of allowingthe target to say sorry without havingto officially admit guilt; it neither consented to nor denied the charge of fraud but agreed to accept a penalty. And in agreeingto a settlement, the SEC could also choose whether to name the individuals involved or simply to make a dealwith the company itself without naminganybody. Beingnamed in a settlement might not be the literal end of someone¡¯s career, but there would be no elephant-bumpingafterward. Havingso recently been elevated into the high and mighty through Supermoney and Forbes and the board of the Washington Post, Buffett began to fight desperately to save his reputation. 
Instead, the investigation widened. Under subpoena, Buffett had to open his files¡ªwhich, naturally, represented a huge and comprehensive collection of documents, just as huge and comprehensive as everythinghe had ever collected. In violation of his cherished privacy, lawyers fromMunger, Tolles sifted out trade tickets, information about recent stock purchases, memos to bankers, letters to See¡¯s Candies, notes to Verne McKenzie at the textile mill, and the like and shipped themoff to investigators in Washington, D.C. Buffett felt persecuted. He and Munger were beingchased in a nightmare by a huge, lumberinggiant. To survive, they would have to outrun it. 
Letters flew back and forth like shuttlecocks between Munger, Tolles and the SEC. Buffett maintained a veneer of calm, but his back problems were plaguinghim. Munger did not hide his agitation. 
By March 1975, the investigation had wound its way to a command performance at the SEC. Betty Peters was hauled in. ¡°Is your lawyer here?¡± they asked. ¡°No. Do I need a lawyer?¡± she replied. ¡°Well, everybody comes with a lawyer,¡± they told her. ¡°Don¡¯t you just want to know what happened?¡± she asked. They interviewed Peters without a lawyer. 
Munger was summoned. For two days¡ªalso unaccompanied, for what additionallegal counsel could Charles 
T. Munger possibly need?¡ªhe tried to defend Blue Chip against the charge that it was tryingto bust up the Santa Barbara merger and to explain why Blue Chip had paid more than was strictly necessary for Wesco¡¯s stock. Yes, Blue Chip had thought about gettingcontrol, he said, but those plans were only ¡°remote and contingent¡± until the Santa Barbara merger blew up. This discussion became somewhat circular given his and Buffett¡¯s role in talkingto Vincentiand their admitted ¡°wooing¡± of Betty Peters and the Casper family¡¯s votes. Munger had a regrettable tendency to interrupt and lecture the SEC staff lawyer, Larry Seidman. ¡°We 
wanted to look very fair and equitable to Lou Vincentiand Betty Peters,¡± he said.27 But the SEC lawyers had never met the intractable Lou Vincenti. They could not possibly understand. What about your Blue Chip shareholders? Seidman asked. Seidman saw no reason for Blue Chip to be so generous to Wesco shareholders; Wesco¡¯s stock by then was largely in the hands of arbitrageurs. 
These were people who had bought Wesco¡¯s stock knowingit would rise to the price that Santa Barbara had offered once the deal closed. They partly hedged their bets by shortingSanta Barbara¡¯s stock, much as Graham-Newman had once bought Rockwood stock in exchange for cocoa-bean warehouse receipts. But 
when the Wesco deal blew up, it was as if the price of cocoa beans had collapsed.28 Why do the arbs a favor by proppingup the price? 
Munger reached for his ultimate weapon¡ªBenjamin Franklin. ¡°We didn¡¯t feelour obligation to the shareholders was inconsistent with leaningover backward to be fair. We have that Ben Franklin idea that the honest policy is the best policy. It had a sort of shoddy mental image to us to try to reduce the price.¡±29 
Seidman seemed a little baffled by this argument, and even Munger admitted that the details of what had been done did not look good. He begged Seidman to look at the bigpicture. ¡°As you look at the overall records, we go way beyond any legal requirement in tryingto be fair with people to observe the niceties of fair-dealing; I simply hope that you willreach the conclusion that this averages out as not an appropriate case for any sort of prosecution¡­. If there¡¯s any defect at all, it¡¯s not intentional.¡± 
When Buffett appeared, they asked himwhy he and Munger hadn¡¯t let Wesco go into the tank so they could buy it cheap. ¡°I think the general business reputation of Blue Chip would not have been as good,¡± Buffett said. ¡°I think someone might have been sore about it.¡± But why should he care? Because, said Buffett, it was ¡°important how Wesco management feels about us. You can say, well, we own the controlling interest, so it doesn¡¯t make any difference. But Lou Vincenti doesn¡¯t really need to work for us¡­. If he felt that we were, you know, slobs or something, it just wouldn¡¯t work.¡± 
Now Buffett¡ªwho, like Munger, startled the enforcement lawyers by showingup alone¡ªmade himself helpful, venturingback to Washington severaltimes, patiently explaininghow Blue Chip worked, expounding on his investment philosophies, and talkingabout his childhood years in Washington. He made a favorable impression on Seidman, but not on the senior SEC staff lawyer who was in charge of the investigation, and who was known as a ¡°tiger¡± whose motto was ¡°They shall not pass.¡± He found these arguments 
unconvincing.30 The senior investigator¡¯s attitude was that nobody who did anythingclose to the line would ever get by him.31 
The SEC staff kept delving. It seemed fascinated by the intricacies and complications of Buffett¡¯s empire. It even started lookinginto whether he had traded on inside information about San Jose Water Works.32 The staff started kickingaround Source Capital, the closed-end investment fund that Munger had bought a twenty 
percent interest in as a cigar butt and helped turn around. By then, the stock market had recovered. Ruane¡¯s Sequoia Fund had made a huge comeback in 1975, up almost sixty-two percent compared to thirty-seven percent for the market. Munger had just about made back his partners¡¯ money, with a seventy-three percent gain in 1975. He took no fees for himself, and was windinghis partnership down. Explainingwhy their convoluted empire made sense based on the cheap prices paid for stocks at the time grew harder as the market recovered. The investigation kept growinghairy legs like a tarantula. 
Rickershauser had been studyinga chart that showed all of Buffett and Munger¡¯s complex financial interests. 
Buffett sat at the center, buyingBlue Chip, Diversified, and Berkshire, Wattlingthem into so many pockets that it made Rickershauser shudder.33 Everyone knew Buffett, the great white shark, was virtually helpless to stop himself fromacquiringthese stocks. If he found ten bucks and spied a share of Blue Chip, Berkshire, or Diversified, he charged, grabbed, and threw the stock in the nearest drawer. After he and Munger had bought the first twenty-five percent of Wesco, Rickershauser had finally advised Buffett to buy stock only through 
formal tender offers to avoid the appearance of impropriety.34 The complex cross-holdings that Buffett had 
created made it seemas though he was tryingto hide something. Rickershauser looked at the crazy diagram and fretted, ¡°There¡¯s got to be an indictment in there somewhere.¡±35 He didn¡¯t think the SEC would have enough evidence to convict, but it would be awfully easy to accuse. 
In the greater sense, Munger was a two-bit player, his financial stake minute compared with Buffett¡¯s. He 
had been snared as a petty accomplice. But since Blue Chip was his territory, he was a principalin the Wesco saga and thus played a central role in the SEC¡¯s questioning.36 He admitted to Seidman, ¡°We do have a very complicated set of business affairs, and I think we have learned, to our regret, that that may not be too smart. But we tried to keep all the balls in the air and properly sequenized with the other balls and handle them honorably.¡± 
Despite the pair¡¯s protestations and the fact that it could find nothingwrongwith the San Jose Water Works or Source Capital deals, the SEC kept going. The tiger of a prosecutor now recommended to Sporkin that the SEC file charges against Buffett and Munger personally. He was unswayed by Buffett¡¯s and Munger¡¯s testimony and believed that they had intentionally quashed the Santa Barbara merger by overpayingfor Wesco¡¯s stock. He was unsympathetic to the ¡°who was harmed?¡± explanation for payingmore for the stock 
and thought the pair was splittinghairs too fine in its explanations of events.37 


Rickershauser wrote Sporkin directly. He pleaded with him not to prosecute Buffett and Munger, ¡°individuals who value their good names and reputations as their most priceless possessions,¡± because ¡°many people, probably most people, assume evilconduct on the part of anyone civilly prosecuted by the commission.¡± Even if Buffett and Munger consented to a settlement without admittingor denyingthe charges, merely filingthemwould cause ¡°terrible, irreversible damage¡± because ¡°the good reputation of the commission automatically and inexorably destroys the good reputation¡± of the defendants. ¡°A giant¡¯s strength should be used with great discretion,¡± he urged. ¡°The risk frominadvertent oversights in business 
should not become so onerous that people who value their reputations are deterred fromparticipation.¡±38 He begged to save Buffett¡¯s and Munger¡¯s reputations by offeringto consent to an order on minor, technical disclosure violations on behalf of Blue Chip only, as longas the consent decree did not name any individuals. 
The panic inside Buffett¡¯s mind can only be imagined. Within the office, he did his best to maintain an 
imperturbable facade so as not to alarmhis office staff, any of whom might be interviewed by the SEC. 
Rickershauser worked like a stevedore to portray his clients as upstandingcitizens fromthe perfect model families. He sent in biographies of Munger and Buffett to the SEC, stressingtheir charitable work, the many boards on which they served, Howard Buffett¡¯s tenure as a Congressman, and the millions of dollars of taxes that Buffett had paid to the government since filinghis first tax return at age fourteen. Buffett obviously had been grindingaway at this document as if his life depended on it. 
Munger was resigned. ¡°If a policeman follows you down the road for five hundred miles,¡± he said to Buffett, ¡°you¡¯re goingto get a ticket.¡± 
Then Rickershauser made a further proffer to Sporkin, put delicately: ¡°The complex financialinterests of Mr. Buffett and Mr. Munger¡­have apparently raised the impression that compliance with various legal requirements is becomingdifficult,¡± he wrote, notingthe pair had tried to comply with both the spirit and the 
letter of the law. ¡°They now wish to simplify their holdings as rapidly as they can.¡±39 
In their interviews, the SEC lawyers had already explored what simplifyingwould mean. ¡°Sometime in the future, it is certainly possible that we would merge Blue Chip with Berkshire,¡± Buffett had responded to their question, ¡°but Blue Chip has a lot of legal problems, and until some of those are resolved, it might be hard to arrive at what we would feel reasonably sure would be a fair exchange ratio. If I had my preferences, it would be that someday they would be merged. So hopefully we would have more or less the same businesses we have now, but less complications. I don¡¯t really like these complications. It may look like I like these complications. I don¡¯t have a great staff to handle it all. It seemed fairly simple while we 
were doing it,¡± he said, ¡°but not simple now.¡±40 
Asked by an SEC investigator if Buffett had ¡°contingency plans¡± to simplify things, ¡°Oh, does he ever,¡± said Munger. ¡°He has about twice as biga contingency plan as before this investigation started.¡±41 
In consideringthe proffer, says Sporkin today, much depended on Rickershauser. He ¡°was one of those few lawyers that I¡¯ve met in life that, whatever he told you, you could go to the bank on.¡± Sporkin viewed Rickershauser as not only a brilliant lawyer but truthful, straightforward, and upright, incapable of being disingenuous. Rickershauser told Sporkin that Buffett was ¡°goingto be the greatest person that WallStreet has ever seen¡± and that ¡°he was the most decent, honorable person you would ever meet.¡± Comingfrom almost anyone else, Sporkin would have dismissed this as rhetoric, but comingfrom Rickershauser, he took 
these statements to be both sincere and probably well-judged.42 Sporkin felt he had as great a duty to absolve as to convict. He thought that a prosecutor had to differentiate between a fundamentally honest person who had made a misstep and a crook. When it came to crooks, his job was to put ¡¯em away. His view of Buffett 
and Munger was that they had certainly misstepped, but that they were not crooks.43 
And so the giant tapped Blue Chip gently on the wrist.44 
The company consented to an SEC findingin which it neither admitted nor denied that it failed to notify investors it was tryingto bust the Santa Barbara merger in buyingWesco¡¯s stock and that Blue Chip had 
artificially propped up Wesco¡¯s market price over the course of three weeks.45 Blue Chip promised never again to do what it had not admitted it had done.46 The consent decree named no individuals. The publicity over the event had been trivial and would fade. Buffett¡¯s and Munger¡¯s records and reputations stayed clean. 
Two weeks later, the SEC named Buffett to a blue-ribbon panelto study corporate disclosure practices. It was forgiveness and, above all, a fresh start.47 
40 
HowNottoRunaPublicLibrary 
Washington, D.C. . 1975¨C1976 
One day in early 1975, Susie Buffett¡¯s friend Eunice Denenbergcame over to the house and sat on the dog-hair-covered sofa in the family room. Susie turned her back so she wouldn¡¯t have to face her friend and turned on the tape deck. Then she sang. Denenbergpronounced approval. They talked about Susie¡¯s dream of singingprofessionally, which she was too diffident to do anythingabout herself. Denenbergwent home; then she called back the next day and said, ¡°This is your agent.¡± She enlisted Bob Edson, an assistant music professor at Midland College, to create a backup band and got Susie a gigat the SteamShed, a nightclub in Irvington, the tiny town on Omaha¡¯s outskirts where she and Dottie had once formed the choir in her father¡¯s church. Susie was nervous, but the rest of the family was enthusiastic. Only Doc Thompson, who said, ¡°I don¡¯t know why you want to singin bars,¡± had any doubts. 
The night of Susie¡¯s first public performance, before a crowd made up of about thirty-five friends, she was so anxious that she asked Warren not to come. Talkingand greetingpeople in a longsequined dress, she stalled until Denenbergpushed her out onto the stage. FromAretha Franklin¡¯s ¡°CallMe,¡± to Sinatra¡¯s ¡°You Make Me Feel So Young,¡± to Blood, Sweat & Tears¡¯s ¡°You¡¯ve Made Me So Very Happy,¡± to what she said was one of her favorites, Roberta Flack¡¯s ¡°The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face,¡± her choice of music was 
soulful, passionate, and romantic. Susie found that the audience responded to and returned her warmth.1 The same pulse and flow she got fromconnectingwith people individually came through in a wave when she sang to a group in an intimate space. This was her special gift, transmuted and magnified. She wanted to become a cabaret singer. 
A few weeks later, however, Susie was pulled away from rehearsals for her next performance to go to Carmel, California, to help her sister-in-law Bertie, whose youngest daughter, Sally, was dyingof a brain tumor. Bertie¡¯s marriage to Charlie Snorf was crumblingat the same time. 
When Sally died, Bertie discovered that the tragedy had unlocked her frozen emotions. ¡°Sally was a wonderful person, amazingand intuitive and so strangely insightful about people and feelings for a seven-year-old,¡± Bertie says. ¡°Once she told me, Mom, you and Dad are lonely together. I think when someone dies who¡¯s very close to you, they will you something. When Sally died, what she willed to me was that I couldn¡¯t deny my feelings to myself anymore. It was like a copper wire went straight into my heart, and I couldn¡¯t cover up my feelings fromthen on.¡± 
Bertie had always had a specialrelationship with Susie, but when her heart opened after Sally died, suddenly they connected on a different level. ¡°Susie was somebody I loved who was so important to me,¡± says Bertie. ¡°She was the only person I could talk to about my feelings when there was nobody else in my family whom I could do that with.¡± 
Her brother, however, reacted differently to his niece¡¯s death. He called some friends who had visited the Buffetts in Laguna and told themabout Sally. ¡°We were so shocked because we¡¯d allbeen together a week or two before,¡± says Mary Holland. ¡°I asked him what happened, and he said, ¡®I can¡¯t talk anymore,¡¯ and got off the phone.¡± 
Warren at the time had many distractions to assist him in evadinghis feelings. He was finishingup the SEC investigation. He was so fascinated with Kay Graham that he literally could not get enough of her. When Warren got obsessed with something¡ªespecially someone new¡ªhe could not stop thinkingabout it or them; this came across to a new person as a wholehearted, flattering, and even overwhelmingattentiveness. When business arose, however, he snapped back to it in a split second with all the fierce intensity his steely mind 
could muster. As Munger put it, Buffett ¡°never let his minor obsessions interfere with his major obsession.¡±2 Katharine Graham, however, was no minor obsession. Some time earlier, he had decided to see what sparks 
would fly when she brushed up against Munger, the greatest smart-ass he knew. ¡°Kay was the kind, if I gave topics of things for her to do, she was very dutiful. If I told her to read some terribly complicated financial statements, she was going to follow my instructions, no matter what. I told her, ¡®You have to meet Charlie.¡¯ I was laying it on thick. Finally, she was out in Los Angeles and went to meet Charlie. 
¡°So she sat down in that scrubby office of Charlie¡¯s, and immediately she pulls out a yellow pad so she can take notes on what he¡¯s saying. Charlie just loved it¡ªthe idea that everything he was saying was so important that the most powerful woman in the world had to be taking it down as fast as he could talk.¡± 
Munger could not resist this encouragement to show off. He had been correspondingwith Graham, and wrote to her, ¡°You are takingme back thirty years or more and makingme behave like Tom Sawyer with Becky Thatcher, and I figure that Warren is silly enough for both of us.¡±3 
But however giddily she might be makingWarren behave, he was also takingKay to business schoolin a serious way. ¡°Kay had had me trying to explain accounting to her on the side. I¡¯d bring these annual reports to Washington. And she¡¯d say, ¡®Oh, Warren, lessons.¡¯ There I was, teaching again.¡± He considered her son Don ¡°unbelievably smart,¡± with ¡°as close to a photographic memory as anyone I¡¯ve ever run into.¡± As a sign of reassurance to the family, Warren had signed the votingproxy on his shares over to Don. He now stayed at Kay¡¯s house when he came to Washington for monthly board meetings. She didn¡¯t approve of the way he dressed, but ¡°I told her, ¡®I¡¯ll dress as well as Don dresses,¡¯¡± Buffett says. ¡°He and I had a sort of united front.¡± 
Buffett felt that Kay was ¡°very, very smart, and in many ways wise, as long as you didn¡¯t go into those areas where the wounds were. But she understood people well.¡± As they grew more intimate, he felt he could say somethingto her about the way she presented herself to her board. He knew she was less needy than she herself realized. One day he took her aside and said, ¡°You can¡¯t plead for help anymore fromthe board. It¡¯s just not the position you want to be in.¡± And so, he says, she quit. 
The business and personal ties between the Grahams and Buffett had become close enough that Warren invited Katharine and Don to join the GrahamGroup at their 1975 meeting, at Hilton Head. Don made an immediate impression with his unpretentious manner, while raisingits already high average IQ. Many people quickly saw beneath Kay¡¯s brittle, patrician veneer to the vulnerability and humility that had endeared her to Warren. Thus she fit easily with most of the group despite her queenly presence, worldliness, and connections. She made a sincere effort to get alongwith everyone¡ªalthough her deep belief that men were far superior to women wasn¡¯t lost on the women at the meeting. The beautifully dressed, perfectly coiffed Graham, an icon amongthem, would slide casually into a chair amid the men with a cocktail in her hand; somebody would utter a political opinion, and she would respond ¡°Henry thinks thus-and-so¡±¡ªspeakingof Kissinger. It was impossible not to be impressed. 
Susie Buffett sangfor the group for the first time at Hilton Head. Bill Ruane brought a chart showingthe price of gold, which for five years had surged past Berkshire Hathaway¡¯s. He asked, the others thought jokingly, whether he should be buyingmetal. It would turn out that he had, in fact, been buyinggold coins, 
and made a nice bit of money on it.4 
Henry Brandt pulled Buffett into a separate roomand asked him to promise that Berkshire stock wouldn¡¯t drop below $40. By October 1975, the stock had been cut in half after tradingat $93 just two years before. ¡°Look, I love you,¡± Buffett recalls saying, ¡°but I can¡¯t promise you that.¡± ¡°The world is ending,¡± said Brandt, or words to that effect. ¡°I¡¯ve got every dollar I own in this stock.¡± 
The world continued to end. Even though the rest of the stock market was recovering, Berkshire was not. Brandt panicked and called Buffett, who offered him$40 a share. Then Brandt called Walter Schloss and said, ¡°Warren willpay me forty dollars and I want fifty. What should I do?¡± 
Schloss was the last champion of cigar butts. At the Graham Group meetings, the others razzed himabout his ¡°buggy-whip¡± portfolio of bankrupt steel companies and destitute auto-parts makers. ¡°So what,¡± said Schloss. ¡°I don¡¯t like stress and I sleep well at night.¡± He filled out the simple checklists, applyingGraham¡¯s philosophy in its purest form. He went home fromhis desk in the closet at Tweedy, Browne at five o¡¯clock every evening, and his results were phenomenal. 
Now Schloss was dismayed to hear Brandt tellinghimself he was better off without Berkshire stock in a way that contravened this whole cigar-butt philosophy. Schloss worked on him for two hours, saying, You¡¯ve got the smartest guy in the world managingyour money, in effect, and Warren doesn¡¯t charge you anything, you¡¯re makinga bigmistake to sell. ¡°I thought I convinced him,¡± says Schloss. But the U.S. economy by then was in so much trouble that New York City was almost bankrupt; the country was in a mood of such profound pessimism that it affected people¡¯s judgment. ¡°On Monday he called his broker,¡± says Schloss, and 
began selling¡ªhis wife¡¯s shares, not his own¡ªuntil half their shares were gone. 5 
Immediately afterward, President Ford refused a bailout of the New York City economy; the New York Daily News captured the feelingof the times in a huge headline: ¡°Ford to City:Drop Dead.¡±6 
The partners who had been given Berkshire stock in 1970 when it was tradingaround $40 seemed no better off five years later. ¡°To anybody who held our stock,¡± says Munger, ¡°it looked like not much was happening favorably for a long, longtime. And that was not the way our partners, by and large, had previously experienced things. The paper record looked terrible, yet the future, what you might call the intrinsic record, the realbusiness momentum, was gainingallthe while.¡± 
Buffett¡¯s own net worth, based on where the stock was trading, had likewise been sliced to the levelof when he closed the partnership. Yet despite this apparent destruction of wealth¡ªwhich would have frightened almost anyone else¡ªhis pulse never seemed to flutter. He just had the companies he controlled keep buying, and buying, and buying. In 1974, before the SEC investigation began, Berkshire owned twenty-six percent of Blue Chip. Although he put the brakes on at Berkshire duringthe 1975 Omniaviation affair, through Diversified, he bought Berkshire stock. By 1976, he was buyingboth Berkshire and Blue Chip through Diversified. When all was said and done, Berkshire would own more than forty-one percent of Blue Chip¡ªso much that he and Susie owned, personally and through Berkshire Hathaway, thirty-seven percent of the stock all by themselves. 
And as longas Berkshire was cheap in 1976, he thought of another way to capitalize on the situation, getting his mother, ¡°who cared nothingabout money,¡± to sell her 5,272 shares of Berkshire to Doris and Bertie. For $5,440 plus a $100,000 note, they each got 2,636 shares of Berkshire¡ªpayingthe equivalent of $2 a share in 
cash.7 Buffett, who viewed debt as almost sinful, thought Berkshire was so cheap at $40 a share that he was willingto have his sisters borrow an extraordinary ninety-five percent of the purchase price to buy it. At the rate he obviously thought he could compound the stock¡¯s value, buyingon these terms would make his sisters 
rich.8 And it would also avoid an enormous estate tax bill. 
¡°It¡¯s what my mother wanted to do, but it was the perfect time. That was probably the greatest move of all time. It will never happen again. That was a once-in-a-lifetime situation.¡± 
Valuable properties were beingsold everywhere for a pittance. Around the same time, TomMurphy came to Warren with the chance to buy a television station. Buffett realized it would be a terrific deal but that he couldn¡¯t buy it because it would conflict with the Washington Post Company, which also owned television 
stations. Since he sat on the Post board, it would put the Post over the limit the FCC allowed.9 ¡°What amI involved with that I don¡¯t own?¡± he asked himself. He actually had to think about it to find something. Then he remembered that he didn¡¯t own Grinnell College. The first station they looked at had already sold, but at Buffett¡¯s recommendation, Grinnellbought a Dayton, Ohio, station for $13 million, puttingdown only $2 million. Sandy Gottesman arranged debt financingfor the rest. The broker who sold it to Grinnell called it the 
best deal he had seen in the past twenty years.10 
There were some good reasons, however, why stocks were cheap and cities like New York were close to bankruptcy. Alongwith rampant inflation, out-of-controllabor costs and unstable labor relations were stranglingthe economy. Newspapers were amongthe most severely affected businesses. Right after the Hilton Head meeting, on October 1, 1975, at four a.m., the Washington Post¡¯s union contracts expired. Some of the Post¡¯s pressmen disabled the fire extinguishers, drained the oil, stripped the gears, and ripped electrical 
wiringand operatingmachinery out of the presses. They slashed the rolls of newsprint, set fires, and left one pressroom foreman bleedingfrom a gapinghead wound.11 Graham arrived within an hour to a building glaringunder the lights of television cameras and engulfed with fire engines, police, and hundreds of picketers. 
The Post¡¯s relations with some of its unions ¡°were almost literally on a drunk,¡± recalls Don Graham.12 The militant workers viewed management as ¡°incompetent,¡± Kay was to later write, ¡°yet able enough to deviously make themscapegoats for all of the problems that could more clearly be laid at management¡¯s own 
door.¡±13 After years of surrenderingto sabotage and work slowdowns, with nine union contracts set to expire at once, management negotiators armwrestled with labor in an atmosphere of tension and frustration. 
Most of the unions other than the pressmen had stayed at work, especially the all-important Newspaper Guild of journalists. Usingborrowed printingplants and helicopters to move key people past picket lines, the Post started gettingout an attenuated paper after only one day¡¯s disruption. But as the strike ground on, Graham became paralyzed with fears that her paper was committingsuicide. The managers and scab workers could produce only half the number of papers at a quarter of their normal size, and advertisers marched steadily over to the Post¡¯s archrival, the Evening Star. Within days, the Star was ¡°so thick with advertisingthat we 
could hardly lift it.¡±14 
¡°They called me back because they were actually afraid Kay would fall apart. We crossed the picket line together. Kay was gutsy about that. But I saw her burst into tears when she picked up the Star. The Star was trying to out-Post the Post, copying their format, hiring their people. She¡¯d wake up and call me in the middle of the night.¡± 
When she felt threatened, the woman that her editor Howard Simons called the ¡°Bad Katharine¡± flew down the chimney. 
¡°It wasn¡¯t really the Bad Kay. It was the Insecure Kay. If she got feeling insecure, she could get pretty shrill. Occasionally some incident would set her off, and then she would react like an animal. It was as if she felt nobody was on her side. She felt cornered. And nobody would quite know what to do. That¡¯s when they would call for me. Phil hadn¡¯t been on her side, and her mother hadn¡¯t been on her side. The executives at the company hadn¡¯t always been on her side. And so she always had this sense in the back of her mind that she was in an unfriendly environment and it could be triggered by some incident. 
¡°But she always knew that I was on her side. That didn¡¯t mean I agreed with her on everything or ate everything she wanted me to eat. But I was on her side. And I always would be.¡± 
The Bad Katharine bore some similarities to Leila Buffett. And Warren took an obvious pride in beingthe one person who could win Kay¡¯s trust and keep the Bad Katharine at bay. 
Buffett had developed so much discernment about people¡¯s motivations by now that he understood what was drivingeveryone around Grahamand helped her gain perspective. It was a measure of what Susie had done for him that he could transmit some of her discernment to others. His antennae for people¡¯s reactions were sharp. He could help a person who felt threatened tell the difference between somebody who was actually dangerous and someone who was simply actingfromfear. 
¡°She thought Warren walked on water¡ªand he did,¡± says board member Arjay Miller. ¡°Warren was open, and she had confidence in him.¡± For the right person, Buffett could instill an ability to see all sides nonjudgmentally, an ability that Susie had instilled in him, and this marvelous gift of self-confidence and security could be internalized, so that it was not dependent on his presence. But Kay was so insecure, ¡°I don¡¯t think he ever really got her to do that,¡± says Miller, ¡°although if anybody could have, it would have been him.¡± She needed his actualpresence. 
For the next six months, the Post would continue to publish while navigatingfruitless negotiations, threats, 
violence, a logisticalwar of nerves, and a constant struggle to keep the torn Newspaper Guild from strikingin sympathy. People were tacklingall sorts of incongruous jobs to get the paper out; Don Grahamworked as a paper handler, pushinghuge, heavy rolls of newsprint to the presses. 
¡°She had people telling her, including some of the people she respected most, ¡®You¡¯ve got to give in or you¡¯re going to lose.¡¯ They were afraid, they hated not publishing and seeing the Star gain on the Post. 
¡°So I was the countervailing force. I said to her, ¡®I will tell you before the tipping point is reached.¡¯ The tipping point is the point at which the other guy becomes dominant, and after you go back, he is still dominant. There are fifty variables involved: the attitude of your employees when you come back, the impression that you¡¯ve left on the community, the degree to which advertising has gotten better results from having shifted over. You¡¯re gauging the likelihood of people changing their habits. They couldn¡¯t get our columnists, or our comics, so the question is, at what point does it become more of a habit for them to buy the other paper? 
¡°That¡¯s probably what did the most for her. She believed me, and she was right to believe me. All I had were her interests at heart, and she believed that I knew enough about the business.¡± 
But while ¡°Warren encouraged her, it was her backbone, not his,¡± stresses George Gillespie.15 
Her backbone had to be strongenough to support the whole company. Although nearly all of the Post¡¯s employees other than the pressmen stayed on the job, the constant threat of violence hungover those who crossed the picket lines. Their tires were beingslashed, and their families were gettingthreateningphone calls at home. A striker carried a placard that said ¡°PhilShot the WrongGraham.¡± To keep morale up, Graham and Buffett and MegGreenfield rolled papers in the mailroom. Buffett loved it, workingcirculation once again. 
Two months into the strike, the Post had made a final offer to the pressmen, who rejected it.16 The strike dragged on, unresolved. Grahambegan to hire replacement workers, breakingthe strike. The pressmen carried on picketingas if there was a chance of negotiation. But over the next few months, the paper gradually won back the remainingunions, readers, and advertisers, even though the picketingand bad publicity continued through the spring. 
Just as Graham was slowly rescuingher company, 17 Buffett and Munger had finally reached their settlement with the SEC. Now Buffett invited Munger for a steak dinner down at Johnny¡¯s Caf¨¦ near the stockyards to finalize their ¡°simplification¡± plan. He had decided to stop managingmoney for FMC on the side. Next, Blue 
Chip would sell its interest in Source Capital,18 and Berkshire and Diversified would refile their merger plan, formerly quashed at the beginningof 1975 by the SEC investigation. At Betty Peters¡¯s request, Wesco, owned only eighty percent by Blue Chip, would remain a public company, and Munger would be chairman of that. Munger and Buffett deferred mergingBlue Chip into Berkshire Hathaway until they could more easily agree on the relative values of the companies. 
With both Berkshire and the Post emergingfromthe tumultuous times that had consumed his attention for so long, Buffett¡¯s business routine began to normalize. The Post board meetings lost their edge of emergency, and Graham began thinkingof expandingher empire. 
Newspapers at the time were beingsnapped up left and right. ¡°Kay really wanted to buy newspapers. But above all, she didn¡¯t want other people to buy them instead of her,¡± Buffett says. ¡°Tellme what to do,¡± she would beg. Buffett had gotten her to stop pleadingfor help from the rest of the board, but she still pleaded for help fromhim. ¡°I would just make her make the damn decision,¡± he says. He helped her understand that it was always a mistake to pay too much for somethingyou wanted. Impatience was the enemy. For a long time, the Post did very little and grew slowly. Buffett taught the Grahams the immense value of buyingtheir company¡¯s own stock when it was cheap to reduce the shares outstanding. That increased the size of each slice of the pie. Meanwhile, the Post avoided makingexpensive mistakes and became much more profitable 
as a result.19 
Buffett, used to doingthe taking, for the first time found himself in the givingrole and discovered that, with Graham, he liked it. ¡°She would talk to me about some business policy and then she¡¯d talk to some other guy back home, and they¡¯d know how to scare the hell out of her. She knew they were doing it, and she didn¡¯t like it, but she couldn¡¯t get over it. 
¡°Eventually I told her my job was to get her to see herself in a regular mirror rather than a fun-house mirror. I really wanted her to feel better about what she was doing. Basically, I enjoyed trying to build her up. And I had some success, although I started late in life with her.¡± 
Yet, wrote Munger to Grahamabout Buffett, ¡°I can see damn well whose ways, predominantly, are actually beingmended.¡±20 Buffett began to be seen out with Grahammore and more. She made it her job to try to give himsome polish. 
¡°Kay tried to upgrade me a little. It was just very gradual and not so I would notice. It was very funny. She worked so hard to sort of remold me, but it didn¡¯t work. She was a hell of a lot more sophisticated than I was, that¡¯s for sure.¡± Buffett learned that Grahamthought it was uncouth and disgustingto eat out in restaurants. ¡°Around Washington your cook was a big point of pride. The highest compliment you could pay somebody at a party was, ¡®I¡¯m going to try and hire away your cook,¡¯ or ¡®You must have brought your cook over from France.¡¯ Kay cared about that, like everybody in Washington. So her dinners tended to be quite fancy, except that she would make exceptions for me.¡± 
Graham¡¯s chef found the restrictions imposed by cookingfor Warren a challenge. ¡°Broccoli, asparagus, and Brussels sprouts look to me like Chinese food crawling around on a plate. Cauliflower almost makes me sick. I eat carrots reluctantly. I don¡¯t like sweet potatoes. I don¡¯t even want to be close to a rhubarb, it makes me retch. My idea of a vegetable is green beans, corn, and peas. I like spaghetti and grilled cheese sandwiches. I¡¯ll eat meat loaf but wouldn¡¯t order it in a restaurant.¡± 
His idea of a feast was a half gallon of chocolate chip ice cream. He ate his foods in sequence, one at a time, and did not like the individual foods to touch. If a stalk of broccoli brushed his steak, he recoiled in horror. ¡°I like eating the same thing over and over and over again. I could eat a ham sandwich every day for fifty days in a row for breakfast. At dinner at her farm retreat, Glen Welby, Kay served lobster. I was attacking the shellfish through the wrong side, attacking the shell, and not having much luck. She told me to turn it over.¡± Confronted with a nine-course dinner¡ªeach course accompanied by the appropriate wines and destined for a dinner table filled with dignitaries and celebrities and journalism¡¯s star reporters¡ª¡°it threw him,¡± says Gladys Kaiser. He never grew accustomed to life on this grand scale. 
Yet Buffett became a regular guest at Graham¡¯s famous dinners, which he called her ¡°Kay Parties.¡± He enjoyed his status as the hayseed who was flummoxed by a lobster. His childlike tastes conveyed an air of authenticity and innocence. But his socialnaivet¨¦ was also genuine¡ªmostly because he went around with blinders on. When ¡°sightseeing¡± with Graham, he was focused like a laser on who was there, not on which fork to use. He had no desire to broaden this aspect of his horizons. Grahamupgraded his elephant-bumping 
skills gradually but was amazed that Buffett continued to eat nothingbut hamburgers and ice cream. 21 
¡°She always talked to the cook in French, always, totally in French. So I would hear ¡®hamburger¡¯ among the French words and tease her and say, ¡®No, no, it¡¯s hambur-zhay.¡¯ Then I would just say, ¡®Order me a hambur-zhay,¡¯ and it would come out of the kitchen very fancy. The chef at Kay¡¯s wanted so much to be able to make hamburgers and french fries¡ªand I ate them, but they were not even close to as good as you could get at McDonald¡¯s or Wendy¡¯s. The french fries were always mushy. And he wanted so hard to please. 
¡°But at her big parties, she didn¡¯t make exceptions for me as much.¡± 
At the Kay Parties, Buffett¡¯s role was not to eat but, of course, to talk. As a star investor, he was like a bald eagle in a town where birds of any kind were scarce. Even the most hidebound of Georgetown ¡°cave dwellers¡±¡ªblue bloods who rarely emerged to socialize with anyone except others of their kind, many of whom were Graham¡¯s friends, such as the columnists Joe and Stewart Alsop, cousins of Eleanor Roosevelt ¡ªenjoyed havingthe charmingBuffett around. Dinner guests pelted him with questions about investments, and he fell into his most comfortable role:the teacher. 
By now he was spendingso much time in Washington that he began keepinga spare set of clothes in 
Graham¡¯s guest room, just as he once had with the more maternalAnne Gottschaldt in LongIsland. Usually he wore a frayingblue suede jacket and gray flannel slacks that looked like a rumpled bedspread.22 Graham tried to improve his sartorial sense. ¡°She was appalled by Warren¡¯s clothes,¡± accordingto her son Don, ¡°although my mother just hated the way that I dressed. And at one point she said, referringto her employees, ¡®Why am I of all people surrounded by the worst-dressed executive staff of anyone in America?¡¯ Her scorn 
for people¡¯s clothes was widespread, and not confined to Warren.¡±23 She took him to meet Halston, the tony designer whom she preferred and who had made over her own sense of style. Buffett¡¯s take on Halston: ¡°He was from Des Moines, you know.¡± 
*** 
By June 1976, Buffett had occasion to invite Graham to an event of his own:Susie Jr.¡¯s wedding. In every way this event would be the antithesis of a Kay Party¡ªheld in Newport Beach, California, a mix of the formal and the casual, with a Buffettish zoo of a guest list, to celebrate a marriage that everybody knew was a mistake fromthe start. 
The springsemester of her senior year of college, Susie Jr. had dropped out of UC Irvine when her roommate 
learned that Century 21, a real estate company, was offeringhigh-payingsecretarial jobs that didn¡¯t require typingskills.24 Though they were wise enough not to interfere, both her parents knew that Susie Jr.¡¯s marriage to Dennis Westergard, the good-lookingblond surfer, wasn¡¯t goingto work out. On some level, 
Susie Jr. herself knew this, but she was caught up in the fantasy.25 Parental reservation notwithstanding, her weddingwas an important affair. Warren had asked that Kay be invited; BigSusie had reserved a special place for her at St. John¡¯s Lutheran Church, right behind the family. For a few minutes she sat with Dick and Mary Holland, who had escorted her to the service. Then, not surprisingly, Kay said to them, ¡°I feel uncomfortable. I don¡¯t know why, but it¡¯d be better if I sat in back.¡± She removed herself to the rear of the 
church, where she sat for the rest of the wedding.26 
Buffett had traveled far fromthe day of his own wedding, when he had to take off his glasses because he was so nervous that he didn¡¯t want to see. Waitingin the rear of the church to go down the aisle, he said to his anxious daughter, ¡°Don¡¯t look now, but my fly is open.¡± The photographer was standingin front of the altar, waitingto snap a picture. Susie Jr. was so busy tryingto stifle her laughter and to keep fromlookingat her 
father¡¯s fly so that the photographer would not capture her staringat his crotch that she forgot to be scared.27 
The rest of the traditional ceremony proceeded without incident. Then the reception at the Newport Beach Marriott turned wild. The Buffetts had let their music-groupie daughter hire any band she liked. Susie Jr. chose her favorite, Quicksilver Messenger Service, a psychedelic rock band that had been amongthe groups launched at San Francisco¡¯s Fillmore Auditorium in the 1960s. Its members looked like any normal rock band. As the group of twenty-somethingmen with white-boy afros and nipple-length uncombed hair mounted the stage and tuned up their instruments, Buffett looked on with inner horror. When Quicksilver Messenger Service hit it with the drums and electric guitars, Susie Jr. danced in ecstasy at her rock-and-rollwedding while her father managed to keep his composure, even though he was squirminginside. ¡°I was not wild about their music,¡± he says in an understatement. ¡°They played awfully loud.¡± He longed for somethinglike his wife¡¯s sweet Doris Day style of singing, or Florence Henderson or Sammy Davis Jr. After ninety minutes, the musicians flabbergasted himagain when they stopped playingand put away their instruments. Then their manager compounded his astonishment by askingBuffett to fork over the staggeringsumof $4,000¡ªin 
cash.28 BigSusie had told her daughter, ¡°You know, Susan, you can¡¯t go home with the band on your weddingnight.¡± ¡°Darn!¡± said Susie Jr. But ¡°some of my friends did,¡± she says. 
Now Susie Jr. had settled permanently in Los Angeles, workingfor Century21. Howie had already dropped 
out of Augustana College after havingtrouble adjustingand connectingwith his roommate. He tried a couple of other schools, but had lost his support systemand never graduated. ¡°I was so close to my mom,¡± he says, ¡°and everythingin my life revolved around our family and our home. In college I just could not get any 
traction.¡±29 Neither had their father¡¯s ambition, but both had money for the first time. The trust left by Howard to his grandchildren had distributed a little over six hundred shares of Berkshire Hathaway stock to them. Warren gave themno advice on what to do with it. He had never sold a share himself; why would they selltheirs? Susie Jr. sold most of hers to buy a Porsche and a condo. Howie sold some of his to start Buffett Excavating. In a grown-up version of his childhood love of Tonka Toys, he was now diggingbasements for a living. 
Peter, just finishinghis senior year in high school, had been accepted at Stanford and would be headed to California in the fall. More and more duringthe summer of 1976, the house in Omaha was simply empty. Most days after schoolPeter went to Arby¡¯s by himself to get somethingfor dinner, then headed to the darkroom to work on his photography. Even the dogwas decamping. Peter¡¯s friends had started callingto 
report ¡°Hamilton¡¯s over here.¡±30 
BigSusie, who was rarely home these days, admitted to feelingdepressed about the state of her marriage. She seemed to feel that Kay was an interloper who was pursuingher husband;31 Kay had such a territorial way with men that it would have been surprisingif Susie had felt otherwise. Yet despite¡ªor perhaps because of¡ªher sadness, Susie herself was ¡°runningaround like a teenager,¡± as one person put it, in the hot rush of a midlife romance. She was angry at Warren and got careless, lettingherself be seen around Omaha with John 
McCabe, her tennis coach. She stillcalled Milt from time to time as well, and when he agreed to see her they, too, were spotted out in public. She seemed to be livingin different worlds, with no plan to proceed in any direction. She could not conceive of abandoningWarren. She described himas an ¡°extraordinary man.¡±32 
She clearly looked up to him; however much she joked and nagged about his rigidity and his preoccupation with money, he gave her things she very much wanted:security, stability, strength. ¡°It mattered to her that he was honest and had a good value system,¡± says Doris. ¡°If I ever let down someone who needed me,¡± Susie 
said, that would be the biggest failure she could imagine.33 Susie was not a thinker. She had a natural confidence in her ability to manage complex relationships with multiple people, usingher emotions as her guide. But somebody would have to be let down eventually. 
*** 
While Susie was off on her various unknown pursuits, and his three children were headed in their respective directions¡ªPeter takingoff for Palo Alto in his little yellow Triumph convertible; Howie drivinga backhoe, gorilla costume in tow; and Susie Jr. embarkingon married life with her good-lookingsurfer¡ªWarren was on a journey of his own. The man of simple tastes who thought of his life as somethingout of Leave It to Beaver was now spendinghis time at parties on Embassy Row. Katharine Grahamwas dragginghim into elephant territory as fast as she could. 
¡°She didn¡¯t change my behavior as much as changing what I knew and saw. Everywhere she went, she was treated just like royalty. I saw a whole lot of interesting things that I wouldn¡¯t have seen in the world. I had a lot of things explained to me. I picked up a lot around her. Kay knew so damned much about everybody that she would give me insights on people in the political arena. 
¡°It bothered her that she thought I was teaching her all these things and she wasn¡¯t doing anything for me. She was constantly laboring in terms of trying to think of something she could do to help me out, whether it was inviting me to fancy dinners or something else. You could call all these events glamorous or exotic. I found them quite interesting. I¡¯m not knocking these things. There were probably people who were way more dying to do them, particularly in her presence, than I would be. But I had a good time doing it, you know.¡± 
There undoubtedly were people who were ¡°way more dying¡± to go. Nevertheless, Buffett did go, over and 
over again, no matter how ridiculous or awkward for him the events turned out to be. 
One night Grahamtook himto a black-tie state dinner at the Iranian Embassy. She wore a golden gown to match the embassy¡¯s decor. Reza Pahlavi, the Shah of Iran, was an important U.S. strategic ally and a charminghost. His embassy sat at the apex of the Embassy Row Washington socialscene, and its doings glittered with a fin de si¨¨cle magnificence. 
After the cocktail hour, Buffett sat down at his assigned table and found himself between one of Empress Farah Pahlavi¡¯s ladies-in-waitingand Illinois Senator Charles Percy¡¯s wife. He turned toward Loraine Percy and found her locked in a t¨ºte-¨¤-t¨ºte with her other dinner partner, PaulNewman. Seeingthat it might be a while before she turned toward him, Buffett revolved toward his right and said somethingto the empress¡¯s lady-in-waiting. She smiled politely. He said somethingelse. She smiled again, then went blank. Ted Kennedy, seated on her other side, leaned over and uttered some bon mot in French. Her face brightened and they began conversinganimatedly in French. Buffett sat stranded in the middle. He turned back to Loraine Percy and found that she was stillengrossed in Paul Newman. He realized with a dullfeelingthat with Paul Newman sittingon her left, it might become a very longevening. 
Kay had been seated next to the Shah, at another table. Amongthese circles, she was the most important and Warren the least important guest there. Kay was the queen and he was some hayseed investor fromNebraska whom Kay had towed along. Forget Supermoney; this was old money. After a while, Ted Kennedy noticed his plight and asked, ¡°Don¡¯t you speak any French?¡± Buffett felt like a poseur. He had landed in Bora-Bora with only a snowsuit to wear. The meal went on untilone o¡¯clock in the morning, and then the band began to play. To begin the dancing, one of the gentlemen waltzed the empress around the floor. Buffett grabbed Graham¡¯s hand and escaped. 
And yet, if she had asked him again, he would have gone. Because he was for sure not knockingit. The sightseeingwas too good. 
As he knew all too well by now, despite the fame from Supermoney and the articles in Forbes, many prominent people had never heard of him. In May 1976, Buffett was visitingKay Grahamin Washington when she said, I have someone I want you to meet. Jack Byrne, the person in question, was reluctant, however. When Grahamcalled to arrange a meeting, he said, ¡°Who¡¯s Buffett?¡± 
¡°Well, he¡¯s a friend of mine,¡± Grahamsaid. ¡°He¡¯s just bought a piece of the Washington Post.¡± Neither knowingnor caring, Byrne turned down the meeting. Then Buffett¡¯s old friend Lorimer ¡°Davy¡± Davidson, who had retired fromGEICO in 1970, called Byrne. ¡°God, what kind of ninny are you to pass up a meeting 
with Warren Buffett?¡± he asked.34 
*** 
Byrne had been hired in 1976 to try to pull GEICO¡ªon the brink of bankruptcy¡ªout of the ditch. Once an 
insurer only of government employees, GEICO had taken on John Q. Public. ¡°Millions more qualified¡± was the tagline. ¡°Growth, growth, growth, the emphasis was all growth,¡± says a longtime executive.35 Fueled by growth, growth, growth, GEICO stock had traded as high as $61¡ªfar too rich for Buffett, but he had kept an eye on it anyway. In fact, he had never stopped followingit for the past twenty years. 
In 1975, ¡°I looked again at GEICO and was startled by what I saw after a few rule-of-thumb calculations about loss reserves.¡± As an auto-insurance company grows, grows, grows, so does the number of accidents its customers have. If a company underestimates the payments for those claims, it has overstated profits by the same amount. ¡°It was clear in a sixty-second examination that the company was far underreserved and the situation was getting worse. I went in to see [the CEO] Norm Gidden on one of my Washington Post trips. I had known and liked Norm for twenty years on a casual basis. He was friendly, but he had no interest at all in listening to my comments. They were in deep denial. He really sort of hustled me out of the 
36 
office and would not respond on the subject.¡± 
That Buffett, who did not own the stock, was tryingto help GEICO¡¯s management says somethingabout how attached he stillwas to the company fromwhich Lorimer Davidson had recently retired, the stock that had been his first really bigidea, the investment that had made so much money for his friends and family. 
In early 1976, GEICO announced its worst year in history, a $190 million loss fromunderwritingoperations 
during1975.37 The company stopped payingdividends, a move that conveys to shareholders that the tillis empty. Gidden cast about frantically to bolster the mere $25 million in capital that GEICO had in its coffers.38 That April, at Washington¡¯s Statler Hilton, four hundred angry stockholders stormed the 
shareholder meeting, armed with questions and accusations. Shortly afterward, the insurance commissioners 
arrived in a squadron at GEICO¡¯s offices. The board realized, a bit belatedly, that it had to fire the management.39 The board itself was in disarray, several of its members havinglost their personal fortunes in the debacle. Without a capable CEO to steer the company, Sam Butler, a steady-handed lawyer from Cravath, Swaine & Moore, took charge as the lead board member¡ªin effect, a temporary CEO. 
Butler knew that Byrne had quit Travelers on impulse, bitter at havingjust been passed over for the job of CEO. A former actuary who became a millionaire at age twenty-nine through a start-up insurance company, Byrne had been instrumentalin turningaround the Travelers¡¯ flailinghome-and auto-insurance lines two years earlier. Butler called himin Hartford and played on his ego, explainingthat if he took the job at GEICO it would prevent a nationalemergency that would throw the whole United States economy into jeopardy. The 
unemployed Byrne was easily recruited to audition for CEO.40 He came down to Washington in early May and pogo-sticked back and forth before the board, tearingthrough white flip-chart pages, coveringthem with marker pen while talkingnonstop. ¡°I came in and gave a sort of off-the-cuff five-hour blah, blah, blah, here¡¯s 
five points, here¡¯s what we have to do, boomboom boom speech,¡±41 he says. The desperate board had no trouble decidingthat this ruddy, round-faced cannonball was the right guy. 
Byrne¡¯s first task when he took over as CEO was to run straight to the dusty Chinatown offices of the District of Columbia¡¯s Insurance Superintendent Max Wallach. An old-school German who spoke with a thick accent, Wallach was ¡°stubborn as hell, and he had this enormous interest in servingthe public,¡± Byrne recalls. He was disgusted with GEICO¡¯s former management and had refused to dealwith them. Byrne perceived that Wallach was not wild about himeither. Nevertheless, the two men began talkingdaily, 
sometimes hourly.42 Wallach insisted that the company put a dealin place by late June to raise money while 
simultaneously gettingother insurance companies to take over some of its policies¡ªthat is, to ¡°reinsure¡± GEICO.43 The idea was to increase the resources GEICO had available to pay claims and to cut the risk it was carryingso that they were more in balance. Thus, Byrne had to sell other insurers on the idea of putting up money to save a competitor. 
Byrne¡¯s prior experience was that he could sell anything. At first he was confident. 
¡°My pitch was that insurance companies take care of themselves,¡± says Byrne. ¡°We don¡¯t want the regulators involved.¡± If GEICO failed, the regulators would just send the billfor GEICO¡¯s unpaid claims to its competitors. So they would end up bailingit out anyway. But ¡°Ed Rust, Senior, who ran State Farm,¡± says Byrne, ¡°he was a cooney old bastard. He concluded¡ªand he was probably pretty smart¡ª¡®I¡¯llpay a hundred million to cover any of their unpaid claims if it puts GEICO out of business. They have a better mousetrap, and killingGEICO willsave us money in the longrun.¡¯¡± So State Farm backed out of the reinsurance deal. 
¡°In the end,¡± says Byrne, ¡°a couple of really good friends reneged. The Travelers just said, ¡®We¡¯re not going to help.¡¯ They didn¡¯t have any principled idea behind this. Travelers was just wussy about it.¡± 
Three weeks after he joined GEICO, ¡°I was racingaround, thinkingI had made the biggest mistake of my life. My wife, Dorothy, was up in Hartford, cryingand cryingand crying. We had just moved for the nineteenth time.¡± The market was suggestingGEICO might not survive; its stock, so recently tradingfor $61 a share, had crashed to $2 a share. Somebody who owned, say, twenty-five thousand shares, had just seen their fortune dwindle by almost ninety-seven percent¡ªfrom more than $1.5 million to $50,000¡ªfrom enough to live on for the rest of your life to enough to buy a very good sports car. 
The reaction of the company¡¯s investors and shareholders to the calamity would, in not a few cases, literally determine their fate. 
Many longtime shareholders had panicked and talked themselves into selling, which is how the stock got to $2 in the first place. Whoever was buyingfromthemtook a gamble on GEICO¡¯s fate. 
Ben Graham, now age eighty-two, did nothingand kept his stock. Graham¡¯s cousin Rhoda and her husband, Bernie Sarnat, talked to the dean of the University of Chicago business school. He told them to sell it, since stocks that cheap rarely recover. They decided¡ªau contraire¡ªthat a stock that had sunk so low was too 
cheap to sell. What would they gain by selling? They had little to lose by keepingit. So they did nothing.44 Likewise, Lorimer Davidson never sold a share.45 
Leo Goodwin Jr., the son of GEICO¡¯s founder, sold and destituted himself. Shortly thereafter, his son, Leo Goodwin III, died of a drugoverdose, a presumed suicide.46 
Buffett did not own the stock, but with GEICO tradingat $2 a share, he had sniffed out another situation like American Express. Here, however, the company didn¡¯t have a franchise strongenough to pullit out of the ditch. GEICO needed a tow truck. Buffett felt that only a brilliant, energetic manager had any chance of turningthe situation around. He wanted to meet Byrne and size himup before committingany money to the stock. He had Katharine Grahamcall Byrne; after overcomingByrne¡¯s initial resistance, she set up the meeting. 
*** 
Buffett waited at Graham¡¯s Georgetown house after a Post board dinner for Byrne to arrive. ¡°This is risky,¡± he told Don Graham. ¡°It could go completely out of business. But in insurance it¡¯s very hard to get an edge, and they have an edge. If they got the right person in to run it, I think he could turn it around.¡±47 
In came Byrne, red-faced, effervescent, forty-three years old, like a firecracker exploding. The two men sat down by the fireplace in Graham¡¯s high-ceilinged library. Buffett questioned Byrne for a couple of hours. Of all the Irish-Americans who would ever swingthrough Buffett¡¯s orbit, Byrne had the greatest gift of blarney, and ¡°by a wide margin,¡± Buffett says. ¡°I was excited and babblingon and on and on,¡± says Byrne. ¡°Warren asked a lot of questions about how I thought we were goingto stay out of insolvency and what my plans would be after that.¡± 
For Buffett, ¡°the question was whether Byrne really was cool, unflappable, and professional, or whether he just didn¡¯t know what was going on.¡±48 He decided that Byrne ¡°understood insurance very well and had the analytical abilities. And he was a leader and a promoter. GEICO needed an analytical leader to figure out how to solve its problem and it needed a promoter to make that sale to all the constituencies that were 
49
involved.¡± 
The next morning, Buffett met up with George Gillespie, the lawyer who had sold himthe Post stock, 
because the two men were on the board of Pinkerton¡¯s, the detective company, and there was a board meetingthat day.50 ¡°George,¡± he said, ¡°it¡¯s pretty uncharacteristic of me, but today I bought some stock that really might be worthless tomorrow.¡± He had just called Bill Scott back in the office and placed an order for half a million shares of GEICO for Berkshire, leavinganother order to buy millions more as stock became 
available. Scott put together a huge block trade, buying$4 million worth of GEICO for him.51 
Buffett had waited years for the chance to buy GEICO at the right price. The tow truck had arrived, but GEICO stilldid not have reinsurance, it needed capital, and both depended on the goodwill of Max Wallach, 
the regulator.52 But now a new phenomenon took hold. Buffett¡¯s margin of safety was his mere presence as 
an investor. HavingBuffett as a backer¡ªa now-legendary investor whose company already owned a successful insurer¡ªgave Byrne a powerful card to play with the regulators.53 In addition, ¡°General McDermott, the head of USAA, wrote a letter¡± to other insurers, says Byrne. The United States Automobile Association sold insurance only to military officers and behaved accordingly. Within the insurance industry, it was fabled, General Robert McDermott almost revered. He supposedly wrote that ¡°in the military we never 
leave people behind; we have a fallen eagle here.¡±54 
Buffett went to see Wallach to do what he could to convince the crusty old public servant to ease up on the 
June deadline. But assemblingthe reinsurance dealwas like convincingtwo dozen shiveringchildren to hold hands and jump into a lake.55 To pullit off, the story Byrne was sellingwas that the worthless former management, befoulers of GEICO, had been tossed out; that what was left of the termite-riddled house was now clean; that the seasoned Jack Byrne, rescuer of Travelers, had helicoptered in to restore the damage; and so confident was the infallible Warren Buffett in Jack Byrne that he had plunked down a whopping$4 million on the stock. 
Nonetheless, when Byrne started hittingthe banks on WallStreet, ¡°people were walkingout in the middle of lunch,¡± he says. ¡°I got kicked out of everywhere.¡± Then Sam Butler took himdown to Salomon Inc. An old, respected specialist bond house, Salomon had never done an equity dealbut craved to enter the lucrative business of underwritingstocks. John Gutfreund, an influential Salomon executive, sent a junior research analyst, MichaelFrinquelli, and his sidekick, Joe Barone, to Washington to check GEICO out. ¡°I kept them waitingfor an hour and a half, so they were furious,¡± says Byrne. ¡°But I talked till the sun came up. And they were very blank-faced, but on the way to the airport, the company driver heard themtalking, and he told me 
they were very, very enthused on the way back.¡±56 
¡°The insurance industry can¡¯t afford to let these guys go down,¡± Frinquellitold Gutfreund. ¡°It would be a terrible black eye on the industry, and these assholes willnot tolerate that.¡±57 But when Byrne and Butler arrived at Salomon¡¯s offices for his last-ditch attempt to raise the money, Gutfreund opened with a bruising remark: ¡°I don¡¯t know who¡¯d ever buy that fuckingreinsurance treaty you¡¯re tryingto sell.¡± 
¡°You don¡¯t know any fuckingthingyou¡¯re talkingabout,¡± said Byrne right back.58 
Displays of testosterone out of the way, Byrne made a passionate speech, citing ¡°God and the national interest¡± amongreasons why Salomon should raise the money, and referringto Buffett¡¯s investment. As Byrne waxed about GEICO¡¯s prospects and approached liftoff, Gutfreund fiddled with a long, expensive cigar. Finally, wrungout and crestfallen, Byrne ground to a halt. Then Butler said his piece. Byrne thought, from Gutfreund¡¯s demeanor, that they had failed. Then Gutfreund pointed at Byrne and said to Butler, ¡°I will 
do this underwriting. I feelyou¡¯ve got the right guy, but you¡¯ve got to keep him quiet.¡±59 
Salomon agreed to underwrite a $76 million convertible stock offeringby itself. No other investment bank would participate and share the risk. GEICO had to consent to an SEC decree in which it neither admitted nor denied the SEC¡¯s conclusion that it had failed to disclose its losses to the shareholders¡ªthe mere 
description of which in a public offeringprospectus would tend to poison the deal.60 To get the financing done, Salomon had to convince investors that GEICO would survive, yet the financingwas what would enable GEICO to survive. The dealreeked of desperation, and investors could smell it. GEICO was getting such bad press, Byrne said, that if he had walked across the Potomac River, the headlines would have 
screamed, ¡°Byrne Can¡¯t Swim.¡±61 
Buffett, the ace in the hole, was unperturbed by these events. When the offeringlooked as if it was not going to go off, he simply went to New York and met with Gutfreund, sayinghe stood ready to buy the whole deal¡ªat a price. Havinga backup buyer strengthened Salomon¡¯s hand, but Gutfreund also got the impression 
that Buffett wouldn¡¯t mind if the dealfailed and he ended up buyingall the stock.62 For Buffett, this was the ultimate no-risk deal. Naturally, the backup price he insisted on was low. Salomon told Byrne unequivocally that, given Buffett¡¯s ceiling, the convertible offeringwould sell no higher than $9.20 per share, not $10.50 as Byrne wanted. 
Buffett wanted as much of the stock as could be had. He asked Salomon to buy all that was available for him once the stock started trading. Buffett¡¯s willingness to buy after the offeringbolstered Salomon¡¯s ability to market the deal. Otherwise, Salomon would have had to jamthe stock down its customers¡¯ throats. 
Indeed, once the self-fulfillingprophecy of the sage of Omaha took hold, there was more demand for the stock than shares to be had.63 Buffett got only a quarter of the deal. Within a few weeks, after a total of twenty-seven reinsurers came forward to provide the required reinsurance, the common stock had quadrupled and was tradingaround $8 a share. And GEICO¡¯s savior, John Gutfreund, became one of a tiny handfulof modern Wall Street figures whom Buffett genuinely admired. 
But GEICO was stillnot fixed. Byrne needed a thirty-five percent rate increase in New York¡ªand speedily got it.64 In New Jersey, Byrne went to the decayingold capitol of Trenton to plead with Commissioner James Sheeran, a handsome ex-Marine who prided himself on beingtough. Byrne marched into the commissioner¡¯s office with a copy of the company¡¯s license in his pocket and told Sheeran that GEICO must have a rate increase. 
¡°He had a sour-ass, little wizened actuary at his side who had been fired by some insurance company and had a bone to pick,¡± says Byrne. Sheeran said his numbers didn¡¯t justify a rate increase. ¡°I did all the arm-waving and stuff that I could, and Mr. Sheeran was intractable.¡± Byrne pulled the license out of his pocket and threw it on Sheeran¡¯s desk, saying, ¡°I have no choice but to turn in the license,¡± or somethingto that effect but 
containingmore four-letter words.65 He then drove back to the office with tires screeching, sent out telegrams to thirty thousand policyholders cancelingtheir insurance, and fired two thousand New Jersey employees in a single afternoon, before Sheeran could go to court and get an injunction to stop him.66 
¡°It showed everybody, all audiences, I was serious about this,¡± recalls Byrne. ¡°And that I was goingto fight for the life of this company no matter what, includingwalkingout of a state, which wasn¡¯t done back then.¡± Byrne¡¯s impalement of New Jersey had exactly that effect. Everybody knew he was serious. 
¡°It was like he had trained all his life for that position. It was like he¡¯d been genetically designed for that particular period of time. If you¡¯d searched the country, you could not have found a better battlefield commander. He had to assemble a team of people, he had to chop thousands of heads, and he had to change the thinking of those heads that stayed around. It was a Herculean job. Nobody could have done it better than Jack. He was a tough, disciplined thinker about pricing and reserves and he demanded rational business principles and actions. Everybody knew exactly what GEICO was all about, and he worked extraordinary hours focused on a single objective. He was always interested in what made sense rather than what had been done in the past.¡± 
Byrne walked through GEICO¡¯s door each morning, sailed his hat fifty feet up to the upper floor of the atrium, and hollered hello to the secretaries.67 ¡°If I don¡¯t whistle by the graveyard, who is goingto?¡± he asked. ¡°If I don¡¯t dance, who¡¯s goingto dance?¡± He had a way of makingpeople feel tah-riffic about the place where they went to work every morning, despite the career-threateningstatus of their employer. He chopped forty percent of the company¡¯s customers, sold half of its profitable life-insurance affiliate to raise 
cash, and withdrew fromall but seven states plus the District of Columbia. Byrne seemed to run on rocket fuel. He called his executives into meetings at the Sheraton and Westin hotels near Dulles Airport and questioned themfor fifteen hours at a stretch, sometimes for days at a time.68 He interrupted GEICO¡¯s 
human-resources manager at the podiumduringa meetingby saying, ¡°You¡¯re out,¡± and named his successor from the audience that very moment. His attitude was: ¡°You¡¯re not runninga public library here, you¡¯re tryingto save a company.¡±69 
¡°Jack was unmerciful on me,¡± says Tony Nicely, who had worked for GEICO since he was eighteen years old. ¡°He liked pickingon young, aggressive people. But he taught me a lot and I will always be indebted to 
him. He taught me to think of the business as a whole, not separate functions like underwritingor investing. I learned the importance of a disciplined balance sheet.¡± 
Byrne told his workers if they couldn¡¯t meet a certain sales figure, they would have to hoist his 240 pounds on their shoulders into a sedan chair like a Roman emperor and bear himinto company meetings for a year. 70 They made the numbers. Wearinga huge chef¡¯s hat and a giant shamrock, ¡°I cooked Irish dinners for them,¡± he says. ¡°Colcannon, which is turnips and potatoes and sour milk. It tastes terrible. I¡¯d have these bigkettles, and I¡¯d pound these turnips, saying, ¡®Oh, this is goingto be wonderful!¡¯¡± 
Buffett grabbed Byrne and his wife, Dorothy, and immediately pulled theminto his circle of friends. Now, between GEICO, Washington Post meetings, Pinkerton¡¯s board meetings, West Coast trips for Blue Chip and Wesco, business trips to New York, board meetings for Munsingwear, a board that he had joined in 1974, and Kay Parties, he was travelingmuch of the time. Buffett decided that he needed help in the office. Pushed by BigSusie, one of her tennis friends approached Warren about a job as a sort of general apprentice. Dan Grossman, a bright Yale graduate with a Stanford business degree, even offered to work for free. Buffett didn¡¯t take himup on that, but latched on to Grossman with his usual intensity. Some thought that since neither of his sons wanted to work in the business, he saw in Grossman the chance at a surrogate son, someone who could potentially succeed him. 
Buffett remodeled the office in order to installGrossman next door to himself. Gladys ran interference while Buffett spent hour after hour with him, explainingfloat, reviewingfinancial models of insurance companies, outliningregulatory filings, tellingGrossman his stories, and leafingthrough the old Moody¡¯s Manuals. He played hours of tennis and handballwith Grossman and added himto the Graham Group, where Grossman 
became friendly with many people.71 Warren had found yet another object of obsession. 
41 
AndThenWhat? 
Omaha . 1977 
Susie¡¯s friends would say that she created a separate life for herself within her marriage as a way to accommodate Warren¡¯s obsessions. As one put it, Warren¡¯s ¡°realmarriage was to Berkshire Hathaway.¡± There was no gettingaround that fact. However uneasily, however, their routine had worked for them. At least, that is, it worked for them until another of Buffett¡¯s obsessions¡ªwith Katharine Graham¡ªreached the point that it began to push Susie offstage. That was when she finally took action. 
Warren now spent much of his time elephant-bumpingat black-tie events in New York and Washington with Graham, or stayingat her house for her Kay Parties. Despite his residualawkwardness and cacklinglaugh, he was meetinga circle of powerful, celebrated friends and acquaintances of Kay¡¯s that opened his eyes to a new world. ¡°I met Truman Capote,¡± he says about the author of Breakfast at Tiffany¡¯s and In Cold Blood, who had thrown the legendary Black and White Ballin Graham¡¯s honor at the Plaza Hotel in New York; the event became known as the ¡°party of the century.¡± Capote had been a confidant of many rich international society women. 
¡°He would come down to her place and sit there, this little guy all kind of hunched down on the sofa, talking in this voice you couldn¡¯t believe. But he knew all the secrets of all of them. He really did know them, because they all talked to him. He was terribly canny. The one person he really liked was Kay. Unlike the rest, he just didn¡¯t feel she was a phony, I think.¡± 
Buffett had even been summoned by former British ambassador Walter Annenberg, who owned Triangle 
Publications, which held, amongother lucrative properties, the Philadelphia Inquirer and Buffett¡¯s childhood favorite, the Daily Racing Form. 
¡°Walter read about me in the Wall Street Journal in 1977. I got this letter that read, ¡®Dear Mr. Buffett,¡¯ and he invited me to Sunnylands,¡± his California estate. Havingheard stories about the famously thin-skinned ambassador fromTomMurphy as well as from Kay Graham, who had reason to know about how easily offended he was, Buffett was intrigued. Annenberg¡¯s father featured in many of the stories. Besides the publishinginterests that he had bequeathed to his son, Moe Annenberghad also left hima legacy of scandal and shame, havinggone to prison for tax evasion in connection with a racingwire he ran that telegraphed horse-race results to bookies allover the country. Of dubious legality, it was linked to organized crime, and added to his reputation for havingmobster connections. Reportedly to save his son from prosecution alongwith him, Moe Annenbergcopped a plea and was led into jail wearinga homburghat and chains. Walter was later to say that his gaunt, pain-racked father, dyingof a brain tumor in St. Mary¡¯s 
Hospital, whispered as his last few words, ¡°My sufferingis allfor the purpose of makinga man out of you.¡±1 Whether this scene was real or imagined, Walter would later act as though he believed it. 
Consumed by a drive to redeem his family¡¯s honor, Walter was now responsible for the support of his mother and his sisters. He learned the publishingbusiness through trial by fire and proved a gifted entrepreneur. He dreamed up Seventeen magazine, then a booklet-size magazine called TV Guide, a brilliant conception that fed the public¡¯s appetite for information about television schedules, shows, and stars. By the time he met Buffett, he had not only become a great business success story but had reached the pinnacle of social respectability after Richard Nixon appointed him ambassador to England¡¯s Court of St. James¡¯s. Yet even though he restored the family name, he never overcame the personal scars of his legacy. 
Buffett arrived at Sunnylands filled with curiosity to meet Annenberg. The two already had a connection; Annenbergwas the brother of Aye Simon, the ¡°spoiled, spoiled¡± widow of Ben Rosner¡¯s former partner Leo Simon¡ªthe same Aye Simon whom Rosner had decided to screw when he had sold Associated Retailingto Buffett too cheap, because she was no longer his partner. On the one occasion that Buffett had met her, Aye Simon had entertained himin her vast art-filled apartment in New York City. Maids tiptoed back and forth carryingsilver trays of cucumber sandwiches; Aye explained to Buffett that her ¡°Pop,¡± Moe Annenberg, once had his goons, known as ¡°the boys,¡± ¡°take a few shots at Leo¡± to improve his attitude toward Moe. You can stillsee the bullet holes on a buildingon a certain corner of Michigan Avenue in Chicago, she told Buffett. Aye then asked for her son to join the Buffett partnership. Warren, ¡°envisioningbullets¡± if he turned in a year of bad results, had ¡°tap-danced¡± his way out of the situation. 
Her brother, Walter, had spent decades establishinga reputation for propriety about as different fromthe image of bullets on Michigan Avenue as you could get. Sunnylands was a vast, opulent oasis in the desert in Rancho Mirage, California. Amid a garden filled with the images of Mayan sun gods, Rodin¡¯s bronze sculpture of Eve stood in a reflectingpool, coveringher face in shame. Hundreds of floatingbromeliads gazed up at her fromthe water beneath her feet. At Sunnylands, Annenberghad entertained Prince Charles, hosted Frank Sinatra¡¯s fourth wedding, and given his friend Richard Nixon peace and quiet to write his last State of the Union address. 
¡°He had a courtly way about him and was very formal. We went outside in back by the pool, and Walter sat down. He was beautifully dressed and looked as though everything he was wearing had been bought that morning. He was about seventy at the time, and I was about forty-seven. And he said, in a nice, kind manner, as if he were talking to a young man he was trying to help, ¡®Mr. Buffett, the first thing you should understand is, nobody likes to be criticized.¡¯ That was setting the ground rules for getting along.¡± 
Nothingcould be easier for Buffett. ¡°I said, ¡®Yes, Mr. Ambassador. I¡¯ve got it. Don¡¯t worry about that one.¡¯ 
¡°And then he started in on ¡®Essentiality.¡¯ 
¡°¡®There are three properties in the world,¡¯ he said, ¡®that have the quality of ¡®Essentiality.¡¯ They are the Daily Racing Form, the TV Guide, and the Wall Street Journal. And I own two out of three.¡¯ 
¡°What he meant by ¡®Essentiality¡¯ was that, even during the Depression, he saw the Racing Form being sold for two and a half bucks down in Cuba.¡± 
The Racing Form had that quality because there was no source of better or more complete information about handicappinghorses. 
¡°It sold a hundred fifty thousand copies a day, and it had for about fifty years. It cost more than two bucks, and it was essential. If you were headed to the racetrack and were a serious racing handicapper, you wanted the Racing Form. He could charge whatever he wanted, and people were going to pay it. It¡¯s like selling needles to addicts, basically. 
¡°So every year, Walter would go in and say, ¡®Mirror, mirror, on the wall, how much should I raise the price of the Racing Form this fall?¡¯ 
¡°And the mirror would always say, ¡®Walter, charge another quarter!¡¯¡± 
This was when you could buy the entire New York Times or Washington Post for a quarter. And yet, thought Buffett, the New York Times and the Washington Post were great businesses! That meant the Daily Racing Form was an incredible business. 
Annenbergenjoyed owningtwo of the Essentialities, but he wanted to own all three. The visit to Sunnylands was the beginningof a reelthat he and Buffett would dance fromtime to time:talkingabout whether and how they could buy the Wall Street Journal together. 
But ¡°the real reason that he had me out there was to send a message to Kay.¡± 
The Annenbergs and the Grahams had once been friends.2 Then, in 1969, duringthe confirmation hearingfor Annenberg¡¯s appointment as ambassador to Great Britain, the Post¡¯s muckrakingcolumnist, Drew Pearson, penned a column sayingthat Annenberg¡¯s fortune ¡°was built up by gangwarfare¡± and repeated an unsubstantiated rumor that his father had paid $1 million a year in protection money to mob boss Al 
Capone.3 Annenberg, enraged, accused Grahamof usingher paper as a political weapon against President Nixon, the man who had restored the Annenbergfamily to respectability by takingthe risk of nominatinghim for the ambassadorship. ¡°President Nixon may have had his flaws,¡± Annenbergsaid later, ¡°but he paid me 
the highest honor that anyone ever paid the family.¡±4 
The morningof his confirmation hearing, Annenbergread another Pearson column that described at length his editorialvindictiveness at the Philadelphia Inquirer. He clutched his chest and his face turned purple. His wife thought he was havinga heart attack.5 
Annenbergcalled Grahamto ask for a retraction. She tried to soothe his feelings, but said she never interfered with the editorial page. 
That evening, after a stressful day of hearings in which Walter had had to defend himself one by one against the points made in the Pearson columns, the Annenbergs reluctantly went to Graham¡¯s Georgetown mansion to attend a dinner party for fifty guests to which they had been invited many weeks before. Upon enteringthe gilded splendor of Graham¡¯s drawingroom, Annenberg¡ªwho cared deeply about protocol and who was well primed to take offense that night¡ªdid indeed take offense when Graham seated someone else next to herself and seated himbetween two of her friends, Evangeline Bruce, wife of the outgoingBritish ambassador David Bruce, and Lorraine Cooper, the wife of a prominent senator. 
Annenberg¡¯s prickliness about anythinghe took as a slight resembled in many ways his friend Nixon¡¯s lack of 
perspective. He and Nixon also shared an unfortunate inability to charmand disarm.6 Thus, a feud that had been brewingbetween Mrs. Annenbergand Vangie Bruce over the decoration of the ambassadorial residence soon escalated and overshadowed the meal.7 Compoundingthis, Mrs. Cooper offended Annenbergby 
supposedly implyingthat he wasn¡¯t rich enough to be ambassador.8 Feelingthat he had been set up, Annenbergstalked out of the party early and stopped speakingto Kay Graham. 
¡°Kay was distraught about it. She wanted enormously to get along with Walter. Kay was not looking to have fights with anybody. That was not her style. She liked being in charge, but she did not like to show off. She liked big shots, and she liked big-shot guys, particularly. So it was not comfortable for her to be in a fight with him. But she also wanted Walter to understand that she wasn¡¯t going to tell Ben Bradlee what to write about in the paper. 
¡°So by the time I went out to see him, he was thinking about having a book commissioned about Phil Graham, and how Phil¡¯s teeth were in a funny way.¡± 
Phil Graham¡¯s teeth. 
¡°Walter had a theory that if you were gap-toothed, that was a sign of mental instability. And if Walter had a theory, you didn¡¯t argue with it. Walter liked me, but one reason that he liked me was that I never disagreed. If Walter said to me, black was white, I just wouldn¡¯t say anything. 
¡°So I became the go-between with Kay.¡± Annenbergexpected Buffett to deliver the message that if he published the book about Phil Graham¡¯s teeth, well, that¡¯s show business. 
¡°Meanwhile, he couldn¡¯t have been nicer to me. He put me in this super-fancy guest room. And he took me into his office, where he had a little display in a glass case of a Prussian coin, a pocketknife, and one other thing. It was all that his grandfather had in his pocket when he landed in this country from Prussia. And he said, ¡®Everything you see here is a product of that.¡¯ In a period of not that many years, Walter had rehabilitated his family. He did his father proud. And that was his number one goal in life, to do his father proud.¡± 
Buffett understood Annenbergpsychologically yet never seemed to notice certain resemblances between the ambassador and himself. Probably this was because they were so different in other ways. Annenberg¡¯s humorlessness, his fondness for opulence and formality, and his enmity toward the Grahams set him strikingly apart fromBuffett, and they were at opposite poles politically. Nonetheless, beneath their similarly paper-thin skins, these two shrewd businessmen shared a deep drive to prove themselves¡ªboth in business and in the socialworld¡ªand a reverence for fathers whom they felt the world had treated unjustly. 
They struck up a correspondence. Annenbergwould come to think of himself, in an avuncular sort of way, as 
trainingBuffett in philanthropy. He thought rich people should give it allaway before they died lest their appointed stewards dishonor their obligations.9 He wanted to warn Buffett of the potential pitfalls. Mistrustful by nature and always testingpeople¡ªagain, like Buffett in both respects¡ªAnnenberghad made a close study of failed foundations and the perfidy of foundation trustees. He sent Buffett examples of foundations gone wrongafter their benefactors had died, alongwith chitchat about stocks and courtly correspondence. Buffett¡ªa buddingphilanthropist and a publisher whose paper had won a Pulitzer Prize for exposingthe failed stewardship of a major charity¡ªread this materialwith interest. Annenbergconveyed to him his dread of an imperial administrator for his money, one who would conduct what he referred to as ¡°foundation rapings¡± after he was gone. 
¡°Dear Warren,¡± he wrote, thankingBuffett for sendingan article about Mac Bundy, who ran the Ford 
Foundation in a way that Annenbergdeemed abhorrent,10 ¡°Henry [Ford II] once described McGeorge Bundy as ¡®the most arrogant son of a bitch in the country, who developed the lifestyle of an Arabian prince on Ford Foundation money.¡¯¡±11 
Annenbergspent immense amounts of time schemingto avoid beingdouble-crossed after he was dead. He told Buffett about the Donner Foundation, whose executive director had changed the name of the foundation to the Independence Fund, obliteratingthe foundingdonor.12 ¡°I respectfully suggest you make sure that no one can tamper with the name of your foundation after you¡¯re gone,¡± he wrote. ¡°Remember Mr. Donner.¡±13 
Buffett thought otherwise about the foundation he and Susie had set up. ¡°It should not have been named the Buffett Foundation,¡± he said later. ¡°It was dumb to name it the Buffett Foundation. But it would also be 
14 
dumb to change it now, because it would be too obvious.¡± 
He and Annenbergshared a fascination for media and publishing. TV Guide was Annenberg¡¯s greatest asset. It had the same ¡°essentiality¡± as the Daily Racing Form, but a much bigger audience. Once Buffett got the idea that Annenbergwas goingto sell TV Guide, he and TomMurphy flew out to Los Angeles to see if the imperious ambassador would sellit to them, fifty-fifty. 
But Annenbergwanted to be paid in stock, not cash. ¡°And we wouldn¡¯t give our stock away,¡± says Murphy. ¡°Warren never gave his stock away; neither did I if I could possibly avoid it. You don¡¯t get rich that way.¡± Givingstock in exchange for TV Guide was saying, in a literalsense, that they thought it would earn more in the future than whatever share of Berkshire Buffett swapped for it. Payingwith stock showed a sort of contempt for your own business versus whatever it was that you were buying¡ªthat is, unless you were 
payingwith stock that had gotten wildly overpriced.15 As a rule, the way they ran their businesses and dealt with their shareholders meant that didn¡¯t happen, so they didn¡¯t buy TV Guide. 
Nevertheless, Buffett continued to work as the go-between for Annenbergand Graham, who had been taking Buffett to etiquette school and preparinghimfor these elevated doings. She called himconstantly about the smallest details of her life. He visited her ramblingshingle mansion on Martha¡¯s Vineyard overlooking Lambert¡¯s Cove, and they traveled together often to business meetings and went, on a lark, to Niagara Falls. He took her to see one of his totems, the Berkshire textile mills. As the flirtatious, fifty-nine-year-old Kay was spotted tossingthe forty-six-year-old Warren her house key at charity benefits and the two were seen together ever more often in public, by early 1977 the gossip columns had taken note, and, as Graham put it, 
¡°eyebrows shot up.¡±16 
Friends observed, as one put it, that the pair had ¡°zero chemistry.¡± Yet Graham discussed an affair candidly with her friends.17 She was obviously sexually insecure but tried to project the opposite, as illustrated in her memoir.18 Her mother, notably, was famous for pursuing(and flaunting) obsessive, flirtatious, but platonic 
relationships with powerful, brilliant men. Buffett himself would go on to develop a history of romanticized friendships with women. Whatever genuinely romantic elements the relationship with Kay may have had initially, however, at the heart theirs was a friendship. 
But publicity upset the delicate equilibriumbetween Susie and Warren. Whatever else was goingon in her life, she stillcared very much about her husband. Moreover, Susie needed the people in her life to need her, even to be dependent on her. Now she felt discounted and trivialized. Yet she would never allow herself to look like the spurned Daisy Mae in public. She continued to stay at Kay¡¯s house when she traveled to Washington and smiled benevolently no matter how often her husband was seen with Kay. Some of Susie¡¯s friends believed that she was, in fact, indifferent. Others felt that she needed to be in control or that Warren¡¯s relationship with Kay gave her cover to live her own separate life in peace. Nevertheless, she made it plain to severalfriends that she was furious and humiliated. Her way of dealingwith the situation was to send Graham a letter grantingher leave to pursue a relationship with Warren¡ªas if Kay had been waitingfor any 
such permission.19 Kay showed the letter to people as though it let her off the hook.20 
Susie was now workinghard on a serious singingcareer. In 1976, she had approached the owners of Omaha¡¯s French Caf¨¦, a formal restaurant located in a renovated warehouse in the quaint, cobblestoned Old Market district downtown, and suggested that she singin their lounge, the Underground. They were astonished but gladly agreed. Susie had once hosted a benefit there for African relief¡ªbarefoot, in gingham, wearinga 
bandanna.21 Ads went up verifyingthe rumors that Susan Buffett would become a chanteuse. ¡°This is very scary, but I¡¯ve always wanted to live to the hilt,¡±22 she had told a reporter before her first performance. 
She ¡°lacked self-confidence,¡± said a reviewer, but her ¡°Ann-Margret youthfulness,¡± ¡°stylized jazz,¡± and desire to please won over the crowd in the French Caf¨¦¡¯s stone-lined basement cabaret. The audience was 
described as beingmade up of ¡°uncriticalfriends¡± and people who attended out of curiosity to see a rich man¡¯s wife.23 Within weeks, BillRuane had said to her, ¡°This is Broadway Bill. I¡¯ve lined you up with auditions in New York.¡± She did a three-week gigas an openingact at Yellow Brick Road, See Saw, Tramps, 
and The Ballroom. Afterward she said, ¡°I¡¯ve been asked back, but I¡¯m goingto be loose about the timing. Maybe after the first of the year. First I plan to find a musicaldirector and put a package together. Now I know how hard it is, but I¡¯m hooked on it, and when I go back, I want to do six months without stopping.¡±24 
She signed up with the WilliamMorris talent agency. 
That summer had taken both Buffetts to New York. Warren played bridge in Kay¡¯s apartment, and on other evenings Susie sangwhile he gazed at her rapturously from the audience. Her musicalcareer bound them together¡ªhe was thrilled for her success. They considered buyingan apartment in a landmarked buildingjust off Fifth Avenue in New York City, which would have given them a permanent base in New York¡ªbut 
decided to pass. 25 
Susie was indeed loose about the timing, and by the fall of 1976 had made no plans to go back to New York. 
She stillspent more time at Laguna than Warren. Moreover, her ¡°clientele¡± around Omaha was a distraction. From Leila, who besieged Susie with hours of stories about the 381/2 wonderful years with Howard; to Howie, who was runninga backhoe outside Omaha; to Dottie, who seemed to be sleepwalkingthrough her life, so passive that one day when she called and reported that there was a bigfire at her house, Susie had no sooner hungup the phone than she wondered whether Dottie had called the fire department. Susie phoned 
her sister back. Dottie said no, she had thought only of callingSusie.26 And all these responsibilities came only from the family; outnumberingthemby miles were Susie¡¯s ¡°vagrants,¡± lonelyhearts, and local relationships. 
Instead of settingup commitments to singin New York, therefore, she scheduled another round of performances for the springof 1977 at the French Caf¨¦ in Omaha. With that, a magazine published by the Omaha World-Herald decided to do a cover piece on the millionaire¡¯s wife who set out to become a cabaret singer in midlife. The reporter, Al ¡°Bud¡± Pagel, started out with a routine story, approachingSusie¡¯s friends and askingthemsimple questions about her life. What makes Susie sing?he wanted to know. Like many 
people in Omaha, of course, he had heard the rumors about Susie¡¯s extracurricular activities.27 Susie¡¯s friends were ¡°defensive¡± and ¡°protective.¡± 
Eunice Denenberg¡°bristled¡± and declared, ¡°Susie is one of those old-fashioned GOOD people that lots of 
folks today don¡¯t think exist. So they attribute some of their own baser behavior to her because it bothers them.¡±28 The worshippers circled to protect the saint. Pageladmitted that, faced with such an aggressive pack of defenders, yes, it did bringout a subconscious urge in himto toss a handfulof mud at Susie¡¯s best 
white party dress.29 
For her interview, Susie sat down with Pagelon the couch by the fireplace in the Buffetts¡¯ family room, with its Ping-Pongtable and the posters on the wallthat said things like ¡°Love Is Here to Stay¡± and ¡°Damn Everythingbut the Circus.¡± She struck himas vulnerable. 
¡°Beinga performer is kind of the opposite of beinga mother,¡± she told him in her interview. ¡°I¡¯mnot used to the care and feedingof Susan Buffett. Maybe I ama reinforcement for someone who is on the verge of thinking, ¡®I want to try somethingbut I¡¯mafraid to do it.¡¯ I¡¯m just one more person who tried somethingbut 
was afraid to do it.¡± She paused. ¡°That¡¯s the only story I have.¡±30 
The reporter gave some indication he was lookingfor more of a story than that. His curiosity had been piqued rather than muzzled by her pit-bull defenders. Susie opened up and talked about herself for five hours, without gettinginto her personal relationships. Still, by the end, she said she was astonished at what she had done:The woman whose lips were sealed like a mollusk¡¯s when people tried to pry her open at dinner parties had given herself to Pagel. In the process she managed to win himover as a friend. 
When the story was published, the cover of the magazine read, What Makes Susie Sing? and featured a photo 
of her with a ¡°who knows?¡± expression, tentative smile, eyes tilted up, avoidingthe camera. Inside, Susie faced away fromthe camera in the photographs, gazingdown at Hamilton with a small smile and lookingat her hands on the piano keyboard. Somethinginward, an uncertain dream, had replaced the open-jawed grin that nearly always appeared in pictures of her. 
The morningthe story came out, Susie showed up on Pagel¡¯s doorstep with a huge box of See¡¯s Candies, 
excited as a child at the portrait he had drawn of her. She put himon the guest list to her openingat the French Caf¨¦ and sent himan invitation.31 He and other guests remember her as lookingyoungand radiant that night, wearinga brunette shagwigand a sequined dress that hugged her newly svelte figure. Raven-feather eyelashes fluttered around her beamingeyes. The look on her face suggested that she was discovering that the care and feedingof Susan Buffett was not so bad. By now she had developed some polish as a 
performer, and smiled seductively while the crowd hooted and hollered in between songs. 32 Her guests saw the glow of a woman emergingfrom behind her role as a wife and mother onto the stage of her own life. The audience found her tender delivery and smooth liquid stylingof pop standards and sentimental favorites engagingand sweet. Her repertoire of medleys¡ª¡°Daddy¡± songs like ¡°My Heart Belongs to Daddy¡± cabaret classics like ¡°What Are You Doingthe Rest of Your Life?¡± and her personalfavorite, Sondheim¡¯s ¡°Send in 
the Clowns¡±33¡ªmoistened eyes. When she sang, Susie¡¯s torchy side came to life and she opened up emotionally. Standingin the back with his arms crossed, watchinghis wife vampingand flirtingand romancingher audience, Buffett, in good humor, remarked, ¡°This is pretty good of me to let her do this.¡± 
Yet by the summer of 1977, Susie stillhad not followed up on her New York opportunities. Warren thought it was because his spontaneous wife resisted the structured time commitments required of a professionalsinger. Some of the Buffetts¡¯ friends questioned whether Susie¡¯s pretty warble and her appealingstage presence could compete with established singers of greater artistry. While Susie loved to perform, it was Warren¡¯s dream that his wife might become a singingstar with a recordingcareer. Her ambitions had always been harnessed on behalf of others, not herself. Meanwhile, the care and feedingof Susan Buffett was something separate, a more private matter. 
There was the rub. Beinga rich man¡¯s wife opened doors that would have helped her pursue a serious singing career. But it also opened doors that invited others to peer into her personal life, doors that she would prefer remained shut. Warren could stay at Kay Graham¡¯s house and be seen as her date in public in perfect freedom, while the gossip columns did no more than wink. Yet as a married woman, Susie had no such liberty. The women¡¯s movement had changed many things, but not that. With her privacy eroding, the question of how to deal with her increasingly divided feelings was beginningto tear her apart. 
Stan Lipsey, their Sun publisher friend, was also havingsome issues with his marriage, and he and Susie sat 
on park benches in the mornings, sharingconfidences. Both of them were interested in Eastern thought and the human-potentialmovement, which had sprungfrom the Esalen Institute in BigSur, California.34 They somehow convinced Warren, as well as Stan¡¯s wife, Jeannie, and Susie¡¯s sister, Dottie, to join themat a weekend workshop in a Lincoln hotel. The idea was to get in touch with yourself. The workshop started with an exercise to get people to open up to one another nonjudgmentally, a skill of Susie¡¯s. Warren¡¯s reaction to such an outpouringwas nothinglike his wife¡¯s. 
¡°There were five hundred people who had come from as much as a thousand miles away. And they started doing all these crazy things. First we had to get a partner. And one of them was to start talking, and the other person, no matter what, just keeps saying, ¡®And then what?¡¯ 
¡°So I paired up with this nice woman from Oklahoma, and she starts talking. Then she pauses and I say, ¡®And then what?¡¯ In ten minutes, she¡¯s sobbing uncontrollably. I¡¯ve destroyed her, just by saying, ¡®And then what?¡¯ It was like I was boring into her. I felt like I was running a torture chamber or something.¡± 
After havingmisinterpreted this exercise in every possible way, Buffett left his tear-drenched companion, eager to move on. The leader told the participants to find another partner. ¡°Now, when I hear the leader say, ¡®I want you to choose a partner of the opposite sex,¡¯ Lipsey says, ¡°I¡¯m lookingfor someone attractive.¡± Buffett stood lookingaround like someone who didn¡¯t quite know what to do. ¡°The next thingyou know,¡± says Lipsey, ¡°he¡¯s paired with this very heavy woman.¡± 
¡°She was wearing a muumuu and weighed about four hundred pounds. My job was to get down on the floor. And then the leader said this woman was to give me the ¡®gift of her weight.¡¯ Which meant she flopped right down on top of me. There was this whale coming right at me. I was just¡ªack! It turned out to be the gift that never stopped giving. 
¡°Meanwhile, in the other room, they were having people bark like dogs. I could hear Dottie¡ªwho was so uptight she could hardly say hello to somebody¡ªtrying desperately to bark.¡± 
Followinga session of beingblindfolded and led through the streets of Lincoln to experience sensory deprivation, Susie and Stan gave up and they all ran away to a movie theater to watch Annie Hall¡ª¡°a nervous romance¡±¡ªand ¡°spent the rest of the weekend gorgingourselves on fried food and ice-cream sundaes,¡± says Lipsey. 
The summer of 1977, while Buffett again played bridge marathons at Kay Graham¡¯s apartment in New York, Susie stayed away fromhome at allhours of the day and night. 
Howie got married that August to Marcia Sue Duncan, despite her father¡¯s warnings that she would not be happy with a guy who dugbasements for a livingand drove a pickup truck everywhere with a couple of big shaggy dogs in its cargo bed. After sendingthe newlyweds a gift, Kay Grahamcalled Buffett to say how disgusted she was that Howie had spelled three words in the thank-you note wrong. 
Over Labor Day weekend, Susie gave her final performance in Omaha, appearingat the OrpheumTheater as the openingact for singer/songwriter PaulWilliams. In a pink chiffon gown, she smiled and beguiled as her smooth contralto oozed romantic jazzy ballads like warm honey, ¡°languorous and sensual.¡± She 
come-hithered the audience with ¡°Let¡¯s feellike we¡¯re in love, okay?¡±35 But in a small, gossipy city like Omaha, that announcement probably could have been left unmade. 
That fall, Susie apparently began to realize what a mess her life had become. She went out until four o¡¯clock in the morning, drivingall the way to Wahoo¡ªwhere she had spent her weddingnight¡ªplayingmusic at top volume on the radio of her Porsche before returningat dawn to her lonely home.36 
At her best Susie gave people part of her soul. Now panicked, she reached out to people and made her problems their own. Friends listened to her agonize in parks, on walks, on longdrives. She stockpiled little sums of money and gave themto friends to hold, as if planningan escape. She appeared at Berkshire Hathaway¡¯s office in her tennis palDan Grossman¡¯s doorway, sobbingand askingfor advice, while her husband sat in his office next door. 
Susie seemed to realize on some levelthat she was compromisingnumerous people by lettingthemknow more than her husband did about his troubled marriage and the secret yearnings of his disillusioned wife. You can¡¯t tell Warren, she said to one person. If you love him, you won¡¯t hurt himthat way. If he ever found out, 
he would kill himself.37 
So powerfulwas Susie, so beloved, so apparent was Warren¡¯s devotion to his wife, and so thoroughly had Susie trained everyone to think that he was helpless without her, that people accepted this burden. Some did it automatically, some did it out of loyalty, some did it uneasily, half aware of the flaws in her logic. But they all now felt responsible for keepingher secrets on the pretext of Warren¡¯s vulnerability. 
Yet nothingappeared amiss at Gardiner¡¯s Tennis Ranch in Arizona, where the GrahamGroup was meeting that fall. Most of the group¡ªnow usually referred to as the Buffett Group¡ªhad longago accepted the idea of ¡°Warren-o¡± and ¡°Susan-o¡± as an affectionate couple who lived separate lives. This year proceeded like any other, with Susie in attendance alongwith the rest of the wives. BillRuane presented Warren¡¯s Fortune 
article ¡°How Inflation Swindles the Equity Investor.¡±38 Buffett explained that stocks, especially stocks of companies that can raise prices as their costs increase, are the best protection against inflation¡ªbut their value is stilleroded by severe inflation, a problem that he referred to as a ¡°giant corporate tapeworm.¡±39 At a social break, Marshall Weinbergtold Warren and Susie about his niece, who was livingand workingon a reservation with Native Americans. ¡°Oh!¡± gushed Susie. ¡°I would love to do that! It would be so wonderful to live so simply and help those poor people on a reservation that way.¡± Warren looked at her. ¡°Sooz, I¡¯ll buy 
you one,¡± he said, deadpan.40 
At age forty-seven, Warren had already accomplished everythinghe had ever imagined he could want. He was worth $72 million. He ran a company that was worth $135 million.41 His newspaper had won the two highest prizes in journalism. He was one of the most important men in Omaha and increasingly prominent at a national level. He was servingon the boards of the largest localbank, the Washington Post, and a number of other companies. He had been CEO of three companies and had bought and sold successfully more stocks than most people could name in a lifetime. Most of his original partners were now enormously rich. 
Allhe wanted was to keep on makingmoney for the thrill of it without changinganythingelse about his life. He knew Susie thought he was obsessed with money, but she always had, yet they had managed to lead their lives in such a way so as to honor their differences while stayinga united teamfor twenty-five years. Or so it seemed to him. 
Later that fall, after the Buffett Group meeting, Susie went to visit a high school friend who lived in San Francisco. She stayed for four or five weeks. One relationship after another seemed to bind her to California. Her nephew Billy Rogers had moved to the West Coast to join the music scene. Susie had told himshe would give himany help he needed to kick his heroin addiction, but she worried about himon his own in California. Bertie Buffett, who was now married to Hilton Bialek, lived in San Francisco and Carmel. Jeannie and Stan Lipsey were thinkingof movingto San Francisco. Susie¡¯s widowed friend Rackie Newman now lived there. Susie Jr. and her husband were livingin Los Angeles. Peter, on whom she had grown to rely, was now a sophomore at Stanford in Palo Alto. And she and Warren already had their own foothold in California¡ªtheir vacation home in Emerald Bay, just south of Los Angeles. Fewer and fewer ties pulled her back to Nebraska. The house in Omaha was spooky empty: As soon as Peter left for college, Hamilton the dogran away and 
went to live with one of Peter¡¯s friends.42 
Spendingthis extended time in San Francisco, Susie found it a beautiful, creative, spirited city. At every angle from its risinghills, the bay and ocean and bridges and sunsets and rickrack rows of Victorian houses beckoned, Come look at me. A delirious mosaic of people, neighborhoods, architecture, culture, art, and music said, You¡¯llnever be bored in San Francisco. The thermometer never registered 110 degrees in San Francisco. The city¡¯s air raced through your lungs, clean and liberating. In the spontaneous, hot, do-anything-with-anyone mood of the 1970s, San Francisco was the capital of mind-expanding, hedonistic spirituality, a magnet of tolerance where people didn¡¯t judge one another. 
Susie looked at some apartments. She came back to Omaha and went to the French Caf¨¦, where she had been singing, and talked to Astrid Menks, who was the ma.tre d¡¯there on Monday nights as well as a sommelier and sometime chef. She and Menks were friendly; Astrid served her tea between sets at the French Caf¨¦, and had catered a dinner at the Buffetts¡¯ earlier that year when Peter Jay, the new British ambassador to the United States, had visited Omaha. Knowingthe Buffetts¡¯ tastes, Menks had either delighted or sludged Jay with the carbohydrate count of Warren¡¯s favorite meal: fried chicken, mashed potatoes, gravy, corn on the cob, and hot fudge sundaes. 
Now Susie asked Astrid to look in on Warren and cook an occasional mealfor him. Then she had a talk with him and said she wanted to rent a funky little cubbyhole in Gramercy Tower on Nob Hill so she could have a base in San Francisco. 
Warren¡¯s tendency not to listen, to hear only what he wanted to hear, worked in Susie¡¯s favor as she explained that she was not leavinghim. They were not ¡°separating.¡± They would stay married. Nothing would really change if she had a roomof her own, a place where she could be herself in San Francisco. She simply wanted to surround herself with a city full of art and music and theater, she reassured him. Their lives were already on such different courses, and they both traveled so much anyway, he would barely notice the difference. With the children grown, it was time for her to tend to her needs. She told him, over and over, ¡°We both¡ªwe both¡ªhave needs.¡± That part was for sure true. 
¡°Susie wasn¡¯t totally leaving either, that was the thing. She just wanted a change.¡± 
In allof Susie¡¯s travels, in her talk of buyingthis place or that place, it had never occurred to him that she would leave, because it would never occur to himto leave her. ¡°Wantinga change¡± and ¡°not totally leaving¡± were the kind of ambiguous Buffettesque statements they both tended to make to avoid feelingas though they were disappointinganyone. 
And then she left. 
Susie went off to Europe for a few weeks with her friend Bella Eisenberg. She returned to Emerald Bay for Christmas with the family but left to go back to Europe again, where she connected in Paris with Tom Newman, son of her friend Rackie. Susie and Tom, who would soon be joininghis mother in her new home in 
San Francisco, became instant friends.43 Increasingly, it was clear that for Susie, havinga place of her own in San Francisco did not mean rentinga pied-¨¤-terre that she would escape to for a week every now and then. Warren was hopeless at takingcare of himself and Susie Jr. came back to Omaha for a couple of weeks to lend a hand. Since the Quicksilver wedding, she had spent much of her marriage callingher mother in tears. BigSusie was gently assistingher out of the marriage at the same time that she was extricatingherself from many of the conventions that tied her to her own marriage. Susie Jr. tried to explain to her father that, given how much time he and her mother had been spendingapart, his life was not goingto be that different from before. But Warren had not previously thought of himself and Susie as livingvirtually separate lives. In his mind, Susie lived for him. She certainly acted as if she did when they were together. So it was a hard concept to grasp, that Susie wanted her own life and would not be there for himallthe time. 
Susie and Warren talked for hours and hours on the phone. Now that he understood, Warren would have done anythingshe asked to get her back, submitted to any conditions, met any demands¡ªmove to California, learn to dance. But apparently it was too late. He could not give her what she wanted, whatever that was. She explained it in terms of her freedom, her need to be separate and to fulfill her needs and find her own identity. She could not do that while spendingallher time takingcare of him. So he wandered aimlessly around the house, barely able to feed and clothe himself. He came to the office most days with a raging headache. In front of the staff, he maintained his self-control, although he did look as though he was not sleepingwell at night. He was callingSusie every day, weeping. ¡°It was as if they couldn¡¯t live together and they couldn¡¯t live without each other,¡± one person said. 
Seeingher husband helpless and destroyed, Susie wavered. She told a friend, ¡°I might have to go back.¡± But she didn¡¯t. They both had needs. One of her needs was for her tennis coach to move to San Francisco. She installed himin a tiny separate apartment down the way from her own. His understandingwas that this was 
temporary and that when Susie got divorced, they would marry. 44 
While Susie waffled, she made no move to get divorced. ¡°Warren and I don¡¯t want to lose anything,¡± she told a friend who inquired about her plans. It wasn¡¯t the money she was talkingabout; she had enough Berkshire stock of her own. Susie was the type of person who never subtracted frombut only added to her life, and she never thought of actingdifferently now. 
Meanwhile, she phoned Astrid Menks at the French Caf¨¦ over and over. ¡°Have you called himyet? Have you called himyet?¡±45 
Susie knew her target well. Born in West Germany in 1946 as Astrid Beat¨¦ Menks after her parents ¡°walked out of Latvia when Russia took it,¡± Menks had emigrated to the United States at age five with her parents and five siblings on a converted, broken-down battleship. Her first sight of America as they pulled in to the harbor was a huge object approachingthrough a fogbank¡ªthe Statue of Liberty. 
The Menks family was assigned to sponsors in Verdell, Nebraska, where they lived on a farmwith a 
potbellied stove and no electricity or indoor plumbing. When Astrid was six, the family moved to Omaha. Shortly afterward, when their mother was diagnosed with breast cancer, Astrid and her two younger brothers entered the Immanuel Deaconess Institute of Omaha, an all-purpose facility operated by Lutheran sisters that included a retirement home, an orphanage, a hospital, a church, and a recreational hall. Her father, who spoke little English, worked as a maintenance man on the grounds while the children lived at the orphanage. Astrid¡¯s mother died in 1954. When Astrid was thirteen, she was sent to a succession of three foster homes. ¡°I can¡¯t say I had wonderful experiences in foster care,¡± she says. ¡°I felt more secure at the children¡¯s home.¡± 
After high school, Menks attended the University of Nebraska, untilshe ran out of money. After a stint at Mutualof Omaha, for a while she worked as a buyer and manager for a women¡¯s clothingstore, although she dressed herself in thrift-store finds. Eventually she wound up workingas a garde-manger in restaurants, slicingfifty pounds of zucchiniand preparingcold foods. She lived in a little apartment downtown in the Old Market close to work, which was convenient because the rusted-out floor of her Chevy Vega had holes 
through to the street.46 
She was always broke but knew everybody in the perpetually gentrifyingwarehouse district, and was one of a restaurant crowd that would help organize the area¡¯s would-be artists, stray singles, and gay men to put on a mealor a holiday feast. Small-boned, fair-skinned with ice-blonde hair and refined features, Astrid had a Nordic beauty with a subtle hard-knocks edge to it. At times she looked even younger than her thirty-one years. She always made light of her life struggles, but when Susie Buffett got to know her, Astrid was 
depressed, empty, and unfulfilled. Nonetheless, when it came to caretakingpeople in need,47 she could out-Susie Susie any day. 
Faced with allthis badgeringabout callingWarren, Menks wasn¡¯t exactly sure where Susie was headed, so she was terrified. But finally she made the call.48 Arrivingat the door to cook a homemade meal, she found a cave filled with books, newspapers, and annual reports. Warren, who was incapable of functioningwithout female companionship, was desperate for affection; he had been tryingto fillthe void by takingDottie to the movies and spendingtime with Ruthie Muchemore, a divorc¨¦e and family friend. Yet he was obviously still a lonely, miserable man who had been reduced emotionally to an eleven-year-old boy. He needed feeding. His clothes were a wreck. Astrid was the least pushy woman imaginable. But¡ªas Susie had known would happen¡ªwhen faced with a problem, she knew what to do. 
Warren would eventually come to explain why Susie left this way: 
¡°It was preventable. It shouldn¡¯t have happened. It was my biggest mistake. Essentially, whatever I did in connection with Susie leaving would be the biggest mistake I ever made. 
¡°Parts of it are sort of not understandable. It was definitely ninety-five percent my fault¡ªno question about that. It may even have been ninety-nine percent. I just wasn¡¯t attuned enough to her, and she¡¯d always been perfectly attuned to me. It had always been all in my direction, almost. You know, my job was getting more interesting and more interesting and more interesting as I went along. When Susie left, she felt less needed than I should have made her feel. Your spouse starts coming second. She kept me together for a lot of years, and she contributed ninety percent to raising the kids. Although, strangely enough, I think I had about as much influence. It just wasn¡¯t proportional to the time spent. And then she lost her job, in effect, when the kids were raised. 
¡°In a sense, it was time for her to do what she liked to do. She did a lot of volunteer things along the way, but in the end, that never really works that well. She didn¡¯t want to be Mrs. Big the way a lot of wives of prominent guys in town do. She didn¡¯t like being a prominent woman because she¡¯s the wife of a prominent guy. She loves connecting with people, and everybody connects with her. 
¡°She loved me, and she still loves me, and we have an incredible relationship. But still¡­it shouldn¡¯t have happened. And it¡¯s totally my fault.¡± 
No matter how huge the wound or its reasons, as each day passed Warren discovered that he was still alive. And so eventually he fellback on the one role that suited himbest: the teacher, the preacher. As longas he had his brains and his reputation, people would listen to him. 
In the winter of 1978, Buffett turned with renewed intensity to writinghis annualletter. The previous letter had been a brief, informative report on how the businesses were doing. Now he started draftinga lesson on how managements¡¯ performance should be measured, an explanation of why short-term earnings are a poor criterion for investment decisions, a longdissertation on insurance, and a paean to his friend TomMurphy¡¯s skills in runningCap Cities. His neediness at the time was of an almost unfathomable depth. He reached out to Carol Loomis for companionship, partly on the pretext of makingher the letter¡¯s official editor. She filled the hours on trips to New York as together they put a great dealof thought into how he wanted to convey these lessons to the people who had stayed with himthroughout, those who had placed their faith in him:the 
shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway.49 
42 
BlueRibbon 
Omaha and Buffalo . 1977¨C1983 
By early 1978, with encouragement fromSusie, Astrid Menks was comingto FarnamStreet fromtime to time, cookingand caretaking. Susie was callingAstrid to cheer her on, saying, ¡°Thank you so much for taking care of him.¡± Gradually, however, the relationship with Menks became somethingmore as Warren began to accept that Susie wasn¡¯t comingback to him. 
At first, he and Astrid spent time at her tiny place down in the old warehouse district. In May she moved in with him, givingup the apartment where she had played after-hours hostess to la boh¨¨me Omaha. By the time Peter came home fromStanford that summer, she was growingtomatoes in the yard on FarnamStreet and searchingfor Pepsi at thirty cents off a gallon. After so many months, ¡°I never gave it a thought,¡± Astrid 
says. ¡°It just happened naturally.¡±1 
Astrid ¡°just disappeared¡± fromthe downtown scene, says an acquaintance.2 Meetingher, Buffett¡¯s friends were taken aback at the match. She was sixteen years younger, a blue-collar girl. Nonetheless, she knew everythingthat Buffett didn¡¯t about haute cuisine and fine wines, shellfish forks and chef¡¯s knives. In contrast to Susie¡¯s spendinghabits and preference for all things modern, Astrid haunted junk shops looking for bargain antiques. She prided herself on payingthe least amount possible for her thrift-shop wardrobe; so parsimonious was Astrid that she made Buffett look like a wastrel. Far more of a homebody than Susie, her interests¡ªcooking, gardening, bargain hunting¡ªwere narrow compared to Susie¡¯s constantly expandingand evolvingtastes. Although modest, Astrid had a blunt-spoken, provocative wit that bore no resemblance to Susie¡¯s sly sense of humor and warm-hearted interest in others; Astrid¡¯s down-to-earth manner was as unlike Kay Graham¡¯s patrician refinement as could possibly be. 
The advent of Astrid caused an upheaval in Buffett¡¯s other relationships. The unusual triangle clashed with Leila¡¯s religious tenets and her sense of public propriety¡ªalthough of course she had little contact with and no influence on her son. Peter, on the other hand, knew his father was reachingout for companionship. He had been raised to take the remarkable in stride, and thought little of it. Howie was bewildered. To Susie Jr., it meant the classic stepmother problem: a barrier between her and her father and the problemof accepting that anyone besides her mother could be good enough for him. To Gladys Kaiser, Warren¡¯s chief protector, who guarded the office door, answered his phone, and handled his¡ªand now BigSusie¡¯s¡ªmoney, Astrid¡¯s 
arrival meant an additionallevel of stress, which she resented.3 
Susie herself was shocked. This wasn¡¯t what she had had in mind when she stressed to her husband that they both had needs. In her mind, Warren¡¯s dependence on her was absolute; how could he need a relationship with anyone else? But it might have been predicted. Warren had searched his whole life for the perfect Daisy Mae, and whatever he wanted, Astrid did:buy the Pepsi, do the laundry, take care of the house, give him head rubs, cook the meals, answer the telephone, and provide all the companionship he needed. Astrid never told himwhat to do and asked for nothingin return except to be with him. The previous Daisy Mae, Big Susie, had fled Omaha partly to escape this endless well of neediness. As she adjusted to the shock, she came to accept the relationship, which did make her new life easier. Susie, however, was possessive by nature. No matter how she divided her own attention, she did not really want Warren to divide his. And thus it was Susie¡¯s expectations¡ªnot Warren¡¯s¡ªthat would come to define allof their roles. 
The pieces of Buffett¡¯s life began to come back together into some sort of coherent whole. But he had been shocked into realizingthe truth of Susie¡¯s insistence that sittingin a roommakingmoney was no way to spend a life; he began to see what he had missed. While he was friendly enough with his kids, he hadn¡¯t 
really gotten to know them. The reality behind the jokes (¡°Who is that? That¡¯s your son¡±4) meant that he would spend the next few decades tryingto repair these relationships. Much of the damage could not be undone. At age forty-seven, he was just beginningto take stock of his losses.5 
Warren, who placed a high value on honesty, was perfectly open about livingwith Astrid. Everybody knew (except Doc Thompson). Both Susie and Astrid, however, remained closemouthed about the situation, saying merely that they liked each other. Warren made only one public statement: ¡°If you knew the people involved, you¡¯d see that it suited all of us quite well.¡± That was true, at least if compared to the alternatives. In this sense and others, the situation bore a resemblance to the life of Warren¡¯s idol, Ben Graham. 
In the mid-1960s, Grahamhad proposed a novelarrangement to his wife, Estey, in which he would live half the year with his deceased son Newton¡¯s former girlfriend, Marie Louise Amingues, or Malou¡ªML, as she was called by the family¡ªand half with Estey. Marriage was a concept that Grahamhad always honored more in the breach than in reality, but Estey had her limits, and had reached them. Ever since she said no, the Grahams had been separated but they never divorced. Ben and ML were in La Jolla and spent part of the year in Aixen-Provence. Estey lived in Beverly Hills. Ben felt perfectly friendly toward Estey, and ML was 
content to live without marriage.6 
Graham had succeeded in maintainingboth relationships in name only, however, and Buffett was not trying to emulate him. Buffett did not want two wives; for him it was a real strain to explain the relationships. Much later he would describe it this way: ¡°Susie put me together, and Astrid keeps me together. They both need to 
give, and I¡¯m a great receiver, so it works for them.¡±7 But the questions never ended, because explanations like these and statements that the arrangement suited all of them glided past the fundamental problemof all love triangles:If three weights balance on a scale, they can¡¯t allbe equal. 
The inequality of this particular triangle was multiplied because in fact it involved two triangles¡ªbut only one of themknew that. In a state of ignorance, Warren thought of Susie as the one who had been wronged. He tried to square things by placatingher in private and showeringher with lavish attentiveness in public, which left Astrid exposed and vulnerable. In a similar state of ignorance, Astrid¡ªwho admired and practically worshipped Susie¡ªaccepted that Warren would never marry her, ceded Susie the turf of all social and business events outside Omaha, and unhappily tolerated beingcalled Buffett¡¯s housekeeper and mistress so that his marriage to Susie would appear as intact as possible. Buffett would come to rationalize this: ¡°Astrid knows where she fits with me. She knows she¡¯s needed. That¡¯s not a bad place to be.¡± And indeed, her role, however narrowly defined, did give Astrid a security that she had always lacked. 
It had taken a literalchange in geography for Susie to maintain her aura of the selfless Mrs. Warren Buffett while simultaneously seekingfulfillment in a life completely outside that role. Yet it was Warren who looked as though he were gettingthe best of both worlds, even though the new relationship didn¡¯t compensate for his loss. He couldn¡¯t defend himself against the impression that he had driven his wife to move out through his relationship with Katharine Grahamor¡ªbecause some people got the time line wrong¡ªhis relationship with Astrid. 
He wanted desperately to hold the remainingpieces together, and would try for the rest of Susie¡¯s life to make up for what he had done to disappoint her. But of course that didn¡¯t change who he was and obviously didn¡¯t mean he would stop seeingKay. Buffett invited Graham to Omaha to visit the Strategic Air Command, probably as a pretext to introduce her to Astrid. Graham brought her best friend, MegGreenfield, editorial page editor of the Post and one exception to Graham¡¯s freely acknowledged weakness¡ªshe did not usually 
get on well with other women when men were around.8 On meetingan attractive woman, Buffett says, 
¡°Kay¡¯s first thought would be how to get her out of the room.¡± 
Buffett took themall to dinner with Stan Lipsey at the Omaha Club. Kay carried on a spirited conversation with Warren; Megand Stan occasionally joined in. The conversation left Astrid, who was not the type to put herself forward, entirely on her own. Except for ordering, she sat in silence for the entire meal. Mesmerized as always by Graham, Buffett did nothingto help. A couple of dozen people at a huge table nearby carried on with a raucous birthday celebration. Finally the celebrants got up, stood in a circle, and started to make squawking-beak motions, flap wings, and wiggle tail feathers with their hands to the sound of music, doing 
the Chicken Dance. Ever Miss Proper, Grahamsat staringwith a ¡°priceless¡± look on her face.9 
From then on, Buffett almost always saw Grahamoutside of Omaha. When she called the house and Astrid answered the phone, Kay had nothingto say. 10 She handled the situation mostly by actingas if she believed that Astrid didn¡¯t exist, except for callingAstrid once to ask how to work her VCR.11 
Susie and Astrid were on a wholly different footing; they were perfectly comfortable with each other, and Astrid even went to San Francisco to visit Susie. Susie¡¯s stark cubicle on Nob Hill now looked like a little girl¡¯s room, gussied up with dolls and pillows and posters and a Mickey Mouse phone. She used the kitchen 
cabinets to store her blouses.12 
Susie by now was grateful to Astrid for makingher life easier, as longas Astrid accepted the limited public role that Susie had defined for her. Movingto San Francisco had been difficult enough because she had had to leave behind so many friends and causes she cared about. Her departure had left shock waves in its wake. The Future Central Committee, Planned Parenthood, the Urban League, and other civil-rights organizations regrouped, but all felt a huge hole had been ripped from their center. Her friends and her hangers-on had coped in varyingways. A few felt abandoned, others simply missed her. Some began goingback and forth to San Francisco, consideringit a sort of second home. A couple of themeven followed her to San Francisco 
and relocated there.13 
To many of the Buffetts¡¯ friends, the explanation that Susie needed to live in San Francisco because it offered her a richer palette that she couldn¡¯t find in Omaha conveyed a vague impression of time spent visitingart galleries, jazz clubs, and the symphony. But by the late 1970s, San Francisco was not the Paris of America. A wave of returningwar veterans had washed up on the Bay Area¡¯s shores, many of theminjured physically, mentally, and spiritually. The worst-scarred relics fell to the pavement with the winos and the burned-out addicts left fromthe days of the skinny-dippinghippies who had blown their minds on LSD and pot in the Haight. Those still drawn to San Francisco for its hedonism, sexualfreedom, and liberation stepped through a growingpuddle of homeless on the streets. The gays had burst fromthe closet earlier in the decade, in a celebration of freedomthat peaked at the Gay Pride Parade in Golden Gate Park in 1976. But a Florida singer named Anita Bryant began what became a national campaign of gay-bashing, which culminated in the murder of San Francisco mayor George Moscone and Supervisor Harvey Milk by a homophobic city 
employee in November 1978.14 After the jury accepted the assassin¡¯s insanity defense and returned a verdict of manslaughter, some of the worst riotingin its history rocked San Francisco. 
Amongthe first of Susie¡¯s new friends were a gay couple, one of whom was a former anesthesiologist who had left Omaha after a malpractice incident. She added others¡ªmusicians, artists, people she met in stores, at church, while gettingher nails done, at the theater, at the Esalen Institute in BigSur. She soon had a large circle, many if not most of whomwere gay men. The rebel in Susie blossomed in San Francisco¡¯s heady atmosphere, and her new life liberated her. The former hostess of charity luncheons now threw parties that felt like beingbackstage at a rock concert; she opened up her doors and invited in the carnival. But, true to form, she also took up a cause, once again defyingconvention. As she worked the soup kitchen lines, she became the acceptingmother that many of her gay friends had never had. 
The part of her life that Warren stillcontrolled was the money. She had plenty of Berkshire stock, but under the deal they had worked out, she wasn¡¯t to sell a share. She fell in love with a Marc Chagall paintingand wanted to buy it for her tiny new apartment. But she told a friend that she couldn¡¯t do it. ¡°It would ruin everything,¡± she said. Warren was equally clear: ¡°I don¡¯t want you sellingBerkshire shares.¡± He stillcovered all her expenses. Gladys monitored her spendingand paid all her bills. 
Similarly, it was Warren whomSusie got to lend her friend Charles Washington $24,900. He was an Omaha activist whomshe had championed through thick and thin; he in turn had been one of the protectors who defended her stoutly to Bud Pagel, the reporter who asked ¡°What Makes Susie Sing?¡± Buffett thought the loan was a terrible idea, and probably wouldn¡¯t have agreed to it were he not now so eager to please his wife. Sure enough, seven months later, Washington missed a couple of payments. Rarely did anythingpierce Buffett¡¯s pleasant demeanor, but if he felt someone was tryingto cheat himout of money, his eyes would flash pain and rage and revenge all at once. Within seconds, at most, the emotion would subside while he considered a businesslike response. This time, he promptly filed suit against Washington and won a judgment of $24,450. 
The Washington episode symbolized the reality of Warren and Susie¡¯s new relationship; if Susie was to keep all her stock, his grip on the checkbook had to loosen. Warren gave her an allowance, besides coveringall her bills: This was her giveaway budget. When the children had needs, she took care of expenses that Warren wouldn¡¯t. Howie had sold some of his Berkshire stock to build a tree house for himand Marcia to live in. They were strugglingwith their finances as well as their marriage. ¡°It¡¯s just terrible that Warren won¡¯t pay for it,¡± Susie grumbled. ¡°He was goingto let the ceilingfallin. He was goingto let themlose the house.¡± But this was part of their game:Warren knew that Susie would take care of it for them, as she had taken care of Little Sooz when she was unhappy in her marriage, as she always took care of everything. 
Everything, that is, except the money. Makingthat was Warren¡¯s job, and allthese changes and complexities and mountingbills had come at a time when the family fortunes were declining. Just as Susie was leavingfor San Francisco, Warren had been dragged into court in Buffalo, New York, for a costly battle between two newspapers. Normally he was competitive enough to rollup his sleeves and relish somethinglike this. But now, since he was facinga personalcrisis, it became an expensive, absorbingepisode that shut out the rest and blunted the pain. The Buffalo Evening News drama would be a protracted battle, one that would threaten Blue Chip¡¯s value and rank amongthe most unpleasant of his career. It bore a vivid resemblance to the conflict he had faced in Beatrice many years before, one he had sworn to himself never to repeat. 
In the springof 1977, he and Munger had finally bought the daily newspaper for which they had been searchingthese many years. At $35.5 million this was their biggest purchase ever. 15 Rusting, icebound Buffalo wasn¡¯t the growingone-newspaper town of their dreams, but it was still a good place to own a newspaper. Buffalo¡¯s citizens left for their factory jobs before dawn and read the paper in the evenings. The Buffalo Evening News dominated its nearest competitor, the Courier-Express, which was weak financially. Buffett had developed a well-founded theory of competition in the newspaper industry. 
¡°Kay was always saying how competition made them better and all that stuff. I said, ¡®Lookit. The economics in the business is inevitably leading to one newspaper in a town. Survival of the fattest is what I call it. And you win. There is no second place. There¡¯s no red ribbon. In the end, there isn¡¯t going to be any competition because that isn¡¯t the way it works.¡¯¡± 
The Courier-Express¡¯s staff and publisher had also figured out that there was no red ribbon in newspapers. In 1920, seven hundred cities in the United States had two major newspapers. By 1977, the number was down to not quite fifty. On weekdays, the Evening News sold twice as many papers as the Courier-Express. The Courier-Express clungto survival through havingthe only Sunday paper in town, which made up sixty percent of its revenues. 
The Evening News had been offered to the Washington Post, which had turned it down. Kay Grahamcould not stomach another paper with a stronglabor union. Buffett was not afraid of that. ¡°We sat down with the unions before we bought it and said, ¡®Lookit, we could be wrong for a variety of reasons, but there¡¯s one thing that will kill any paper in a two-paper town, and that is an extended strike. You guys have got the ability to do that to us. And if you do it, well, you know, we¡¯ll have lost. But that is a risk we¡¯re taking, and we want you to understand we¡¯re taking it. Although you hold the card, if you play it, we both lose.¡¯¡± The unions seemed to understand. 
Buffett and Munger¡¯s empire now had assets of over half a billion dollars,16 and controlled more than half of Berkshire Hathaway and sixty-five percent of Blue Chip. These two companies owned NationalIndemnity, the Rockford Bank, See¡¯s, Wesco, ten percent of the Washington Post, a quarter of Pinkerton¡¯s detective agency, fifteen percent of GEICO, and a bushel of other stocks¡ªand finally the daily city newspaper he had 
sought for so long.17 
Murray Light, the managingeditor of the Evening News, quickly discussed a plan with Buffett to start a weekend edition, a plan that the imperious former owner, the aristocratic heiress Kate Robinson Butler, had never liked. The late Mrs. Butler, a diminutive tyrant with bouffant white hair, had growled at her employees, pounded her fist on the leather surface of her imported French desk, and seen no need to change with the 
times.18 She rode the few blocks to the office fromher ornate mansion, a major Buffalo landmark, in the back of a Rolls-Royce limousine and was said to be less interested in the newsroomthan in her trips to Europe in pursuit of a prince worthy of her daughter¡¯s hand.19 
The News¡¯s publisher, Henry Urban, had gotten on well with Mrs. Butler, a large part of his job beingto calm her on the many occasions when she took issue with the paper¡¯s editorials. Mrs. Butler¡¯s focus was not on profits, and neither was Urban¡¯s. ¡°You will not find a nicer man than Henry Urban. But the idea of negotiating with the newsprint producers just wouldn¡¯t enter his head. As soon as I got there, the newsprint producers said, Does Mr. Buffett like to fish? And I told them, Well, Charlie likes to fish, but I buy the newsprint.¡± The News was payingten percent more than other papers just across the bridge in Canada paid, and the same as publishers paid in Florida, California, and Dallas. Buffett wanted thirty bucks off to reflect lower shippingcosts. ¡°We were buying forty-thousand-plus tons a year. So thirty bucks was $1.2 million on a company that wasn¡¯t making any money.¡± He Buffetted the newsprint producers. ¡°I told all seven, we have contracts for various lengths of time at the wrong price. You¡¯ve got the lowest freight cost of any American customer with us and you¡¯re charging us the same. We will honor those contracts, but if you don¡¯t renegotiate them, you will never have another newsprint contract with us again.¡± He won. 
But lower shippingcosts alone would not cure the Evening News¡¯s blues. Buffalo¡¯s newspapers existed in an odd sort of equilibrium. One controlled weekdays, another weekends.20 Buffett and Munger agreed with Murray Light that the News had no choice but to extend its weekday advantage by expanding.21 ¡°We had to 
do what we did if we were goingto compete effectively,¡± says Munger. ¡°One side or the other was goingto win.¡± 
Two weeks before the Evening News launched its new Sunday edition, the Courier-Express filed suit on 
grounds of antitrust, sayingthe News¡¯s plan to give away free papers on Sunday for five weeks, then to sellat a discount, amounted to an illegalmonopoly that was tryingto run it out of business.22 The Courier-Express¡¯s lawyer, Frederick Furth, hit upon an ingenious strategy to spin Buffett¡¯s views about no red ribbons into a story about monopolists fromout of town stompingall over a localbusiness. 
Furth¡¯s subpoenas produced a sheaf of documents suggestingthat Buffett and Munger were well aware that vigorous competition would doom the Courier-Express. The Courier-Express launched an all-out public-relations war, startingwith a page-one story, amply fleshed out inside, and days and weeks of follow-up coverage, all portrayingitself as a tiny neighborhood David fightingruthless Goliaths from out of state. This message found eager ears in Buffalo, where jobs fell like rust flakes from the once-proud city¡¯s oxidizing employment rolls. 
No sooner had Buffett been released fromthe hellof the Wesco investigation than he found himself embroiled in another bitter legal fight, one that would require his presence in the frigid, unfriendly locale of Buffalo, New York. 
The News began to drain Blue Chip¡¯s coffers. Buffett¡¯s lawyer, Chuck Rickershauser, had by now left Munger, Tolles to become the head of the Pacific Coast Stock Exchange. His replacement, Ron Olson, came to Buffalo to fend off the charge of monopolist-as-liquidator, part of a teamMunger had assembled from Los Angeles. Olson filed an affidavit that spoke of his client¡¯s love of newspapers beginningwith his inky-fingered childhood, and his role in the Sun¡¯s Pulitzer Prize. The Courier-Express, meanwhile, had tried to be so clever as to run a flatteringprofile of every judge who might be chosen for the trial, ¡°to suck up to 
the judge.¡±23 The case ended up beingtried by one they missed. Still, fortune nonetheless favored the Courier-Express in the assignment of federal judge Charles Brieant of the Southern District of New York. Buffett had always prided himself on beingable to size up a business very fast, fromits balance sheet alone. In his first appearance in court in Buffalo, the Courier-Express¡¯s lawyer, Furth, portrayed Buffett as someone who knew little of the Buffalo Evening News, havingnever inspected its plant and havingfailed to hire consultants to study the paper before buyingit. Furth accused Buffett of havingdiscussed whether the News would put the Courier-Express out of business, which Buffett denied. Furth approached the witness stand wavinga copy of a recent, glowing Wall Street Journal profile of Buffett. His growingfame was about 
to be used against himas a weapon for the first time.24 Buffett had told the reporter how glad he was to be out of money management, his ego no longer on the line. But, in fact, with his newly heightened profile, his ego was now more on the line than ever before. In this story, his friend Sandy Gottesman had been quoted by the reporter as saying, ¡°Warren likens owninga monopoly or market-dominant newspaper to owningan 
unregulated tollbridge. You have relative freedomto increase rates when and as much as you want.¡±25 
Had he said this? Furth demanded in court. 
No, well, Buffett responded, ¡°whether it is like a tollbridge I don¡¯t remember, but it is a great business. It may be better than a tollbridge in Fremont, Nebraska. I know a lot of honest people, but when they start givingquotes they don¡¯t necessarily get them¡ª¡± 
Furth bore down. Did he believe it or not? 
¡°I won¡¯t quarrelwith that characterization¡­. I would like to own one¡­. I have said in an inflationary world that a tollbridge would be a great thingto own if it was unregulated.¡± 
¡°Why?¡± asked Furth. 
Buffett looked at the judge, to whomhe was tryingto teach economics. ¡°Because you have laid out the capital costs. You build the bridge in old dollars, and when there is inflation, you don¡¯t have to keep replacing it¡ªa bridge you build only once.¡± 
¡°And you used the term ¡®unregulated¡¯ so that you can raise prices; is that right?¡± 
¡°That is true.¡±26 
Buffett now hungtwistingin a net of his own weaving. A tollbridge, the Douglas Street Bridge over the Missouri River, was, in fact, a prominent feature of his youth.27 DuringBuffett¡¯s childhood, Omaha had been 
torn for more than a decade over how to liberate the only route to Iowa fromthe toll-taker¡¯s grasp. He and Munger later tried to buy the Detroit InternationalBridge Company, which owned the bridge that connected Detroit and Windsor, Ontario, but wound up with only twenty-four percent of the company. 28 
¡°It was one hell of a bridge. A thousand square feet, and it made more money¡­I was terribly disappointed when we didn¡¯t get it. Charlie kept telling me how well off we were that we didn¡¯t get it. Because, he said, what could be worse for your image than a guy who raised the prices on a toll bridge?¡± 
Indeed. 
¡°The judge didn¡¯t like me. For one reason or another, he just didn¡¯t like me. He didn¡¯t like our lawyers either. Most people like Ron Olson, but the judge did not like Ron.¡± 
Judge Brieant¡¯s rulingon a preliminary injunction, which was issued in November 1977, said that the Evening News was perfectly within its rights to start a Sunday paper and it was in the public interest that it should do so. But Brieant, apparently taken with Furth¡¯s exploitation of the toll-bridge theme, took off with it on a flight to the land of metaphor, lamentingthat the ¡°readers and advertisers of Greater Buffalo [might] conclude that they can get alongwith only one newspaper as their unregulated toll bridge to the events of the 
outside world.¡±29 He deemed the News¡¯s plan predatory and enjoined it against promoting, marketing, or distributingits new Sunday edition except under severe restrictions. The judge hamstrungthe News¡¯s ability to offer free papers, discount pricing, and guarantees to advertisers, amongother restrictions. The most problematic rule he imposed required subscribers to fillout a formeach and every week to order that Sunday¡¯s paper. The Courier-Express fired a prepared publishingbarrage crowingabout its victory over an out-of-town bully that was tryingto drive a small-fry local business into the ground. The Evening News could say nothingin response. 
¡°Now we were going to lose or win, and we had a judge who didn¡¯t like us, and we were operating with our hands tied and under threat of contempt.¡± 
Courier-Express employees began to police the minutiae of the order, and proved that the News had delivered some Sunday papers to people who had not filled out the proper forms. Judge Brieant held the News in contempt. 
Five weeks later, advertisers had rallied behind the Courier-Express, and the new Sunday edition of the News could boast of only a quarter of the Courier-Express¡¯s ad lineage.30 The Evening News swungfrom a modest profit to a whopping$1.4 million loss.31 Buffett was chilled by the news. No business he had ever 
owned had lost so much money so fast. 
On a miserable, rain-driven day the week before Christmas 1977, Judge Brieant called the court into session for the beginningof a trial that would determine the terms of a finalinjunction. Buffett had spent the latter part of the fallsleepless and in tears, tryingto digest what it meant that Susie was gone and yet not really leavinghim. His idea of a distraction fromhis personalwoes had been to clinglike a junebugto Carol Loomis, Astrid, and Kay Grahamin turn as he flew back and forth between New York, Omaha, and Washington. Certainly he had not wanted a distraction like this. The trial went into recess as he flew to Emerald Bay for the annual holiday family gathering, the first under the new arrangement with Susie, during which she would continue to reassure himthat their lives would go on much as before. As soon as the Buffetts¡¯ New Year¡¯s Day party was over, Warren and Susie went their separate ways, Judge Brieant reconvened the litigants, and Olson and Munger began callingBuffett with updates on the trial as he returned to work in Omaha. 
In July 1978, he was with Carol and George Gillespie. ¡°We were playing bridge in Kay¡¯s apartment in New York with Charlie, and Judge Brieant¡¯s decision came in. I gave it to Charlie, and he read it, and he said, ¡®Well, this is pretty well-written.¡¯ I was so damned mad. I didn¡¯t give a damn whether it was well-written or not, I was living with all these restrictions. I was not about to admire his prose.¡± 
Judge Brieant¡¯s finalopinion, a masterpiece of judicial unrestraint carryingthe subtitle ¡°Mr. Buffett Comes to Buffalo,¡± kept in place restrictions against the Evening News. Munger and Olson planned to appeal. Characteristically, Buffett did not want to lengthen the fight with the judge. Munger had always kidded Buffett that his management technique was to take out all the cash froma company and raise prices. If that failed, Buffett didn¡¯t have any more arrows in his quiver. This technique wouldn¡¯t solve the problems of the Evening News. Buffett was so beaten down and wanted so badly not to get into a confrontation with the judge that he was willingto let $35.5 million go down the drain. A remnant of his last biglegalbattle was only 
now ending: The SEC had finally, at longlast, approved the merger of Berkshire and Diversified. Buffett wanted desperately to be done with lawyers, depositions, subpoenas, and fighting. ¡°I didn¡¯t want to appeal. I just felt it would take so damned long, it would irritate the judge, and that we had more to lose by irritating him as he enforced this injunction and as the Courier came up with all these furious attacks, and he could just keep extending it. I declared, We¡¯re not going to appeal because in a year or year and a half we¡¯ll be dead anyway. And Ron and Charlie told me I was wrong, and I was wrong.¡± 
In the end, he decided to go alongwith them. ¡°We had to appeal. I wasn¡¯t going to give in to a set of conditions which were going to make us noncompetitive. So basically I had no choice. We don¡¯t bluff. It¡¯s not my style, anyway. Over a lifetime, you¡¯ll get a reputation for either bluffing or not bluffing. And therefore, I want it to be understood that I don¡¯t do it.¡± 
The Buffalo Evening News was Buffett¡¯s single largest investment, and by a wide margin. It was tyingup a third of Blue Chip¡¯s capital, losingmoney under Judge Brieant¡¯s restrictions, and vulnerable to any strike that would weaken it further at a time when the stock market was fallingand Buffett needed it to produce cash to buy stocks at the bargain-basement prices he always favored. The potential failure of the Buffalo Evening News risked more than settinghimand Munger back their $35 million; for the man who begrudged spending $31,500 on a house because that money could ultimately turn into a million, the lost compoundingpotential of their investment in the newspaper made the situation much graver than it appeared superficially. So Buffett not only decided to appeal the decision, but he TomSawyered Stan Lipsey, who was thinkingof movingto San Francisco, into tryingto turn the paper around. ¡°What would you think about goingup to Buffalo?¡± Buffett asked. ¡°My heart sank,¡± Lipsey says, ¡°but I couldn¡¯t turn Warren down on anything.¡± 
Lipsey went to Buffalo to provide some temporary help and arrived in the aftermath of Buffalo¡¯s worst blizzard in years, banks of snow plowed as high as the rooftops of buildings. He stayed in the hotelthat Buffett recommended and ate at Buffett¡¯s favorite steak house¡ªand was baffled at how Buffett could stand either one of them. The next morningwhen he arrived at the office of the Evening News, he quickly saw why Buffett had sent him. The news product was excellent, but the business management was sloppy. He sat down at a secretarialdesk and worked froma manual typewriter. A manager appeared at his side and asked, ¡°What kind of liquor do you want?¡± Lipsey asked what he meant. Well, said the man, as a manager you¡¯re 
entitled to two cases of booze.32 
Lipsey started spendingone week a month in Buffalo. On one of his weeks in Omaha, he joined Warren and Astrid to take the temperature of Buffett¡¯s current life. Warren was clearly relaxed in his new relationship. He let Astrid take themallto a dragshow.33 
By 1979, Lipsey had straightened out the paper¡¯s management, and victory was approachingin the battle of the legal briefs with the Courier-Express. In April1979, nearly a year and a half after Brieant¡¯s preliminary injunction, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals unanimously reversed him, sayinghis opinion was ¡°infected with legaland factual error.¡± There was ¡°simply no evidence that Mr. Buffett acquired the News with the idea of puttingthe Courier out of business¡­. All that the record supports is a findingthat Mr. Buffett intended to do as well as he could with the News and was not lyingawake thinkingwhat the effect of its competition on the Courier would be¡­. Courts must be on guard against efforts of plaintiffs to use the 
antitrust laws to insulate themselves fromthe impact of competition.¡±34 
But the reversalof Judge Brieant¡¯s order was a victory that came almost too late. The Courier-Express immediately appealed the ruling, seekingto reinstate the injunction. The News¡¯s lawyers wearily took up their swords to continue the ludicrous fight. Meanwhile, despite tighter management controls imposed by Lipsey, the battle had cost so much in legalfees and lost advertisinglineage while the News operated under allthe judge¡¯s restrictions for the better part of two years that it was losingmillions¡ªa $5 million operatingloss before tax in 1979¡ªmultiples more than Buffett or Munger had ever experienced in any of their businesses. It was goingto take heroic work to make the money back. 
¡°How about movingto Buffalo?¡± Buffett asked Lipsey. ¡°I don¡¯t really want to do that,¡± Lipsey replied. Buffett said nothing, and Lipsey continued commuting. 
By mid-1979, the stock market was sunk in gloom, and orders for stocks, Buffett said, were placed ¡°with an eyedropper.¡±35 The Dow had languished for a decade, buckingand stallingin snorts and gasps, like a beat-up car with a faulty carburetor. Its latest stall-out took it back down to the familiar territory of the mid-800s. Gerald Ford¡¯s replacement in Washington, Jimmy Carter, wore Mister Rogers sweaters to promote energy conservation; it backfired, and he seemed to embody the United States¡¯ impotence in dealingwith Iran, where the Ayatollah Khomeinihad deposed the Shah. The empress would no longer waltzaround the dance floor at the Iranian Embassy. A partial meltdown at the Three Mile Island nuclear plant released radioactive material into the atmosphere; inflation galloped at double digits; and lines formed at the gas pumps. BusinessWeek declared ¡°The Death of Equities,¡± as if no one would ever buy stocks again. A mood of deep pessimism settled on the country. 
Investors piled into gold, diamonds, platinum, art, real estate, rare coins, miningstocks, feedlot cattle, and oil; ¡°cash is trash¡± was the watchword of the day. High school girls wore necklaces made of Krugerrand coins. A brash new trustee at Grinnell, Steve Jobs, prot¨¦g¨¦ of the esteemed Bob Noyce, tried to talk the investment 
committee into sellingallthe stocks and buyinggold.36 An engineer in his mid-twenties, Jobs was obviously a very smart guy, but the investment committee demurred, and Grinnelldid not buy gold. 
In Forbes, Buffett wrote the opposite: It was time for investors to buy stocks. ¡°The future is never clear,¡± he 
wrote; ¡°you pay a very high price in the stock market for a cheery consensus. Uncertainty actually is the friend of the buyer of long-term values.¡±37 He was the buyer of long-termvalues¡ªexcept that he had no cash. Periodically, cash had showered on Buffett since the beginningof the decade¡ª$16 million from distributingthe partnership assets, then millions more from the sale of Data Documents stock, a private investment. But he had poured it allinto Berkshire Hathaway. Buffett wanted money to invest. He had always paid himself only $50,000 a year, a number that he now raised to a still-modest $100,000. He borrowed some money frombanks and started to invest again. 
And finally, Stan Lipsey made the move Warren had been hopingfor. One day in 1980 Lipsey showed up at Warren¡¯s unlocked back door in Omaha to say that his wife, Jeannie, wanted a divorce and that her lawyer was, from Stan¡¯s perspective, raisinghell. Buffett reminded Lipsey of somethingTomMurphy had taught him. ¡°You can always tell themto go to helltomorrow, Stan,¡± he said. He invited the sparringlawyers to his office and helped mediate the end of a marriage between his friends¡ªthe second time he had done so. Not longbefore, Buffett had brokered peace between his friend Ed Anderson and his wife, Shirley Smith Anderson, an old friend of Warren and Susie¡¯s who had been Doris¡¯s ¡°sorority mother.¡± He was experienced at easinghis friends through difficult transitions. He began talkingto Lipsey about the need to make changes in his life. Maybe it¡¯s time, Stan thought. As the conversation progressed, Buffett helped Lipsey talk himself into movingto Buffalo. ¡°It was typical Warren. He wanted me to come up here in the worst way,¡± but in the end, just as with people investingin the partnership, it had to be Lipsey¡¯s idea. 
Lipsey went to Buffalo, and stayed. Every Friday night, he called and gave Buffett the latest ¡°horrible 
numbers,¡± and each time, no matter how bad the news, Buffett remained encouragingand upbeat, thanking him for calling. ¡°It was sort of mind-blowing,¡± Lipsey says. 38 By the end of 1980, the losses had mounted to $10 million. Munger¡¯s 1980 Blue Chip annual report warned about the dire condition of the paper, and also complained darkly about the ¡°leapfroggingof benefits¡± for the unions, repeatinga warningMunger had first given in the 1978 report: ¡°If any extended strike shuts down the Buffalo Evening News, it willprobably be 
forced to cease operations and liquidate.¡±39 
Munger¡¯s viewpoint as he wrote these words and steered Blue Chip through the legalmaze of the Buffalo Evening News could not have been helped by the dire and dark condition of his health. For severalyears he had stoically tolerated growingcataracts, untilthey reached the point at which his eyesight was seriously impaired. When he had cataract surgery on his left eye, it resulted in an extremely rare complication called an epithelial downgrowth: A specialized type of primary body tissue fromoutside the eye (probably corneal cells) got inside his eye and started growinglike a cancer. The pressure and destruction of the optic nerve 
caused severe, disablingpain.40 When he could no longer tolerate the agony of his slowly explodingeye, Munger arranged to have it eviscerated and replaced with a glass eye. But afterward, ¡°I was like a wounded animal for severaldays.¡±41 He could not stand up to be bathed by the nurses because he was so nauseated from the pain. He told Buffett that he wanted to die. Terrified of goingthrough another such ordeal and facingthe possibility of blindness, he decided to have the remainingcataract in his right eye scraped off without replacingthe lens. Instead, he wore old-fashioned cataract glasses, thick as a jellyfish, over his ¡°good¡± eye. 
DuringMunger¡¯s ordeal, the Buffalo Evening News¡¯s drivers¡¯ union¡ªperhaps emboldened after three years with new management runningthe place under duress¡ªdemanded overtime for work not performed. The Evening News had been payingthis in a temporary capitulation; now the union wanted it as part of its permanent contract. Munger and Buffett said not a chance. Then in December 1980, the Teamsters, figuring that Buffett couldn¡¯t take a strike while the battle with the Courier-Express dragged on, walked out at six 
a.m. after an all-night mediation attempt failed. Workingwith other unions, who crossed the picket line, Lipsey, Henry Urban, and Murray Light worked feverishly to get out the eveningpaper. Then, at the last minute, the pressmen walked off the job, pullingthe page plates off the presses as they went. 
Buffett figured he was sunk. Fromhis decades of background in newspaper circulation, he knew that, even more than the pressmen, the tiny drivers¡¯ union¡ªall of thirty-eight employees¡ªhad the power to shut the paper down. Other unions and volunteers could run the presses, but without the drivers to distribute the newspapers, the paper was dead. Buffett would not use nonunion replacements, concerned for their safety. ¡°I was not going to send our people out in December, in the dark, dropping papers in some rural area where some guy can hit them with a tire iron. I was sitting there in Omaha, and that¡¯s not a decision I was going to make for a bunch of people who were going to have the hell beat out of them.¡± 
The Evening News closed its doors. 
Buffett told the union that the paper ¡°has a limited amount of ¡®blood,¡¯ and if it bleeds too much, it will not live anymore¡­. We¡¯re going to reopen only if there is a reasonable prospect of a viable operation.¡±42 That tippingpoint could quickly be reached.43 
This time, the unions blinked. Within forty-eight hours, the Evening News was back on the streets. By then, the News, though still trailingon Sundays, had gained some ground on the Courier-Express and was crawling 
slowly toward the lead while maintainingits weekday advantage.44 By the end of 1981, Lipsey and Buffett had cut the losses to $1.5 million a year, half of what the Courier-Express was suffering.45 In a war of ¡°survivalof the fattest,¡± it was almost certain to win¡ªalbeit at a staggeringprice. The Courier-Express had never given up the lawsuit tryingto reinstate Judge Brieant¡¯s injunction, but its owners saw another judge, the judge of the marketplace, headingwith the blue ribbon toward the Buffalo Evening News. The Courier-Express now tried to sellitself to press lord Rupert Murdoch, but the unions wouldn¡¯t cave in to Murdoch¡¯s demand that they give up seniority. And with that, the Courier-Express laid down its last card in September 1982. Its next move was to fold. 
The Buffalo Evening News immediately rolled out a morningedition and changed its name to the Buffalo News. With victory in hand, Buffett and Munger went to a meetingof employees at the Statler Hilton downtown. Somebody asked about profit sharing. ¡°There is nothingthat anybody on the third floor¡±¡ªwhere the newsroom sat¡ª¡°can do that affects profits,¡± Buffett said. Capital took the risk and reaped the rewards. He and Munger had staked $35 million on a series of decisions. They might have lost every dime; to them went all the profits that followed. The workers got a paycheck for the time and effort they put in¡ªno more, no less. A deal¡¯s a deal. But after everythingthey had allbeen through, the staff was stunned at his lack of empathy. 
As Buffett and Munger left the office, Munger walked past publisher Henry Urban, who was ¡°waitingfor at least a small accolade,¡± said Ron Olson. Munger was famous for gettinginto cabs while people were talking to himas if he did not hear themand for disappearingthrough doors the second he finished talkingwithout waitingfor a response. Nonetheless Urban stood open-mouthed. Buffett followed alongright after Munger without lookingat anyone. Nobody said thanks. Olson, followingin their wake, moved around the room 
shakinghands in an effort to make up for it.46 
A year later, with higher ad rates and soaringcirculation, the News was earning$19 million pretax, more than all the previous years¡¯ losses combined. About half of that went straight to Buffett. And as the excitement ended, his attention waned. While he still spoke wellof the Buffalo News in his annual report, his interests had moved on to the next new thing. 
PARTFIVE 
TheKingofWallStreet 

43 
Pharaoh 
Omaha . 1980¨C1986 
Five hundred of the gratefulrich, wearingblack tie and ball gowns, walked up the red carpet and into New York¡¯s swanky Metropolitan Club for Buffett¡¯s fiftieth birthday party. With Berkshire Hathaway tradingat $375 a share, the Buffetts¡¯ net worth had more than doubled in the past year and a half. They could easily afford to rent the place.1 Dotted amongthe Buffett Group members were semi-demi-celebrities like the actor Gary Cooper¡¯s daughter. Susie had ordered a cake shaped like a six-pack of Warren¡¯s beloved Pepsi-Cola. He had asked his old pinball partner Don Danly to bringhim the balance sheet for Wilson¡¯s Coin-Operated Machine Company.2 Buffett was beginningto gather materials fromhis early business efforts¡ªtreatingthese objects like totems and showingthemto people with a slight tinge of reverence. They seemed like tangible evidence of himself, reassuringartifacts. 
Susie brought her band fromSan Francisco and took center stage to singa version of ¡°Shuffle Off to Buffalo¡± to her husband: 
Warren got fed up with candy With stamps he wasn¡¯t handy¡­. 
The songcontinued for verse after verse on the theme of Buffett¡¯s latest caper:packingup his duffeland shufflingoff to Buffalo to buy an undervalued paper. 
Susie¡¯s star turn, corny but sweet, was the beginningof a new tendency. Buffett¡¯s family and friends had started to recount¡ªin his presence¡ªthe list of the companies and investments he had collected like the beads on a rosary. The man himself, with eyebrows sproutinglike ivy tendrils over the frames of his glasses, now looked less awkward in black tie. The modern Berkshire Hathaway that he had created churned out new beads for the rosary almost like a clockwork. Buffett¡¯s hunt for things to buy had become more ambitious, free of the cigar butts and lawsuits of the decades before. The great engine of compoundingworked as a servant on his behalf, at exponential speed and under the gatheringapprovalof a public gaze. The method was the same:estimate an investment¡¯s intrinsic value, handicap its risk, buy usingmargin of safety, concentrate, stay in the circle of competence, let it rollas compoundingdid the work. Anyone could understand these simple ideas, but few could execute them. Even though Buffett made the process look effortless, the technique and discipline underlyingit actually did involve an enormous amount of work for him and his employees. As his business empire had expanded from coast to coast, fromthe shores of Lake Erie to the suburbs of Los Angeles, Kiewit Plaza remained at the center¡ªa quiet but endlessly busy temple of commerce, furnished with dinged, scuffed steel-frame furniture and linoleumfloors. With every new investment, there was more to do; but the number of people at headquarters barely changed. Buffett still remained behind closed doors, guarded by Gladys. The very rich Bill Scott now worked part-time and spent the rest of his days playingwith his polka band. A new manager, Mike Goldberg, now augmented the headquarters staff. Verne McKenzie managed the finances. The employees rarely left their tiny offices except for the occasional conclave in the conference room, which seated only four people. No chats took place around the watercooler. As for a period of ease followingthe scuffle at the Buffalo Evening News, 
McKenzie put it this way: ¡°There was never such a time.¡±3 Those who tested Rickershauser¡¯s Law of Thermodynamics found that the sun was indeed nice and warm, but Buffett was so focused and his mind worked at such speed that extended conversations with him left themsunburned. ¡°My mind was so tired,¡± said one friend. ¡°I had to recuperate fromseeinghim,¡± said another. ¡°It was like beingpounded on the head all day long,¡± said a onetime employee. 
Buffett had the energy and enthusiasmof a restless teenager; he seemed to remember every fact and figure he had ever read; he finagled people into volunteeringfor tough jobs, then assumed they could accomplish miracles; and while remarkably tolerant of others¡¯ quirks and flaws, was less so of quirks and flaws that cost him money. So eager for results was he, so confident of others¡¯ skills, so unaware of how far short of his own they fell, that he chronically underestimated people¡¯s workloads. Buffett, the sun around whomeveryone revolved, was impervious to the effects of Rickershauser¡¯s Law of Thermodynamics himself. 
¡°People tell me I put pressure on them. I never intend to. Some people like to apply pressure. I never do. It¡¯s actually the last thing I like to do. I don¡¯t think I¡¯m ever doing it, but I¡¯ve had enough people tell me that I do it that it must be true.¡± 
The managers out in the hinterlands who ran the businesses that Berkshire and Blue Chip owned were lucky because Buffett largely left themalone, his trick of management beingto find obsessed perfectionists like himself who worked incessantly; then ignore themexcept for a ¡°Carnegizing¡±¡ªattention, admiration, and Dale Carnegie¡¯s other techniques¡ªevery now and then. Most would not have had it any other way. 
The decisions Buffett had made about stocks in the 1970s were defiant bets against pessimismin the great bear market, plagued by rampant unemployment and consumer prices that rose at an intolerable fifteen percent a year. Now that bet suddenly paid off, thanks to a desperate President Carter, who had appointed a new Federal Reserve Chairman, PaulVolcker, in 1979. Volcker ratcheted up the central bank discount rate to fourteen percent to get inflation under control. In 1981, new President Ronald Reagan began to cut taxes sharply, started deregulatingbusiness¡ªand supported Volcker despite the howls of pain his policies were causing. The economy and markets had been goingthrough a seizure for two and a half years. Then, in late 1982, the bullmarket of the 1980s began its stampede as the prices of stocks started catchingup with the 
growth in corporate earnings.4 
Much of the money used for Buffett¡¯s late seventies spendingspree came froma bonanza of float from insurance and tradingstamps. While National Indemnity prospered, at Blue Chip stamp sales continued to 
shrink, but investments made fromthe slowly dwindlingpool of float fromprepaid stamps paid handsomely.5 
The turnaround of the Buffalo Evening News meant that Buffett and Munger no longer had to debate whether Blue Chip¡¯s largest asset was worth more dead than alive. The News would live; it now threw off a steady streamof profits. In 1983, they finally agreed on a value for Blue Chip, and Berkshire swallowed it 
whole¡ªthe last step of the great untangling.6 Buffett and Munger were now full partners for the first time¡ªalthough Munger was the junior partner by miles. 
Buffett made Munger, who now owned two percent of Berkshire, the company¡¯s vice chairman. Munger also now took over as president and chairman of Wesco, a wee thingcompared to the now-swollen Berkshire, but Munger¡¯s own. It dangled like a tiny strand of spaghetti fromthe corner of Berkshire Hathaway¡¯s mouth, the only morselthat Buffett had yet failed to swallow. Wesco¡¯s shareholders eventually figured out that he would get to it someday, and inevitably they began to value Wesco¡¯s stock at a forbiddingprice. 
Munger¡¯s influence on Buffett¡¯s thinkinghad always far outweighed his financialclout. They thought so much alike that the main difference between their behavior in business was that Munger on occasion would veto deals that the more easily enraptured Buffett might have struck. Their attitude toward their shareholders was identical. With the merger done, in the 1983 annual report the two men spelled out to Berkshire¡¯s shareholders a set of principles fromwhich they would operate. They called them the ¡°owner-oriented principles.¡± No other management told its company¡¯s owners these things. 
¡°Although our form is corporate, our attitude is partnership,¡± they wrote. ¡°We do not view the company as the ultimate owner of our business assets, but, instead, view the company as a conduit through which our shareholders own the assets.¡±7 
This statement¡ªdeceptively simple¡ªamounted to a throwback to a former generation of corporate governance. The modern-day corporate chief viewed the shareholders as a nuisance, a noisy or quiet group to be appeased or ignored. They were certainly not his partners or his boss. 
We don¡¯t play accountinggames, Buffett and Munger said. We don¡¯t like a lot of debt. We run the business to achieve the best long-termresults. All of these sounded like simple truisms¡ªexcept that so few managements could honestly make allof these statements. 
Incidentally, Buffett also wrote that year, ¡°[r]egardless of price, we have no interest at allin sellingany good businesses that Berkshire owns, and are very reluctant to sell sub-par businesses¡±¡ªeven if that hurt performance¡ª¡°as longas we expect them to generate at least some cash and as longas we feelgood about 
their managers and labor relations.¡±8 That was a warningin the guise of a hint to Gary Morrison, who took over from Ken Chace at Berkshire in 1982 after the exhausted Chace retired. By then, Buffett had shut down the Manchester milland cut back on production in New Bedford by one-third. 
¡°The textile business would make money for about ten minutes each year. We made half the men¡¯s suit linings in the country, but nobody ever went to a tailor and said, ¡®I¡¯d like a pin-striped gray suit with a Hathaway lining.¡¯ A square yard of cloth that came out of our mill cost more than a square yard from somewhere else, and capitalism¡¯s frugal that way. We¡¯d get awards from Sears, Roebuck as supplier of the year, and we took them fishing, and supplied them during World War II, and I was personal friends with the chairman of Sears, and they¡¯d say, Your products are wonderful. And we¡¯d say, How about another half a cent a yard? And they¡¯d say, You¡¯re out of your mind. So it was a terrible business.¡± 
Instead of ¡°generatingcash,¡± Morrison begged Buffett to give him cash so that he could upgrade the mills. Buffett said no. 
And yet he clungto the beleaguered mills. Thus, it had been even harder, like havinga root canal without novocaine, for him to sell one of the company¡¯s most profitable businesses, the Rockford Bank. But he had had to do it; the Bank HoldingCompany Act required it in order for Berkshire to carry on its nonbanking 
interests (especially in insurance).9 Even so, he still carried money with Gene Abegg¡¯s picture on it in his wallet afterward. 
He was equally loath to lose Ben Rosner, who had finally retired fromAssociated Cotton Shops. Rosner¡¯s underlings had made fun of his toilet-paper-pickin¡¯ ways. Sure enough, as soon as they took charge, Associated fell into the tank. For months, Verne McKenzie slogged back and forth to New York¡¯s garment 
district, peddlingits soggy carcass. 10 Finally, he found some buyer willingto pay half a million dollars to haul away the remains of a business that only recently had earned Berkshire as much as $2 million a year. 
A few of the Berkshire companies were so self-steeringthat it was hard to tell the difference between a well-run business and one guided by the wind alone. At Wesco, Lou Vincenti, who resisted beingmanaged, succeeded in concealinghis Alzheimer¡¯s fromBuffett and Munger for several years. 
¡°We didn¡¯t see him that often,¡± says Buffett, ¡°and he would sort of get himself psyched up to try and get past that. Plus, we didn¡¯t want to see it. Charlie and I loved him so much we didn¡¯t want to face it.¡± 
¡°Lou Vincenti was decisive, he was intelligent, and he was honest and shrewd,¡± says Munger. ¡°And he ran the last savings and loan in California to go to a computer-run systemfor depositor¡¯s accounts, because it was still cheaper to do it manually with community-college students workingas part-time employees. You can see how that would turn Warren and me on. He was cranky and independent and a very good human being. And we loved himso much that even after we found out, we kept himin his job until the week that he went off to 
the Alzheimer¡¯s home. He liked comingin, and he wasn¡¯t doingus any harm.¡±11 
Buffett and Munger turned this story into a jokey parable, sayingthat they wanted more businesses that could be run successfully by a manager with Alzheimer¡¯s. 
*** 
Buffett was sensitive to the subject of Alzheimer¡¯s. He took great pride in his powerful memory; now his mother grew forgetful. Her state of mind could be obscured by the way that Leila had always tended to live in the past, and to create her own ideal reality¡ªher version of Buffett¡¯s bathtub memory, in which¡ª whoosh¡ªthe plugpopped up, and bad memories drained away. Now in her late seventies, her son¡¯s glory was her major joy, but Warren still trembled if he had to spend time with her. It was no wonder, since the old rages stillflared up occasionally. By now, virtually every member of the family had had the experience of pickingup the phone and hearingher wrath come scorchingover the line. Her victims all ran for comfort to Susie, who said, ¡°You have to understand that this just happens sometimes, to other people and not just you. 
Warren and Doris went through it for years. So just don¡¯t focus on what she said, because it¡¯s not true.¡±12 
Peter was one grandchild whomLeila had always left alone. She sometimes commented that he looked like Howard and had a way of walkinglike Howard, so possibly that was why. The resemblance was only in appearance, however. Peter had dropped out of Stanford not longbefore graduation and married Mary Lullo, a recently divorced woman six years his senior who had four-year-old twin girls, Nicole and Erica. Peter treated themas his own daughters, they began usingthe name Buffett, and they became great favorites of Big Susie¡¯s. Warren had been tryingto interest Peter in Berkshire for some time and eventually sent his prot¨¦g¨¦, Susie¡¯s former tennis buddy, Dan Grossman, to talk to him about workingin the business, but Peter had no 
interest; his future lay in music.13 He cashed in $30,000 of his Berkshire stock to finance a recordingand music production company, Independent Sound, scoringcommercials out of his apartment in San Francisco with Mary as his business manager and promoter.14 
Susie stayed close to Peter through his music, while she continued to toy with the idea of revivingher career, workingwith a pair of producers, Marvin Laird and Joel Paley. She took themto Omaha and toured them around the Old Market jazz clubs. They felt like they were writingan act for ¡°their favorite English teacher.¡± Susie displayed no signs of wealth, but since they had heard somethingabout a newspaper and See¡¯s, they thought, ¡°Maybe she¡¯ll pay us in candy.¡± 
At last they settled on an act that Susie would perform at Delmonico¡¯s in New York at a benefit for New York University. The act she wanted themto create would reflect her personality¡ªa bohemian, gypsy soul and a wicked, sly sense of humor. In the end, however, she sanga conventional medley, replacingthe soulful, passionate songs of 1977 with standards: ¡°Stringof Pearls,¡± ¡°I¡¯ll Be SeeingYou,¡± ¡°The Way You Look Tonight,¡± ¡°Satin Doll,¡± ¡°Take the A Train,¡± ¡°Seems Like Old Times.¡± 
At the benefit, Warren beamed as he watched his wife work the audience. Laird and Paley realized that showingoff his talented, beautiful wife made Buffett proud and happy. It seemed to themthat, unlike most show-business people, Susie¡¯s performance wasn¡¯t about her ego. Performingwas a way of connectingwith 
the audience, and givingsomethingto her husband.15 
Laird and Paley, who referred to themselves jokingly as ¡°musicalgigolos,¡± became part of Susie¡¯s singing life, meetingPeter and goingdown to the Laguna house to work with her for the next few years on her music as she considered whether she could make a viable career out of it. They never met Susie Jr., who had moved to Washington, where Katharine Grahamtook an interest and arranged for her to work as an editorial assistant, first at the New Republic and then at U.S. News & World Report. In November 1983, in a huge weddingat New York¡¯s Metropolitan Club, she married again, this time to Allen Greenberg, a public-interest lawyer for Ralph Nader. Greenberghad her father¡¯s coolanalytical bent and looked like someone who lived in a library. Both Susie¡¯s parents took to their new son-in-law immediately, and people remarked on how much Allen resembled Susie¡¯s father¡ªrational, dispassionate, good at sayingno. The newlyweds moved into a Washington town house but rented most of it out to other tenants and lived in a tiny apartment. By this time Susie Jr. had sold allher Berkshire stock¡ªwhen it was tradingfor less than $1,000 per share. 
Howie¡¯s first marriage, like his sister¡¯s, had not lasted. Despondent, he spoke to his father, who had told him a change of geography would do himgood and suggested that he work at one of Berkshire¡¯s businesses. Attracted to California, Howie took a job at See¡¯s Candies in Los Angeles. BigSusie sent himto live with Dan Grossman, whom Buffett had installed at one of Berkshire¡¯s little insurers in Los Angeles when it ran into trouble. Howie started moppingfloors and doingmaintenance and worked his way up to orderingboxes, while gettinginto adrenaline-charged scrapes of various types. Buffett told himhe had to stay at See¡¯s for two years. Howie prepared to wait it out in resignation, but he didn¡¯t last at Grossman¡¯s. He moved into the 
house at Laguna, where he felt more at home.16 
By chance, Howie was partnered in doubles tennis at Emerald Bay with Devon Morse, a sweet, unhappily married blonde with four daughters. To impress her, he shimmied up a post to change the time on a clock by the tennis court, felloff, and broke his foot. She helped himget home, then showed up at the house with some food. They started to talk and he learned she was tryingto leave her rich husband. The marriage that had eventually resulted fromtheir relationship followed a series of Howie-type adventures; the couple removed the children fromthe home of Devon¡¯s husband, a gun collector whose house was filled with hundreds of weapons. In 1982, Howie had convinced Devon that it would be best to relocate to Nebraska, 
where they were married by a judge, with Buffett and Gladys Kaiser as witnesses.17 

Buffett now had six step-grandchildren, and soon added a grandson when Howie and Devon had a child of their own, Howard Graham Buffett Jr., who would become known as Howie B. Buffett liked children well enough but was awkward and stiff around themand had no idea how to play with or engage a child. So he did as he had done with his own children¡ªleft themto Susie, who took up the role of grandmother with zest at family gatherings, and quickly added trips to visit grandchildren in Nebraska to her already extensive travelingroutine. 
Buffett involved himself more actively when it came to Howie¡¯s career. At first Howie had gotten a job in real estate, but what he really wanted to be was a farmer. Since he had no capital, Buffett agreed to buy a farm, which he would rent to his son¡ªan arrangement rather like the one he had had with his sharecropper back when he was stillin high school. Howie trudged through Nebraska, lookingat over a hundred farms and makingoffers on behalf of his father, who was determined that a farmbe a cigar butt and would not pay a nickel more than necessary. Finally, somebody bit in Tekamah, and Buffett plunked down the necessary $300,000.18 
Although he took Howie¡¯s rent checks, he didn¡¯t set foot on the farm. As with Susie¡¯s art gallery, he had no interest in the experience, only the money. He compared the farm, as a commodity business, to men¡¯s suit linings. ¡°No one goes to the supermarket to buy Howie Buffett¡¯s corn,¡± he said.19 
That Buffett tried to control his children with money yet never spent any time teachingthemabout money might seemodd, but it was the same story as with his employees: He felt any smart person could figure it out. He handed the kids their Berkshire stock without stressinghow important it might be to themsomeday, explainingcompounding, or mentioningthat they could borrow against the stock without sellingit. By now, his shareholder letters, polished to a fine sheen by Carol Loomis, had tackled most financialsubjects, and he undoubtedly thought that these, alongwith the example of his life, served as adequate lessons. It probably didn¡¯t occur to himthat his kids might need more personal tutoringthan his partners. 
Buffett did care very much about what they did with their stock, however, because he and Berkshire were as one. To sellthe stock was to sell himtoo. Even so, he did not want his childen to live on Easy Street because of Berkshire Hathaway. Rather, he thought the future of his children and the future of Berkshire Hathaway would ultimately be joined not through ownership of the company, but by an act of philanthropy¡ªtheir stewardship of the stock in the Buffett Foundation. 
Buffett expressed his feelings on the subject of inheritance and philanthropy through a tribute he wrote in the Omaha World-Herald upon the death of Peter Kiewit, a near-mythical figure in Omaha. Kiewit¡¯s company, Peter Kiewit Sons¡¯, Inc., was reportedly the most profitable construction company in the world, once called 
the ¡°Colossus of Roads.¡±20 Buffett and Kiewit never had business dealings, but Kiewit owned the Omaha World-Herald and Buffett sat on its board. 
The childless, workaholic Kiewit had lived in a penthouse apartment in Kiewit Plaza, where Berkshire was headquartered, and he commuted to work by elevator. Buffett envied himthis arrangement.21 Kiewit was another Buffett prototype, a hard taskmaster and penny-pincher in the office who instilled his values through pithy little sayings. The company was his labor of love, and he was often ¡°pleased, but never satisfied.¡± ¡°A 
reputation is like fine china,¡± he said, ¡°expensive to acquire, and easily broken.¡± In makingethicaldecisions, therefore, ¡°If you¡¯re not sure if somethingis right or wrong, consider whether you¡¯d want it reported in the morningpaper.¡±22 Also like Buffett, Kiewit was obsessed with managingother people¡¯s weight. 
The main differences between themwere three: Kiewit was a hands-on manager. He shunned publicity. And he only seemed to be a cheapskate. While in Omaha, he drove a four-year-old Ford and lived like a Spartan as an example to his employees, but at his PalmSprings vacation home he drove a Cadillac and lived a 
more-than-comfortable lifestyle.23 Nevertheless, in many ways, Peter Kiewit exemplified Warren Buffett¡¯s ideas about how a life should be lived. When Kiewit died, Buffett¡¯s tribute not only honored the man, it expressed¡ªas much as anythingthat Buffett ever wrote¡ªhow he would like to be remembered himself. 24 
¡°Startingfrom scratch,¡± he wrote, Kiewit ¡°built one of the great construction companies of the world¡­. Although not the largest, it may well be the most profitable business of its type in the country, an achievement possible only because Kiewit was able to transmit, throughout an organization of thousands of employees, an unremittinginsistence on excellence and efficiency. 
¡°Kiewit was overwhelmingly a producer, not a consumer,¡± he went on. ¡°Profits went to build the capacity of the organization, not to provide opulence to the owner. 
¡°In essence, one who spends less than he earns is accumulating ¡®claimchecks¡¯ for future use. At some later date he may reverse the procedure and consume more than he earns by cashingsome of the accumulated claimchecks. Or he may pass themon to others¡ªeither duringhis lifetime by gifts, or upon his death by bequest.¡± 
William Randolph Hearst, Buffett wrote, used up many of his claimchecks by buildingand maintaininghis castle in San Simeon. He arranged to have ice hauled daily to the bears in his private zoo, much the way pharaohs used their claimchecks to build the pyramids. Buffett had meditated on the economics of the pyramids. If he hired a thousand people to build a pyramid dedicated to himself, he says: ¡°It would all go into the economy. Every dime. And a lot of forms of giving and spending are just a form of that. It¡¯s crazy, and it¡¯s probably somewhat morally wrong too. But there are people who would think it¡¯s great that you¡¯re giving employment to the people who are tugging the slabs for the pyramid. And they¡¯re making a mistake. It isn¡¯t productive. They¡¯re thinking in terms of input, not output. 
¡°If you want to build pyramids to yourself, and take a lot of resources out of society, you ought to pay like hell for it. You ought to pay a perfectly appropriate tax. I would force you to give back a huge chunk to society, so that hospitals get built and kids get educated too.¡± 
Instead, he noted in this article, some who earned the claimchecks passed themalongto their heirs, enabling hundreds of descendants to ¡°consume far more than they personally have produced; in effect, their whole lifetimes have been spent at the withdrawal window of the bank of societal resources.¡± Buffett found the results ironic. 
¡°I love it,¡± he says, ¡°when I¡¯m around the country club, and I hear people talk about the debilitating aspects of a welfare cycle, where some woman had a child at seventeen, and she gets food stamps, and we¡¯re perpetuating a cycle of dependency. And these same people are leaving their kids a lifetime supply of food stamps and beyond. But instead of having a welfare officer, they have a trust fund officer. And instead of having food stamps, they have stocks and bonds that pay dividends.¡± 
Peter Kiewit, he wrote, ¡°made major deposits in society¡¯s bank¡­but his withdrawals have been few.¡± He left about five percent of his wealth to his family. The rest went to a charitable foundation for the benefit of the people of the region in which he lived, the same causes that Kiewit had supported when alive. Most of the company continued to be owned by his employees, and Kiewit had ensured that they could sell only to one another. ¡°Peter Kiewit could not have better served his community and his compatriots,¡± Buffett concluded. 
Amongphilanthropists, Buffett also admired Andrew Carnegie and John D. Rockefeller as originalthinkers. 
Carnegie had built public libraries in poor neighborhoods all across the United States. The Carnegie Foundation had sent AbrahamFlexner as an emissary to study medical education in the United States.25 When his 1910 paper caused a national scandal by revealingthe shockingcondition of medical schools, Flexner convinced the Rockefeller Foundation to donate enough money to revolutionize medical education. Rockefeller also wanted to tackle problems that lacked a natural fundingconstituency. He found that poor black colleges, lackingrich alumni, had no way to improve themselves. ¡°In effect, John D. Rockefeller became their alumnus,¡± Buffett says. ¡°He tackled problems without concern of which among them was most popular, and he backed them up big-time.¡± 
At this point, the Buffett Foundation had a token $725,000 and gave away less than $40,000 a year, nearly all to education.26 Susie ran the Buffett Foundation, which reflected their joint philosophy that money should go back to society. If she¡¯d had access to them, Susie would have given away large amounts quickly. But Buffett was in no rush. He felt that by allowingthe money to compound over time, there would be more to give away in the end¡ªafter he was gone. Certainly by 1983 he had a good argument in favor of this idea. Between 1978 and the end of 1983, the Buffetts¡¯ net worth had increased by a stunningamount, from$89 million to $680 million. 
As he became richer, requests for money fromfriends, strangers, and charities poured in to Kiewit Plaza. Some were heartfelt pleas fromthe genuinely needy. Other people seemed to feel entitled to his money. The United Way, universities, cancer, churches, heart disease, the homeless, the environment, the local zoo, the symphony, the Boy Scouts, the Red Cross¡ªall deservingcauses, but the answer was the same: If I did it for you, I would have to do it for everybody. Some of his friends agreed with him, while others were perplexed that a man so generous with his time, advice, and wisdom was such a tightwad with his cash. It¡¯s not like it would killhimto peel off a few bucks, they said. Why didn¡¯t he find the joy in giving? 
But as longas Buffett was still amassingthe snowball, promisingto give it allaway after he died was like the ¡°jamtomorrow¡± of Alice in Wonderland¡¯s White Queen. ¡°After he died¡± was the same as never; another hedge against mortality, one of Buffett¡¯s great preoccupations. The ¡°White Queen¡± formof denialwas self-reinforcingin a peculiar way. By now, the Buffetts had at least nine friends or relatives who had, or whose family members had, attempted or committed suicide. Most recently, one of his friends¡¯ sons had driven his car off a cliff on Christmas Eve. Then, Rick Guerin¡¯s wife, Ann, had shot and killed herself a few days before their son¡¯s eighth birthday. By now, Buffett had a queasy preoccupation with suicide that was perfectly reasonable under the circumstances. Yet he himself was determined to live as longas possible¡ªand to make money untilthe very end. 
As his wealth grew, Buffett¡¯s often articulated and unwaveringdetermination to keep makingmoney at a furious rate while withholdingit fromhis family and his foundation finally sparked a rebellion amonghis friends. Rick Guerin had written to Joe Rosenfield about the possibility of Buffett becomingthe world¡¯s richest man: ¡°What will Warren do when he becomes No. 1 sled dogand sees that there¡¯s more to the world 
than hair and a smalltarget? (He thinks it¡¯s a bull¡¯s-eye, but we know better.)¡±27 
When the Buffett Group met in Lyford Cay, Bahamas, between the snorkelingand deep-sea fishingGeorge Gillespie sparked a hot debate by organizinga talk on ¡°The Children (and Charity) WillHave to Wait.¡± Years earlier Buffett had said he gave his kids a few thousand dollars for Christmas each year and told them 
to expect half a million dollars when he died.28 That, he thought, was ¡°enough money so that they would feel 
they could do anything, but not so much that they could do nothing.¡±29 This phrase would become one of his mantras, repeated over the years. ¡°Warren, that¡¯s wrong,¡± said Larry Tisch, one of his former partners. ¡°If they aren¡¯t spoiled by age twelve, they won¡¯t be spoiled.¡±30 Kay Graham, tears streamingdown her face, 
asked, Don¡¯t you love your children, Warren? 
Prompted by Carol Loomis, Fortune took up the issue in a cover story: ¡°Should You Leave It All to the Children?¡± Family comes first, many people said. 
¡°My kids are goingto carve out their own place in the world and they know that I¡¯mfor them, whatever they want to do,¡± Buffett said. But ¡°just because they came out of the right womb,¡± settingthemup with a trust fund¡ªwhich he considered ¡°a lifetime supply of food stamps¡±¡ªcould be ¡°harmful¡± and an ¡°antisocial 
act.¡±31 This was the rational Buffett. This Buffett had once written to a friend when his children were toddlers that he wanted to see ¡°what the tree has produced¡± before decidingwhat to do about givingthem 
32 
money. 
Nevertheless, Buffett had made a decision that demonstrated newfound¡ªif slight¡ªflexibility. In 1981, he set up an innovative programin which Berkshire Hathaway would contribute $2 per share to a charity of the shareholder¡¯s choice. Berkshire did not pay a dividend, but this programallowed the shareholders to direct how the company spent its charitable dollars rather than lettingtop management donate to its pet causes and receive the credit. The programdid not allocate much money, but for Buffett to do it at all was a looseningof the fist. And the shareholders loved it. The participation rate in the programwas always close to one hundred percent. 
To Buffett, the collector of information, the contributions program also turned out to be a tiny gold mine. It gave himan insight into the philanthropic interests of each shareholder, which he could never have gotten any other way. Collectingthis information had no purpose whatsoever¡ªeven less than collectingnuns¡¯ fingerprints. Buffett, however, was insatiably curious and had a deep interest in knowingabout his shareholders as individuals, as if they were part of an extended family, which was how he thought of them. 
At fifty-three, Buffett¡ªwho had already ¡°retired¡± twice¡ªwas thinkingthrough issues of philanthropy and inheritance. The subject that visibly unnerved himwas retirement. He joked about workingafter he was dead and made a point of highlightingelderly managers like Gene Abeggand Ben Rosner. But now they had retired, and Lou Vincenti had Alzheimer¡¯s. Perhaps it was not surprising, therefore, that Warren¡¯s next move would be to strike a dealwith an eighty-nine-year-old woman, one who would outlast anyone he had ever met. 
44 
Rose 
Omaha . 1983 
Rose Gorelick Blumkin came to Omaha fromthe tiny village of Shchedrin, in the region of Minsk. Born in 1893, she and her seven brothers slept on straw on the bare floor of a two-roomloghouse because her rabbi father couldn¡¯t afford to buy thema mattress. 
¡°I dreamed all my life, since I was six years old,¡± she said. ¡°The first dreamof mine was to go to America. 
¡°In Russia, they used to have pogroms against the Jews. They¡¯d cut up the pregnant women and take out the kids. They¡¯d tear up their fathers and then have a dance in the main market. I was six years old when I found out about that. I said, I¡¯m goingto America when I grow up.¡±1 
At thirteen, Rose walked barefoot for eighteen miles to the nearest train station to save the leather soles of her brand-new shoes. She had the equivalent of four cents in her pocket and hid under a train seat for three hundred miles to save her money, until she reached the closest town, Gomel. There she knocked on twenty-six doors until the owner of a dry-goods store responded to her proposition. ¡°I¡¯mnot a beggar,¡± the four-foot-ten-inch girl said. ¡°I¡¯ve got four cents in my pocket. Let me sleep in your house and I¡¯ll show you how good I am.¡± The next morning, ¡°When I came to work I waited on customer. I rolled out the material and I added it up before anybody picked up a pencil. And at twelve o¡¯clock he asked me if I was goingto 
stay.¡±2 
By age sixteen, she was a manager, supervisingsix married men. ¡°Don¡¯t worry about the men, Mamma!¡± she wrote her mother. ¡°They all mind me!¡±3 Four years later she married Isadore Blumkin, a shoe salesman in Gomel.4 That same year, World War I broke out, vigilantes ran amok in Russia, and Rose made up her mind. 
They had money for only one passage to America, so she sent her husband and started savingto go herself. Two years later, the czarist monk Rasputin was killed by revolutionaries in December 1916. Fearingthe chaos that would ensue even more than the cruelties of the czarist regime, Rose began her journey to America two weeks later, boardingthe Trans-Siberian Railway on a train headed for China. 
For seven days she rode the train until, at the border town of Zabaykai¡¯sk, a Russian guard stopped her before she could enter China. She told the man she was buyingleather for the army and promised hima bottle of slivovitz on her return. Either naive or lenient, he let her through the border. She rode through Harbin, Manchuria, to Tientsin, China, on another train. By then Rose had journeyed over nine thousand 
miles across almost the entire continent of Asia.5 From Tientsin she used her small stock of money to take a boat to Japan, with stops at Hiroshima and Kobe alongthe way, until she finally arrived in Yokohama. There she waited for another two weeks until findingthe Ava Maru, a cargo boat carryingpeanuts that gave her steerage passage to the United States. As the Ava Maru crossed the Pacific for six leisurely weeks on its way 
to Seattle, ¡°I never saw so many peanuts,¡± she said later. ¡°I thought I¡¯d never get here.¡±6 She had carried dry black bread on board but was too sick for most of the journey to eat.7 
Landingin Seattle on the Jewish holiday Purim after almost three months of travel with a face swollen from 
illness, Rose was met at the dock by the Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society, fed a kosher dinner, and given a hotelroom. ¡°When I came to this country,¡± she said, ¡°I thought I amthe luckiest one in the whole world.¡±8 The HIASput a tagaround her neck with her name and ¡°Ft. Dodge, Iowa,¡± where her husband had settled 
and was workingas a junk peddler. They sent her on a train through Minneapolis to Fort Dodge, where the American Red Cross met her and reunited her with Isadore. Rose got pregnant right away and gave birth to a daughter, Frances. She didn¡¯t know a word of English. 
Two years later, she stillspoke hardly any English. Feelingisolated, the Blumkins decided they had to live in a place where Rose could converse in Russian and Yiddish, so they moved to Omaha, a town filled with 32,000 immigrants drawn by the railroads and packinghouses.9 
Isadore rented a pawnshop. ¡°You never hear of a pawnshop goingbroke,¡± he said.10 Rose stayed home and had three more children, Louis, Cynthia, and Sylvia. Sendingfifty dollars at a time back to Russia, she brought ten of her relatives to America. Unlike her husband, she stilldidn¡¯t speak much English. ¡°I was too dumb,¡± she said. ¡°They couldn¡¯t drill it in me with a nail. The kids teached me. When my Frances started 
kindergarten, she says, ¡®I¡¯llshow you what an apple is, what a tablecloth, what a knife.¡¯¡±11 But the store struggled and the family almost did go broke duringthe Depression. Then Rose took charge. I know what to do, undersell the bigshots, she told her husband. ¡°You buy an itemfor three dollars and sellit for $3.30. Ten percent over cost!¡± When the old-fashioned suits they carried weren¡¯t selling, Rose handed out ten thousand circulars allover Omaha, sayingtheir store would outfit a man for five dollars fromhead to toe¡ªunderwear, suit, tie, shoes, and straw hat. They took in $800 in a single day, more than they had made the entire year 
before.12 The store branched into jewelry, used fur coats, and furniture. Then Rose drove the department stores crazy when she started undersellingthemon new fur coats on consignment.13 But she had a philosophy: ¡°It¡¯s better to have themhate you than to feel sorry for you.¡± 
Soon customers started askingher for more furniture. At first she accompanied themto wholesalers and bought for themat ten percent over her cost. She noticed that, unlike pawnbroking, sellingfurniture was a ¡°happy business,¡± so in 1937 she borrowed $500 from a brother to open a store called Blumkin¡¯s in a basement near her husband¡¯s pawnshop. But the furniture wholesalers didn¡¯t want her as a customer, because their dealers complained that she was undersellingthem. So Rose went to Chicago, found one sympathetic man, and ordered $2,000 worth of merchandise fromhim on thirty days¡¯ credit. The time came due and she was short, so she sold her own house furnishings cheap to pay off the debt. ¡°When my kids came home, they cried like somebody willdie,¡± she recalled. ¡°Why I took away the beds and the refrigerator? The whole 
house, an empty house? I told them, they were so nice to me I can¡¯t stand it not to keep my promise.¡±14 That night she took a couple of mattresses fromthe store for the family to sleep on. ¡°The next day I brought in a refrigerator and stove,¡± she said, ¡°and the kids quit crying.¡± 15 
In schoolthe other children picked on her son, Louie, for havinga pawn-broker as a father. He found it painfulbut ignored their taunts, worked in the store after school, remained a good student, and became an all-American diver at Tech High while deliveringsofas until midnight. His mother by now had established the Nebraska Furniture Mart and moved to larger quarters. In a side business, she sold and rented out Browning automatic shotguns duringhuntingseason. Louie¡¯s favorite job was testingthe guns by firingtheminto cinder 
blocks in the family¡¯s basement.16 
By the time the United States entered World War II in 1941, Louie had enrolled at the University of Nebraska, but he dropped out to enlist in the service after only a few semesters, still just a teenager. During the war, he and his mother wrote each other every day. His mother was discouraged, and he urged her not to 
quit.17 Because the bigwholesalers refused to sell to the Nebraska Furniture Mart, Rose had become a furniture ¡°bootlegger,¡± travelingon trains all over the Midwest to buy overstock merchandise at five percent over wholesale fromstores like Macy¡¯s and MarshallField¡¯s. ¡°They could see she knew what she was doing,¡± says Louie. ¡°They were fond of her and would say, here¡¯s this dining-roomset that just came in. It wasn¡¯t easy or cheap, but she got it.¡± Rose said, ¡°The more [the wholesalers] boycotted me, the harder I 
worked.¡±18 You don¡¯t own the country, the country belongs to everyone, was her attitude.19 She developed a lastinghatred of bigshots. ¡°When you¡¯re down they spit on you,¡± she said. ¡°When you start makingsome dollars they start payingattention. Phooey. Who needs them?Give me the middle class and I¡¯ll be happy.¡± 
Her slogan was ¡°Sellcheap and tellthe truth, don¡¯t cheat nobody, and don¡¯t take no kickbacks.¡±20 When she made a sale, she also told the employees, ¡°Deliver it before they change their minds!¡±21 
Louie won a Purple Heart at the Battle of the Bulge. After the war, he came straight home to Omaha in 1946 and went back to work. He learned everythingabout merchandising: buying, pricing, inventories, accounting, delivery, display. To Rose, nobody was as good as Louie. Ruthless with her employees, she screamed at them at the top of her lungs: ¡°You worthless golem! You dummy!¡± But after his mother fired them, Louie would hire themback. 
Four years later, the store was prospering, but then the Korean War began, and sales started to sink. Rose decided to give the business a boost by addingcarpet to her line. She went to Marshall Field¡¯s in Chicago and told themshe was buyingcarpet for an apartment building; they sold her three thousand yards of Mohawk carpet for $3.00 a yard. She retailed it for $3.95, half the standard price, although the fact that she had lied to 
Marshall Field¡¯s seemed to bother her for years afterward.22 
Rose had managed to launch a successful carpet business by givingher customers a better price than the other carpet dealers. But carpet maker Mohawk filed a lawsuit to enforce their minimum-pricingpolicies ¡ªunder which manufacturers required alltheir retailers to charge a minimumprice¡ªand sent three lawyers to court. Rose showed up alone. ¡°I say to the judge, ¡®I don¡¯t have any money for a lawyer because nobody 
would sell to me. Judge, I selleverythingten percent above cost, what¡¯s wrong? I don¡¯t rob my customers.¡±23 The trial lasted only an hour before the judge threw the case out. The next day, he went out to the Furniture Mart and bought $1,400 worth of carpet. 
But even though the Furniture Mart was sellingcarpet, furniture sales were depressed due to the war; Rose 
still couldn¡¯t pay her suppliers. Finally a friendly Omaha banker, Wade Martin, asked her what was wrong. ¡°I don¡¯t know what I¡¯m goingto do,¡± she said, ¡°I can¡¯t eat the merchandise.¡±24 He loaned her $50,000 for ninety days, but Rose couldn¡¯t sleep worryingabout how she was goingto pay it back. She hit upon the idea of rentingthe Omaha City Auditorium and crammingit with sofas and dinettes and coffee tables and TVsets. Master merchandisers, she and Louie took out an ad in the paper that was strictly truthful, yet played on wartime scarcity. 
This is It! The Sale of Sales! Shortages? Malarky! We can¡¯t eat ¡¯em! We must sell ¡¯em! We¡¯ve been shipped so much merchandise this past 60 days, we have no warehouse room. Yes, we¡¯re overloaded, and how! We can¡¯t eat ¡¯emand usually couldn¡¯t sell as much in six months. So we¡¯ve staged the largest sale ever of its type ever held in this area¡­45,000 square feet filled with the most unheard of savings of famous brand merchandise. 
It drew as many people as if the circus had come to town.25 The Furniture Mart sold a quarter of a million dollars¡¯ worth of furniture in three days. Omaha now knew that Rose Blumkin and the Furniture Mart meant discount furniture, and ¡°Fromthat day, I never owed anybody a penny,¡± she said.26 
That same year, Isadore died of a heart attack. Rose and Louie kept on going. Gradually, ¡°Mrs. B¡± was becominga name that everybody knew in Omaha. People came into the store at every stage of their lives: when they got married, when they bought their first house, when they had a baby, when they got a big promotion. The Blumkins bought in huge quantities, cut expenses to the bone, and sold at ten percent above their cost. When a tornado tore the roof off their huge new West Side suburban store in 1975, she and Louie moved everythingto their remainingdowntown store without hesitation. ¡°If you have the lowest price, they will find you at the bottomof a river,¡± she said. They did. When a fire burned down the store, she gave the 
firefighters free TVsets.27 
¡°Everything Mrs. B knew how to do, she would do fast. She didn¡¯t hesitate and there was no second-guessing. She¡¯d buy five thousand tables or sign a thirty-year lease or buy real estate or hire people. There was no looking back. She just swung. You got about two inches outside the perimeter of her circle of competence, she didn¡¯t even want to talk to you about it. She knew exactly what she was good at, and she had no desire to kid herself about those things.¡± 
By the early 1980s, Rose and Louie Blumkin had built the largest furniture store in North America. Its three acres sold over $100 million of furniture a year under one roof, ten times the volume of stores of similar 
size.28 From then on, sales grew every single year, in good economies or bad, whether Omaha grew or shrank.29 The prosperous, established home furnishingretailers in Omaha who had been her competitors when she started had vanished. Other retailers came into the city and tried to compete with the Mart. Rose cased their showrooms, she and Louie created discount campaigns, and they broke themfinancially and drove themaway. The Mart captured half the business in the metropolitan area¡ªmore than Sears, Montgomery Ward, Target, and all the other furniture and appliance retailers combined. Customers began to arrive fromIowa, Kansas, and the Dakotas. 
¡°She grew her own town. Her retailing circle just kept spreading out farther and farther, and her parking 
30 
lot was full of cars from a hundred or more miles away.¡± 
Rose became known as Mrs. B, even to her family. She awoke at five a.m., ate only fruits and vegetables, and never touched liquor. A few gray hairs appeared around the edges of her lacquered black bun, but it stayed firmly in place as she raced around the store with the energy of a youngwoman, shoutingor slicing her arms through the air for emphasis. As her bargainingposition grew stronger, she brooked no sympathy for her suppliers. ¡°Seven dollars? We go bankruptcy tomorrow should we pay that,¡± she sniffed at one¡¯s 
demand.31 The wholesalers who had formerly snubbed her now kneeled at her feet. She loved it. ¡°If you want to sell her twenty-three hundred end tables, she will know in a minute what she can pay, how fast she can move them¡­and she¡¯ll buy them from you. She¡¯ll wait until just before your plane is going to leave in some blizzard when you have to get the hell out of Omaha and can¡¯t afford to miss your flight. She will be 
32 
very tough in dealing with you.¡± 
She was hard at it six and a half days a week. ¡°It¡¯s mine habit,¡± she said. In her mind, the showroomwas her 
home. Her daughter, Cynthia Schneider, who decorated her mother¡¯s house, had arranged the furniture ¡°just as you would find in the store¡± because ¡°it¡¯s the only way we could be sure she would be comfortable.¡±33 The lampshades remained covered in plastic. Price tags dangled fromsome of the furniture. ¡°I only use the kitchen and bedroom,¡± said Mrs. B. ¡°I can¡¯t wait until it gets daylight, so I can get back to the business.¡± 
On Sunday afternoons¡ªthe only time all week she wasn¡¯t at the store¡ªshe drove around town with Louie. 
¡°I go shop the windows,¡± she said. ¡°I plan an attack on the shopkeepers, thinking, ¡®How much hell can I give them?¡¯¡±34 Allher work, she said, was inspired by her ¡°diamond mother,¡± who had run a grocery in Russia. She never forgot wakingin the night to find her mother doinglaundry and bakingbread at three a.m. ¡°She 
would carry a hundred pounds of flour twenty blocks for three cents¡¯ profit,¡± she said. ¡°It broke my heart.¡±35 And so, Rose¡¯s soft spot was refugees and immigrants. She sometimes put them to work in the bookkeeping department, tellingthem, ¡°You don¡¯t need English to count.¡±36 
In 1982, the Omaha World-Herald interviewed her. She said that over the years the family had rejected severaloffers to buy her company. ¡°Who could afford to buy a store this big?¡± One of the offers, she told Louie, was Berkshire¡¯s. Buffett had talked to her a few years earlier and she¡¯d told him: ¡°You¡¯lltry to steal 
it.¡±37 
A year later, Buffett heard that the Blumkins were negotiatingwith a company in Hamburg, Germany, that operated the largest furniture store in the world, a model similar to theirs. The Blumkins were selling! ¡°You don¡¯t have to be very smart to figure out it¡¯s a good idea to go into partnership with Mrs. B,¡± Buffett said.38 
Maybe this time they were serious. Twenty-some-odd years before, on yet another occasion, Rose had summoned Buffett to her store downtown, indicatingthat she was thinkingof selling. He really wanted to buy the Furniture Mart for Berkshire. He had walked in to find a short, squat woman lecturinga group of men lined up against the wall:her grandsons and sons-in-law and nephews. She turned to Buffett. ¡°¡®See all these guys next to me?¡¯ she said. ¡®If I sell it to you, you can fire them. These people are a bunch of bums, and they 
are all related to me and I can¡¯t fire them. But you can fire them. They¡¯re bums, bums, bums.¡¯ 
¡°She went on like this for an hour, literally. The word ¡®bums¡¯ recurred many, many times.¡± The relatives, longused to Rose, stood, impassive. ¡°Then she dismissed me. I had served my purpose.¡± 
It was too bad; he would have liked to buy the store.39 
¡°She thought the only one who was worth anything was Louie, and he was perfect.¡± When she was pleased with Louie, as she usually was, she told him, ¡°Oy, oy, oy, oy, it¡¯s beautiful, you did such a good job.¡±40 
If the Blumkins had talked themselves into selling, now was the time. Mrs. B had had two knee replacements, 
cedingmost of the day-to-day operations to Louie. But she was stillrunningthe carpet department. ¡°Somethingabout carpet fascinated her,¡± said Louie.41 If somebody needed carpet for a nine-by-twelve room, she priced it out, added the tax, and gave the buyer a discount for beinga good customer, all calculated within seconds in her head. And she still made occasionalforays into the furniture department, often enough that the family could never be sure if even their own furniture was safe. Once, Rose called her daughter and told her to ¡°empty the baby chest,¡± because she had a customer. ¡°When I made up my mind,¡± she said, ¡°I 
didn¡¯t want to wait for nothing. That¡¯s mine habit.¡±42 Nevertheless, it was Louie to whomBuffett talked. Louie said, ¡°You should meet my sons Ron and Irv, who¡¯llbe runningthe store someday.¡± 
Buffett invited Ron and Irv to come to his office for a visit, and struck up a relationship with them. He sent Louie a letter, explaininghis thoughts on the pros and cons of their sellingto Berkshire. The Blumkins should be in no hurry to sell, he wrote, dealingwith themas honestly as anyone possibly could. If ¡°you decide not to sell now, you are very likely to realize more money later on. With that knowledge you can deal from strength and take the time required to select the buyer you want.¡± 
Then he laid out what he really had to offer. They could sell to another furniture company, he wrote, or to somebody in a similar business. But ¡°such a buyer¡ªno matter what promises are made¡ªusually will have managers who feel they know how to run your business operations, and sooner or later, will want to get into hands-on activity¡­. They will have their own way of doing things and, even though your business record undoubtedly will be far better than theirs, human nature at some point will cause them to believe that their methods are superior.¡± 
Then there is ¡°the financial maneuverer, usually operating on large amounts of borrowed money, who plans to resell either to the public or to another corporation as soon as the time is favorable,¡± he wrote. ¡°If the sole motive of the owners is to cash their chips and put the business behind them, either of these types of buyers is satisfactory¡­. But if the sellers¡¯ business represents the creative work of a lifetime and remains an integral part of their personality and sense of being, both of these types of buyers have serious flaws. 
¡°Any buyer will tell you that he needs you and, if he has any brains, he most certainly does need you. But a great many, for the reasons mentioned above, don¡¯t subsequently behave in that manner. We will behave exactly as promised, both because we have so promised, and because we need to.¡± 
Buffett explained that if he bought, he wanted the Blumkins to stay on as partners. If they looked back with regret, the deal would be a disappointment for everyone, includinghim. He told Louie that he would get involved in only two things: capitalallocation and selectingand compensatingthe ¡°top man.¡± 
Buffett had somethingelse to offer. He was not German. The German company had offered well over $90 million, but to Mrs. B, who had traveled 9,000 miles across Asia to escape the pogroms, sellingto a German company was anathema. The Blumkins agreed to sellthe company to Berkshire, so Buffett drove out to the 200,000-square-foot store to make a deal. There he found the eighty-nine-year-old Rose gunningthe motor of her three-wheeled golf cart and racingaround the store, roaringat her employees, ¡°You¡¯re allgood for 
nothing! I wouldn¡¯t give a nickel for all of you!¡± while Louie and her three sons-in-law looked on. 43 
¡°I don¡¯t even want to take inventory,¡± said Buffett. ¡°I¡¯ll take your word, Mrs. B, whatever you say you got.¡± 
Mrs. B looked at her sons-in-law, who stood against a wall. One of themwas taller than her by at least a foot. ¡°Norman¡¯s been married to Frances forty-one years,¡± she said. ¡°Jerry¡¯s been married to Sylvia thirty-six years. Charles was married to Cynthia thirty-nine years ago. I told those boys, ¡®I don¡¯t take return merchandise!¡¯¡± 
Her daughters owned twenty percent of the stock and had sent their husbands to sign off on the deal. The sons-in-law were not dumb and knew that they¡¯d get far more money fromthe Germans. ¡°And she snarled at them, Just tell me how much more you think you¡¯re going to get and I¡¯ll give it to you. She wanted to divide up the money and get them out of there so it would be Louie¡¯s company, and they stood there against the wall, quivering. They wanted to go. And then she said the price was fifty-five million dollars for ninety percent of the company.¡± Mrs. B had said, ¡°I don¡¯t understand stock.¡± She wanted cash. ¡°They stood there mute, but they were also thinking, as soon as this sale goes through, we get the money, we¡¯re getting the hell out of here. 
¡°She really liked and trusted me. She would make up her mind about people and that was that.¡± Buffett knew she made decisions about everythingonce and for alland in the blink of an eye, so he wasn¡¯t taking much risk, but, ¡°I told Mrs. B after she signed, I said, ¡®If you change your mind on this it¡¯s okay with me.¡¯ I would never say that to any other seller in the world, but I just felt that this was just such a part of her, if there was any reason she decided she didn¡¯t want to do it after¡ªI didn¡¯t want her to feel bound. And she said, ¡®I don¡¯t change my mind.¡¯ 
¡°When I was leaving, I told Louie, ¡®I¡¯m terrible with accents. Sometimes I don¡¯t understand your mother perfectly; the last thing I want in the world is a misunderstanding with her.¡¯ And Louie said, ¡®Don¡¯t worry, she¡¯ll understand you.¡¯ 
¡°After the deal was done, I said, ¡®Mrs. B, I¡¯ve got to tell you something. It¡¯s my birthday today.¡¯¡± Buffett was fifty-three. ¡°And she said, ¡®You bought an oil well on your birthday.¡¯¡± 
The Blumkins had never had an audit, and Buffett did not ask for one. He did not take inventory or look at 
the detailed accounts. They shook hands. ¡°We gave Mrs. B a check for fifty-five million dollars and she gave us her word,¡± he said.44 Her word was as good as ¡°the Bank of England.¡± Buffett, however, still wanted to make sure that Rose had no regrets. 
The contract was just over a page of Carnegizing. It began, ¡°You own a hundred percent of the outstanding stock of Nebraska Furniture Mart, Inc. (¡®NFM¡¯) which operates a remarkably successful furniture and appliance retailingbusiness¡­. Berkshire Hathaway, Inc. (¡®Berkshire¡¯) has longadmired what you have accomplished together and hereby proposes to purchase from you ninety percent of such outstanding 
stock.¡±45 To announce the deal, he held a press conference and showed a video on the company¡¯s history. Mrs. B dabbed at her eyes as the filmwas shown.46 
Buffett had not only found another unusual specimen to add to his collection of interestingpersonalities. 
Somethingabout Mrs. B¡¯s indomitable will, history of hardship, and strength of character inspired awe in him.47 ¡°Dear Mrs. B,¡± he wrote to her. ¡°I have promised Louie and his boys that all members of the family are goingto feelgood about this transaction five, ten, and twenty years fromnow. I make you the same 
promise.¡±48 
Buffett had promised more than that. Mrs. B was used to operatingin totalcontrol and privacy; she did not want Buffett to throw her financial dress up in the air and show her knickers to the world. He had promised her that the accounts of the Furniture Mart would not be separately reported when Berkshire Hathaway filed its financialstatements with the SEC, as of course was legally required. 
Buffett had no worries about gettinga waiver fromthe SEC¡ªor rather gettingone of his employees to get the waiver. He was a likable boss who never lost his temper, never changed his mind capriciously, never said a rude word to anyone, never berated or criticized his employees, didn¡¯t second-guess people on their work, and let them do their jobs without interference. He also operated on the assumption that if somebody was smart, they could do anything. Charlie Munger said of him, ¡°Warren doesn¡¯t have stress, he causes it.¡± Dale Carnegie said to give people a fine reputation to live up to, and Buffett had learned that lesson well. He knew how to Carnegize heroic accomplishments out of his people. 
The gist of what he told his employees was somethinglike: ¡°You¡¯re so good, this won¡¯t take you any time at all, and it won¡¯t cost anything to do. And, of course, you¡¯ll have it back to me in the next mail. Because 
49 
you¡¯re just so damn great at what you do. It would take three people to replace you.¡± 
Verne McKenzie, who had only just finished moppingup the Blue Chip mess, was assigned the thankless task of convincingthe SEC to grant an exception to its rules so that Mrs. B would not suffer the pains of an audit or of havingto unveil her financial secrets to the shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway. He began to go through torture navigatingthe government¡¯s unsympathetic maze while Buffett offered blithe assurances that 
he could easily get this done.50 
Buffett, meanwhile, had the happy job of divinginto a new business and a new collection of people. He grew fond of Louie and ¡°the boys¡± he started drivingout to 72nd Street at eight-thirty in the eveningwhen the store closed to go out to dinner with Louie, Ron, and Irv, talkingfor hours about furniture and merchandising. He started taking ¡°the boys¡± and their wives on an annual vacation. 
That fall the Buffett Group lurched across the North Atlantic in heavy seas on the Queen Elizabeth II. Some of Buffett¡¯s friends were shocked when told to send $125 in advance for tips and asked to bringtuxedos for severalformaldinners. Joy Ruane was so intimidated by this new hauteur that she showed up with seventeen 
suitcases.51 The food onboard the ship was ¡°second rate,¡± said one member, and the agenda a mix of the typical and the unusual: WyndhamRobertson, another Fortune reporter who was a member of the group, on investingduringinflation; a session on stock options; George Gillespie and Roy Tolles on splittingup assets in a divorce¡ªa subject on which views ran hot; TomMurphy on the race between television networks CBSand Cap Cities; and Charlie Munger on Benjamin Franklin. Buffett spoke on using ¡°game theory¡± to solve 
economic problems, based on pioneeringeconomist Adam Smith¡¯s ¡°invisible hand,¡±52 in which people laboringto further their own interests acted collectively for the good of everyone. 
Allthe while, Buffett delighted in tellinghis friends about the immigrant saga of Mrs. B and her wonderful Furniture Mart, the new money-churningprize he had just bought himself. However, he was almost upstaged by Ed Anderson, who made the prudish members of the group¡ªthe majority¡ªfall out of their chairs when he explained his fundingof human sexuality research and told with perfect earnestness the touchingstory of someone who had had a sex-change operation and kept his severed organ in a jar. 
But the Buffett Group was fallingout of its chairs, anyway. Those who were not below in their staterooms vomitingwere imprisoned inside the saloon, where plates slid off the tables and ashtrays flew while the ship rocked and surged across the ocean in drivingrain and gale-force winds and they heard story after story of the unsinkable Mrs. B. The Buffett Group was supposed to tour England for several leisurely days upon arriving, but five hours after they landed in Southampton, Rick Guerin was on a plane back to New York. 
Nonetheless, through the howlingwind, the homilies of Ben Franklin, divorce planning, and penises in a jar, one message came through, loud and clear: Buffett¡¯s affection and admiration for Rose Blumkin.53 He had plans for her and enlisted Buffett Group member Larry Tisch in his behind-the-scenes machinations. In a virtuoso display of gratitude and showmanship, he had decided to turn the geriatric Rose into Cinderella. 
With the help of Tisch, who was a trustee of New York University, he arranged it so that both Creighton University and NYUgave Rose honorary degrees.54 At Creighton, the tiny Mrs. B was so overcome that she covered her face with her hands and cried on the stage, saying, ¡°Oy, oy, oy, I never even believe it.¡±55 Then 
she spoke of America, the country that made her dream come true. Her advice to the graduatingseniors: ¡°First, honesty,¡± she said. ¡°Second, hard work. Next, if you don¡¯t get the job you want right away, tellthem you¡¯ll take anything. If you¡¯re good, they¡¯ll keep you.¡±56 
In the city for the New York University ceremony, the family took care to keep her fromseeingthe price of her hotel room, for she had been to New York before and thought anythingmore than $75 for a hotel room 
was outrageous.57 She had Louie take her to see Ellis Island and Delancey Street, but gettingaround the city was a struggle, for she felt cheated by the price of a taxi.58 On the morningof commencement, Mrs. B was ¡°robed¡± with great pomp and circumstance and received her degree alongside Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan and the poet Octavio Paz. 
Despite the august company of the NYUceremony, when asked which of the two honorary degrees she preferred, Rose did not hesitate. It was Creighton¡¯s. They had bought carpet from her. 
Soon after, Berkshire¡¯s auditors conducted the Nebraska Furniture Mart¡¯s first inventory. The store was worth $85 million. Mrs. B, seized with a severe case of remorse after she had sold it for a totalvalue of $60 million, includingthe share retained by the family, told Regardie¡¯s magazine, ¡°I wouldn¡¯t go back on my word, but I was surprised¡­. He never thought a minute [before agreeingto the price], but he studies. I bet 
you he knew.¡±59 Buffett, of course, could not have ¡°known,¡± not literally. But he had certainly known there was a whoppingmargin of safety in the price. 
Nevertheless, he practically considered himself a member of the family by now. When Mrs. B turned ninety, the Furniture Mart organized a huge sale, takingout full-page ads for days in the local paper, as it did every year on her birthday. Buffett would tease her about the date of her birthday sales. 
¡°She measured her birthday by the Jewish calendar, which moved around. I used to tease her about that; it really didn¡¯t fall on the same day every year. But I said that the way she moved it around was whenever she needed a little more business. Her birthday was quite flexible. She¡¯d smile and look at me and say, ¡®Well, you don¡¯t understand the Jewish calendar.¡¯¡± 
Within two years, however, this fairy tale of a story turned ugly. The indomitable Mrs. B yelled at her grandsons Ron and Irv in front of the customers, callingthembums. As tough a life as she¡¯d lived, and as hard as she¡¯d had to work, who could know more about the business than she? Gradually¡ªand understandably¡ª¡°the boys¡± stopped speakingto her. 
Finally, when she was age ninety-five, her grandsons overruled her on a carpet purchase and she exploded. It was the last straw. ¡°I was the boss. They never told me nothing,¡±60 she said, and quit. She also demanded $96,000 in unused vacation pay on her way out the door.61 
But sittingat home alone, she acknowledged, was ¡°awfullonely, not to do nothing. I go nuts.¡±62 In ominous newspaper interviews she referred to her grandsons as ¡°dummies¡± and, shockingly, ¡°Nazis.¡±63 She hinted at 
solo trips to the North Carolina High Point Market, the furniture industry¡¯s largest trade show. She suddenly arranged to have a warehouse she owned right across the street from the Furniture Mart refurbished. She held a ¡°garage sale¡± in it, and cleared $18,000 in one day, selling ¡°some of her own things.¡±64 A few months later, 
¡°Mrs. B¡¯s Warehouse¡± was grossing$3,000 a day before it officially opened. 
Asked about the impendingbattle for customers, she snarled to the localpaper, ¡°I¡¯ll give it to them.¡± When the paucity of parkingspaces at her new store was mentioned, she pointed to the Furniture Mart¡¯s lot and said, ¡°Park there¡­they won¡¯t notice.¡± Soon she was embroiled in a fight with her grandsons over city 
parkingordinances. She put up a sign: ¡°Their price $104, our price $80.¡±65 When Bob Brown on ABC¡¯s 20/20 program asked her about the Furniture Mart, she said, ¡°I would it should go up in smoke. I like they should go down to hell¡­.¡±66 
Some time earlier, Buffett had created a saying. ¡°I would rather wrestle grizzlies,¡± he said, ¡°than compete with Mrs. B and her progeny.¡±67 Stuck wrestlinggrizzlies, Buffett acted as he always did when any of his friends¡¯ relationships broke down. He refused to take sides. Mrs. B thought that was disloyal. ¡°Warren Buffett is not my friend,¡± she told a reporter. ¡°I made himfifteen million dollars every year, and when I disagreed with my grandkids, he didn¡¯t stand up for me.¡±68 This was torture to Buffett, who couldn¡¯t bear conflict and broken relationships. 
Louie, who could do no wrongin his mother¡¯s eyes, made no headway with Rose. ¡°She figured she lost controlof this place, and she blew her top,¡± he says. 
¡°He always treated his mother perfectly,¡± Buffett says. ¡°It was the hardest thing in the world for her to accept that she was giving up control. And she was angry at the world for having to give up the thing that she loved most.¡± 
After two years, Mrs. B¡¯s Warehouse, while stillsmall, was growingat such a rate that pound for pound, it 
was trouncingthe Mart. Finally Louie intervened again. ¡°Mother,¡± he said, ¡°you¡¯ve got to sellthis thingback to us. There¡¯s no sense competingone against the other.¡±69 And so Rose called Buffett. She missed the Mart. She missed her family. She was lonely in her house, separated fromher family. ¡°I was wrong,¡± she said; family meant more than pride and more than business. Mrs. B told Buffett that she wanted to come back. With a box of See¡¯s Candies under his armand holdinga huge bouquet of pink roses, Buffett went out to see her. He offered her $5 million simply for the use of her name and her lease. 
He added one catch:This time she must sign a noncompete agreement, a contract designed so that she could never again compete with him. This was somethinghe wished he¡¯d done before. The absurdity of imposinga noncompete agreement on a ninety-nine-year-old woman was far from lost on him. Nevertheless, Buffett was realistic. The agreement was cunningly written to outlast Mrs. B. If she retired, or quit in a rage or for any other reason, no matter how old she was, for five years afterward she could not compete with Buffett and her relatives. Even if she lived to be 120 years old, Buffett was takingno chances. ¡°I thought she might go on forever,¡± he says. ¡°I needed five years beyond forever with her.¡± 
Mrs. B still could not read or write English. Nevertheless, she signed the noncompete, which had been explained to her, with her characteristic mark. The truce made headlines. ¡°And then I made sure she never got mad,¡± Buffett says. He set about flatteringhis new employee unctuously to make her so happy that she would never, ever quit and start the clock runningon her noncompete. 
On April 7, 1993, the Greater Omaha Chamber of Commerce put her in the inauguralclass of its business hall of fame, alongside Buffett, Peter Kiewit, and severalothers. Then Buffett, knees tremblingslightly, got up on a stage at the Highland Club and sangin public, for the first time in his life, to Mrs. B on her hundredth birthday. He also donated a million dollars to a local theater she was renovating. 
Nobody could believe it. Warren Buffett had given away a million dollars. 
And through allof the hosannas, none of it ever went to Rose Blumkin¡¯s head. Not even the million dollars that Warren Buffett had given her. She felt she owed everything, allher good fortune, to this country for the opportunities it had given her. At family events, she insisted that her favorite song, ¡°God Bless America,¡± be played every time, sometimes even more than once. 
¡°I don¡¯t think I deserve it,¡± she said, over and over, of the accolades.70 But she did. 
45 
CalltheTowTruck 
Omaha . 1982¨C1989 
Once disembarked from the QE II, Susie Buffett listened to her husband¡¯s tales of Mrs. B or whatever his latest fixation might be froma distance, just like everybody else. She and Warren talked nearly every day on a special ¡°hotline¡± installed in her apartment. When the phone rang, she jumped up instantly. ¡°That¡¯s Warren!¡± she would say, and run away fromwhatever conversation she was havingwith a friend to answer it. He was stillher number one obligation. But unless he needed her, her life was under her own control. 
Susie had moved out of her minuscule apartment at Gramercy Tower and into another cubbyhole on the Washington Street cable-car line with a splendid view over the bay. She chose the buildingbecause Peter was livingthere with his wife, Mary, and her two daughters. He was stillpursuinghis musical career and had started rentingout studio time to pay the bills, while writingmusic for anyone who would pay him¡ªstudent 
films, the production company Video West. 1 
In the past few years, Susie had lost both of her parents. Doc Thompson had died in July 1981; Dorothy Thompson followed only thirteen months later. Susie was so close to her parents that their deaths left a wrenchinghole in her life. Afterward, her hyperkinetic tendencies did not abate; if anything, they increased. Warren had stopped takingher for granted, and his desire to please the woman he now idolized more than ever found expression partly through the money he gave her. In her younger days, Susie¡¯s idea of a shopping 
spree had been buyinga basketful of greetingcards.2 That had gradually expanded to an annualattack on Bergdorf¡¯s shoe department. Warren¡¯s tightfistedness began to let up in light of the unspoken but inexorable reality that he now controlled the money by Susie¡¯s grace and favor. At any time she could take it back and use the money herself. Torn between two fur coats, she wanted to know, ¡°Why do I have to choose?¡± The answer was, she didn¡¯t. 
But mostly the looser purse strings fueled Susie¡¯s penchant for generosity to a ragtagcollection of colorful friends that grew and grew. Nobody ever left the beguilingBuffetts. Even Peter¡¯s college girlfriend had gone to work for Susie as a secretary several years earlier, despite Susie havingbeen the one to break off the relationship before it became an engagement after Peter started havingsecond thoughts. The risingtide of old friends, family dependents, and her new San Franciscan entourage would have overwhelmed almost anyone, but Susie Buffett was not just anyone. Unleashed from the confines of Omaha, with buckets of money at her disposal, she sprangto life as if powered by magic, like the Sorcerer¡¯s Apprentice¡¯s broom. How much do 
you need for Christmas? Warren said. Oh, seventy-five thousand would do it, Susie replied.3 He wrote the check. 
Her specialcause was artists, creative types, anyone who had potential or whose talents she felt were not beingrecognized. She became the sponsor of artist Edward Mordak, who painted the kind of brightly colored contemporary canvases she preferred and wove brilliant feathery wallhangings. But of allthe people she aided, her nephew Billy Rogers was her greatest challenge. A brilliant jazz guitarist, Rogers had played with different groups, backingup B. B. Kingand achievinghis greatest success performingas one of the Crusaders. He was married, with a son, and livingin Los Angeles. But he had bounced around the West Coast for several years, never stayingclean for longbefore relapsing. Susie remained an optimist and refused to give up on him. No matter how squalid his life when he acted out his addiction, she always treated him like another son. 
By 1984, when AIDShad claimed over two thousand American victims and infected two thousand more, Susie had found her next great cause amongthe gay men of San Francisco. With the disease¡¯s transmission 
poorly understood and badly communicated, gay-bashingturned to hysteria,4 AIDSwas referred to as the ¡°gay cancer¡± people said that God must be punishinggays for their sexualdeviancy.5 Already a mother figure to many men whose families had rejected them, Susie now once again dared to cross a social line, as a 
rich married woman who acted as a refuge for gay men duringthe early years of the AIDScrisis.6 
Susie¡¯s own life in San Francisco was somethingof a high-wire act, requiringa sure sense of balance. She had remained Mrs. Warren Buffett publicly for six years now while privately teeteringon the fence of divorce and remarriage. Some who were aware of her situation thought Susie chose to stay in this limbo as a way to please everyone else and avoid havingto figure out what she herself wanted. Susie, they thought, was a woman who could never speak her own truth. Yet her life history suggests otherwise:that she preferred never to give allof herself to anyone, that she would rather divide her attention amongmore than one relationship. Susie¡ªwho had reason to be confident in her ability to manage people¡ªon occasion could be overconfident. As the circle of those who knew Susie¡¯s secrets grew, it became harder for her to control what the two main men in her life knew themselves about the state of their relationships with her. 
Susie and her former tennis coach spent part of 1983 and early 1984 travelingin Europe, where she made new friends, but also ran into people she knew fromOmaha. Suddenly, her two lives had collided on the Continent. In March 1984, she came to Omaha for Leila¡¯s eightieth birthday party; duringher visit she admitted to Warren for the first time that part of the reason she had moved to San Francisco involved another man. Somehow, however, Warren wound up with the impression that this relationship was in the past, and 
that it involved someone she had met after she left Omaha.7 
Even while confessing, therefore, Susie kept her secrets. Yet she had finally committed herself to one course. By tellingWarren, she had chosen his side of the fence. She would never leave him. They would stay married. 
And Warren did not kill himself when he found out¡ªas if that had ever been likely. But he did lose what appeared to be ten pounds almost overnight. Amongthe severalshocks he had to absorb, he now knew that Susie had been spendingsome of the money he had dispensed to her with such a liberalhand in ways he would never have approved¡ªhad he known. His fondness for the Laguna house, never strongto begin with, also diminished noticeably. 
At Leila¡¯s birthday party, he looked thin, but behaved as he always did with the family gathered around. At home, there was no change in his relationship with Astrid, who knew nothingof what had transpired. At Berkshire headquarters, he sealed himself inside his office, protected by Gladys, and immersed himself in work. He never told anyone what he felt about the end of the beautiful illusion that had been his marriage. Instead, the bathtub memory went to work. 
*** 
The dreamof sustainingsome remnant of Berkshire Hathaway was also dying, even though the ancient spinningframes stillpuffed and wheezed. Looms that looked like they were made fromsalvaged scrap metal, antique sewingmachines, and old locomotive wheels creaked wearily in the weavingroom. Only four hundred workers remained. Most were of Portuguese descent, with specialized skills, many in their fifties or older, some speakinglimited English, some deaf from the roar of the machines. Buffett could not squeeze another ounce of rayon out of the equipment without buyingnew spinningframes and looms. That was the 
end; in 1985 he pulled the plugon Berkshire¡¯s life support.8 The equipment would have cost as much as $50 million to replace. Put to the auction block, it sold for $163,122.9 
The workers asked for severance above their contract guarantee and got a couple of months¡¯ extra pay. They wanted to see Buffett to discuss it with him. He said no. They thought he was heartless. Probably, he couldn¡¯t face them. 
¡°Through no fault of their own, they were in a position of being a horse when the tractor arrived. The free market did them in. If you¡¯re fifty-five and you speak Portuguese, and you¡¯ve been working on a loom for thirty years and your hearing is shot, you¡¯ve had it. And there wasn¡¯t any answer. When you talk about retraining people¡ªit¡¯s not like they¡¯ll all go become computer technicians by taking junior-college courses or something like that. 
¡°But you¡¯ve also got to deal with the people that are displaced. The free market does all kinds of good things in this country, but we need a safety net. Society is getting the benefits, and it should pick up the tab.¡± Warren, of course, was not goingto pick up the tab because society lacked a proper safety net. Whatever pension the workers were entitled to under their terms of employment, that was exactly what they would get. ¡°The market isn¡¯t perfect. You can¡¯t rely on the market to give every single person a decent living.¡± 
By the time he shut it down, the textile business had become a flyspeck on the holdingcompany that bore the Berkshire Hathaway name. Buffett¡¯s plan was that insurance would drive that Berkshire Hathaway¡ªthe one that swallowed up whole businesses like the Nebraska Furniture Mart. Duringthe 1970s, he had cobbled together a diverse group of insurance companies and loaded themonto the back of NationalIndemnity to give it an extra kick. It was a brilliant strategy, but for a number of years, they had mostly been goingwrong. 
First, Jet Jack Ringwalt had retired. Then, the ¡°Omniaffair,¡± when National Indemnity was swindled by a crooked agent, had threatened to explode into losses that could have cost the company $10 million or more. Although the finaltab had settled into a couple of miserable millions, this was only the first of a series of problems with the insurance companies. Buffett had bought a small home-and auto-insurance company in the early 1970s that promptly skidded into a ditch, until a new manager towed it out. That was to be the pattern with allthe rest of Buffett¡¯s insurance investments¡ªstraight into the ditch, then call the tow truck. It would take a mighty winch and a heavy engine to digsome of them out of the muck. Berkshire had gotten involved in California workers¡¯ compensation insurance¡ªcoverage that pays for lost wages and health benefits when people are injured on the job. By 1977, one of its two workers¡¯ comp companies was in a full-blown 
¡°disaster,¡± with its manager takingkickbacks frombrokers.10 Buffett¡¯s prot¨¦g¨¦ Dan Grossman, sent to L.A. to save it, quickly realized that he did not understand insurance, a complex business that is rougher than it sounds. (Verne McKenzie, for example, had once led a trip to personally repossess an agent¡¯s house and 
car. 11) Turningyour controller into a repo man was not the typical CEO¡¯s management style, but in Buffett¡¯s world, after all, a smart person could do anything. Faced with a wrecked company to salvage, Grossman¡¯s solution, therefore, was to call the tow truck and hire an experienced manager, Frank DeNardo, who began to straighten things out. Buffett larded praise on DeNardo in Berkshire¡¯s annualreport. 
Buffett had also started a reinsurer¡ªa company that insures other insurers¡ªas a sort of experiment. He hired George Young, a gentle, professorialman, to run it. Youngseemed to know what he was doing, and money came in the door, but too many losses flowed back out. Buffett tried to work with Youngto solve the problem, then Hail-Maryed Grossman to New York on a rescue mission. It was ¡°kind of vague,¡± says Grossman. ¡°He said, go talk to Lloyd¡¯s of London, go find some reinsurance deals that you can do.¡± Grossman figured out fast that reinsurance was a business for specialists. Given no instructions, he camped out at Ruane, Cunniff and started to learn investing. 
Another of Buffett¡¯s insurance ventures was the creation of the Homestate Companies¡ªa batch of little insurers scattered amonga number of different states. The idea here was that somebody wearingthe title of president would make customers feel better served than the same person as branch manager of a bignational insurance company. In 1978, Buffett wrote that these companies had done a ¡°disappointing¡± job. The customers liked doingbusiness with a president, but the bignationalcompanies had certain other advantages, such as experience. The Homestate Companies needed new management. Buffett had no plans to solve this problem himself. Nor did his standard management technique of takingout all the cash and raisingprices release a flood of profits in insurance (although it was a good startingpoint). His friend TomMurphy liked to 
tellhimthat he ¡°delegated to the point of abdication.¡±12 Now he put Verne McKenzie in charge of one of 
these companies, untilMcKenzie, recognizingthat he did not understand insurance either, threw up his hands and backed out.13 Meanwhile Frank DeNardo, at age thirty-seven, had died tragically froma heart attack. Now the workers¡¯ compensation business in California was rudderless again. Buffett snatched Grossman back from New York to run it. 
Grossman found himself a company president at age twenty-six, in a business where fraud prevention is more important than sales. He faced customers with decades of experience cheatinginsurers. His calls for help only splattered against Buffett¡¯s Teflon pleasantries, addingto the already considerable mess. Grossman was one of many who learned that it was his job to figure it out. Bright and hardworking, he felt ¡°totally unqualified¡± to run an insurer at his age and level of experience, and explained that he was in over his head. Buffett said he had confidence in himand was sure that he could rise to the occasion. Instead, the stress overwhelmed him, and his marriage fellapart. Finally, he told Buffett he simply couldn¡¯t handle it, moved to the San Francisco Bay Area, and began to manage investments on his own. 14 
Buffett, who hated to let anyone go, urged him to remain in the Buffett Group. Grossman was wellliked, and various members of the group called to try to dissuade himfrom leaving. But he felt he was not strong enough to maintain his autonomy within the entanglements that bound people to the Buffetts¡ªSusie with her crowd of dependent worshippers, Warren with his network of supportive protectors. Knowingwhat he was givingup, he cut everyone off. ¡°He divorced the Buffetts,¡± said one former friend, who understood why but thought it was too bad. 
Now headquarters had one fewer person to support the growinginsurance empire. Verne McKenzie was so overworked figuringout how to slide the Furniture Mart into Berkshire¡¯s numbers without showingMrs. B¡¯s financial underwear that he rarely saw Buffett. DuringGrossman¡¯s peripatetics, Buffett had installed Mike Goldberg, a former McKinsey consultant who had once worked with Rickershauser at the Pacific Coast Stock Exchange, in Grossman¡¯s onetime office. A wiry Brooklynite of sardonic intensity and the subtlest humor, Goldbergturned out to have the so-called insurance gene, which is made up of one part knack for handicappingmixed with two parts dark skepticism about human nature. Thus he was able to teach himself the business¡ªjust as well, since it had been out of character for Buffett to spend time on one prot¨¦g¨¦, let alone two. 
With Goldberg¡¯s arrival, the polite, restrained Midwestern way of doingthings at headquarters changed abruptly. Managers that Goldbergdecided were only ninety percent of grade were swiftly sent packing. As the packingcases flew out the doors of the failingHomestate Companies, Goldberggained a fearsome reputation. He brought in new people for workers¡¯ compensation and reinsurance. Some survived, some wearied of the high-amp atmosphere and left, and others didn¡¯t make the cut. 
Goldberg¡¯s method was to call his managers and talk to themat length every day, quizzingthemmercilessly to understand their attitudes and to reinforce how they should think about the business. The value of Goldberg¡¯s hands-on approach in an atmosphere of chaos was hard to overstate. One former manager referred to it as workingin a ¡°Socratic wind tunnel.¡± People learned a lot fromGoldbergif they could withstand the stress. He was the type, an ex-employee said, who ¡°yelled when hailinga cab.¡± 
Throughout the early 1980s, Goldbergworked against the tide to right the ship. Unlike the disappointing Hochschild-Kohn or the pathetic Berkshire Hathaway¡ªbusinesses that Buffett simply should not have bought¡ªfor the first time, perfectly decent businesses were unaccountably flounderingon Buffett¡¯s watch. He had confidence that Goldbergwould do what was necessary. However, the pleasant but unskeptical George Young, who ran the reinsurance division, had been taken by unscrupulous brokers, a problem 
endemic to the industry.15 Buffett by now had a clear-cut pattern:He rationalized to avoid the confrontation of firinglosingmanagers. He gave criticismto his managers indirectly, often by withholding, sometimes resources, but especially by withholdingpraise. As the number of things he owned expanded, he used that technique ever more frequently. Tryingto parse his shareholder letters for news about the insurance companies, one had to be Sherlock Holmes attendingto the curious incident of the dogin the night-time¡ªthe 
dogthat didn¡¯t bark.16 Havinglavished individual insurance managers with praise in the 1970s, Buffett gradually ceased to cite by name any of the insurers or their managers, except the superbly performing GEICO and National Indemnity. 
Buffett did not stop writingabout the insurance industry, however. In fact, in the 1984 letter he wrote about it more than ever. But he lumped all of Berkshire¡¯s insurance companies together and took the blame for their poor performance himself, without naminga single company or a single manager who had been responsible for the hemorrhage of losses. He went on like this for an excruciatingseven pages, citingthe ¡°walkingdead¡± competition and the losses comingback to haunt himlike bill collections for the man who was ¡°buried in a rented suit.¡± Although it was appropriate for him, as CEO, to feel accountable, he seemed almost to be tryingto forestall criticismthrough self-flagellation. 
And he was writingthese things even as he knew that, underlyingthe terrible numbers, substantial improvements were already takingplace. By the next year, the insurers began comingtogether into the 
powerful engine that Buffett had envisioned. They started to produce the cash flows that would be the raw material to fuel the rest of his career. 
By 1985 the unique business modelthat Buffett had designed began risingto its potential. No other business resembled it, and this structure would enable the dramatic compoundingeffect that propelled the shareholders¡¯ wealth. 
Then there came the moment when Goldbergfound the capstone to the structure. Afterward, the numbers would gush blacker than an oil well. 
One day, says Buffett, ¡°I was down here on a Saturday, and Mike Goldberg walked in with Ajit.¡± 
Ajit Jain, born in 1951, had an engineeringdegree from the prestigious Indian Institute of Technology in Kharagpur and had worked for IBM in India for three years before gettinghis business degree fromHarvard. Ajit was skeptical and hard-nosed like Buffett and Munger. Nobody would ever put one over on Ajit. Buffett saw himself in Ajit, who quickly rose in his esteemto share Mrs. B¡¯s pinnacle. ¡°He had no background in insurance. I just liked the guy. I would love to glue myself to Ajit. You can argue that Ajit was when we discovered the electric light. It was huge. It was huge compared to anything we¡¯d ever done at Berkshire.¡± 
Buffett claimed that he ¡°added nothing¡± to the quality of Ajit¡¯s decisions. But he was far froma passive participant in those phone conversations, and if there was any job at Berkshire Hathaway he would have liked to do himself, it was Jain¡¯s. He loved the handicappingaspect of the deals, the tough negotiatingin which temperament mattered and huge sums of money were won or lost based on pure intellect and will. This supremely rationalbusiness in which psychology gave the right person an edge drew together allof Buffett¡¯s skills. Buffettingby proxy through Ajit was as close to the old ¡°under-the-counter¡± market way of tradingas he could get these days, and he loved doingit. 
With Buffett glued to Ajit, and the chaos sorted out, Goldberg¡¯s job was finished. He soon moved over to start a credit and real estate business for Berkshire. 
Ajit did not seemto need much sleep; when he got up around five or six a.m., he apparently asked himself, ¡°Who¡¯s awake?Who can I call?¡± His colleagues learned to be prepared for lengthy predawn talks about reinsurance deals on Saturdays and Sundays. He and Buffett followed a routine of nightly ten o¡¯clock phone calls, which Ajit maintained in every time zone throughout a ceaseless routine of globe-trotting. 
Ajit had arrived at an opportune time. Insurance prices were peaking. He took an ad in Business Insurance magazine: ¡°We are lookingfor more¡ªmore casualty risks where the premiumexceeds one million.¡± The ad combined the showmanship and sharp thinkingthat were Buffett hallmarks. ¡°We didn¡¯t have a reputation, we didn¡¯t have the distribution system,¡± says Buffett. But business came pouringin the door after that ad, 
and Ajit did deals, deals, deals.17 
46 
Rubicon 
Omaha . 1982¨C1987 
The 1980s would be an era of deals, deals, deals¡ªmost financed with debt, debt, debt. The Dow hadn¡¯t 
budged in seventeen years. 1 Grindinginflation had decimated corporate profits, yet companies had eiderdowned their payrolls so that every white-collar worker but the lowliest rested on a comfy cushion stuffed with flunkies. Executives treated themselves and their employees to golf courses and huntinglodges. 
They dribbled away much of their earnings in sloppy operations, loose engineering, and unthinking bureaucracy.2 By the early 1980s, stocks were on sale like polyester suits. Then, under Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker, interest rates, recently an astronomicalfifteen percent, started to fall as inflation came under control. Astute money men noticed the bloated state of American business. With debt now 
cheap, would-be buyers of a company could use the company¡¯s own assets as collateralfor a lender to finance its purchase¡ªlike gettinga hundred percent mortgage on a house. The buyer didn¡¯t have to put up any cash; it cost no more to buy a huge company than to set up a lemonade stand.3 A rush of financiers 
returned to WallStreet, intent on slaughteringthe fatted calves usingthe carvingknife of borrowed money. The merger boomhad begun. 
¡°We were takingearnings or value that should¡¯ve gone to the shareholders and bringingit unto ourselves,¡± said Jerome Kohlberg, one of the first buyout financiers. ¡°Corporate America was responsible for a lot of this. You have to ask the question, Why didn¡¯t they do it [cost-cutting] themselves?¡±4 
In 1984, the burner under managements turned up another notch when ¡°junk bonds¡± became respectable. 
More politely called ¡°fallen angels,¡± these were the bonds of companies like the Penn CentralRailroad that were climbingout of the bankruptcy dustbin or teeteringon its edge.5 Only occasionally did a company issue junk bonds on purpose, payinga high interest rate because it was considered a dicey credit risk. Junk bonds were sort of shady, a little desperate. 
The people who worked in the junk-bond departments on Wall Street were junk peddlers or ragpickers¡ªthe few bankers who scouted for hag-ridden executives willingto issue junk bonds, and ¡°distressed debt¡± analysts who spent their careers gradingpapers in the gloomy school of hard knocks, lookingover picked-clean balance sheets and scuttlebuttingbankruptcy lawyers, angry investors, and desperate managements. 
Everythingchanged when Michael Milken, chief junk peddler of the upstart investment bank Drexel Burnham Lambert, rose to become the most influentialman on WallStreet through a simple proposition:that while individual ¡°fallen angel¡± junk bonds were risky, buyinga bushelof themwas not, because on average, the higher interest rate more than compensated for the risk. In other words, junk bonds in the aggregate had a margin of safety¡ªlike cigar butts. 
Soon, money managers no longer looked as though they were playingroulette with investors¡¯ money by puttinghigh-payingjunk bonds in their portfolios. Indeed, it quickly became more respectable to issue new junk bonds¡ªquite a different thing. Another short hop and takeovers of strong, well-financed companies could be financed with junk, turningformerly sound balance sheets into debt-riddled Swiss cheese. Corporate raiders armed with junk bonds, intent on ¡°hostile takeovers¡± whose goalwas to pluck a company clean, suddenly stalked companies that had been waddlingalongcomplacently. Their targets lunged toward any buyer who might conceivably be more friendly; in the end the target company was usually sold to someone or another and financially gutted. The bankers¡¯ fees became so staggeringthat, instead of waitingfor deals to present themselves, the bankers went a-huntin¡¯ on their own, flippingthrough the ranks of the S&P 1000 the way Buffett had once used his Moody¡¯s Manuals to find cigar-butt stocks. This orgy of mergers that often took place with the consent of only one party riveted the public; the clashes of titanic egos filled the daily 
papers. MichaelMilken¡¯s annual junk-bond conference, the Predators¡¯ Ball,6 lent its name to the entire era. 
Buffett scorned the way these deals transferred riches from shareholders to managers and corporate raiders, helped by a long, longline of toll-takingbankers, brokers, and lawyers.7 ¡°We don¡¯t do hostile takeovers,¡± he said. The deals of the 1980s repelled himabove allbecause they were loaded with debt. To those reared duringthe Depression, debt was somethingto be used only with a careful eye for the worst-case scenario. In the 1980s, however, debt became mere ¡°leverage,¡± a way of boostingprofits usingborrowed money. ¡°Leverage¡± arrived at the same time that the U.S. government began runninglarge deficits courtesy of ¡°Reaganomics¡±¡ªthe ¡°supply-side¡± idea that cuttingtaxes would ultimately increase tax revenues by stoking the economy. Fierce debates raged amongeconomists over whether tax cuts could actually pay for themselves and, if so, by how much. The economy was heatingup at the time fromconsumer spending, also fueled by debt; John and Jane Q. Public had gradually been accustomingthemselves to buyingeverything with credit cards, buildingup a balance that they would never pay off untilfromtheir plastic death did them part. The Depression-era culture of hoardingand savinghad turned turtle, into a culture of buy now, pay later. 
Buffett stillpaid cash and chose the role of the white knight in takeovers. Early one morningin February 1985, while he was in Washington, TomMurphy called and woke him to say he had just bought the ABC television network. 
¡°You¡¯ve got to come and tellme how I¡¯mgoingto pay for it,¡± Murphy said.8 ABC was caught in the crosshairs of the corporate raiders. The company had hunga lure out to see whether Murphy would save it by doinga friendly deal¡ªand Murphy bit.9 
¡°Think about how it willchange your life,¡± Buffett said. Murphy was a devout Catholic who never wasted 
money on anything¡ªand this was Hollywood. Buffett may wellhave been thinkingabout the incongruity between the modest, retiringMurphy and the glamorous world of television, as Murphy believed10¡ªbut Buffett¡¯s next move signaled that he wouldn¡¯t mind such a change himself. Or so it seemed, since he recommended to Murphy that Cap Cities/ABC recruit a ¡°gorilla¡± investor who could protect it if its turn came to be gobbled up by the corporate raiders. To no one¡¯s surprise, Murphy suggested that this investor should be Buffett himself. Likewise, Buffett had no trouble quickly agreeingto spend $517 million of 
Berkshire¡¯s money for fifteen percent of Cap Cities.11 
By savingCap Cities fromprospective raiders, Buffett had now become a player in the biggest media deal in history; Berkshire¡¯s share alone was six times the size of the Nebraska Furniture Mart. At a totalof $3.5 
billion, he and Murphy had also paid a fancy price for ABC,12 which was strugglingand had slipped to third place in the ratings. ¡°The network business is no lollapalooza,¡± Buffett would later say. 13 Yet he had watched the awesome ascendance of television fromits infancy and knew wellboth its power to shape public opinion and its business potential. The combined assets were formidable: Together ABC and Cap Cities would own nearly a hundred publications, twenty-four radio stations, twelve major TVstations, and more 
than fifty cable systems.14 Buffett wanted Cap Cities/ABC so much that he was willingto leave the board of 
the Washington Post, as was required by FCC regulations because of the potential conflict between the two companies¡¯ television interests.15 He did so, however, knowingthat Kay and Don Graham would need only permission, not encouragement, to call on himinformally for advice. He went to bed that night a happy man. 
The year 1985 would be a humdinger. Duringthe same week that Buffett¡¯s investingyielded Berkshire $332 million from a single stock¡ªGeneralFoods, when it was taken over by Philip Morris¡ªForbes caught on to how rich he was and added himto its list of America¡¯s 400 richest people. At the time, it took $150 million to make that list. But Buffett, at age fifty-five, was now a billionaire, one of only fourteen ranked by Forbes. His favorite childhood book could be retitled One Thousand Ways to Make a Million Dollars. The cascading, compoundingslew of pennies fromweighingmachines and other ventures had never, in his boyhood dreams, looked like this. 
Berkshire Hathaway, its first few shares originally bought for $7.50, was now tradingat more than $2,000 a share. But Buffett refused to ¡°split¡±*29 the stock into smaller pieces, citingthe way brokerage fees would multiply needlessly alongwith the number of shares. While this was certainly true, there was also no denying that this policy made Berkshire more like a partnership¡ªor even a club, and the high stock price drew attention to Berkshire like nothingelse. 
His fame ascended with Berkshire¡¯s stock price. Now when he entered a roomof investors, an energy filled the air as allattention gravitated toward him. The purchase of ABC by Cap Cities did indeed begin to change his life, addinga Hollywood sheen to the elephant-bumpingof Kay Graham. Meetingsoap opera impresario Agnes Nixon at a dinner with Murphy, he got invited to do a gigon the show Loving. A lot of CEOs would have feigned a mortal illness before doingsomethingso undignified, but Buffett loved doinghis cameo on Loving so much that he showed off the paycheck fromhis show-business debut. It was allof a piece with the Buffett who loved to play dress-up and would soon be appearingcostumed as Elvis at his friends¡¯ parties. 
This same Buffett reveled in puttingon black tie to take Susie Jr. to a state dinner at the Reagan White House, where Sylvester Stallone and fashion designer Donna Karan were seated at the same table. Jettingoff to the Academy Awards with Astrid¡ªwho made a rare public appearance, proudly wearinga thrift-shop gown¡ªhe dined with Dolly Parton. But Buffett, who found Parton likable as well as hugely attractive, failed to make the lastingimpression on her that he managed with most other women. 
At the Kay Parties, where Grahamalways seated him between the two most important or interestingwomen, he did better. Still, he had never grown to love small talk, and found it challenging¡ªor just plain tiresome. 
¡°The truth is, you¡¯re sitting next to two people that you¡¯ve never seen before and you¡¯re never going to see again. It¡¯s kind of strained, no matter what. Whether it was Babe Paley, or Marella Agnelli, or Princess Di, Kay always saw in these women what she aspired to be. I didn¡¯t have the faintest idea what to talk about. Princess Di was not as easy to talk to as Dolly Parton. What do you say to Princess Di¡ª¡®How¡¯s Chuck? Anything new at the castle?¡¯¡± 
Still, by 1987 a billionaire commanded a certain coolrespect; Buffett had become somethingof an elephant himself, no longer so dependent on Grahamfor invitations to bump. And Grahamno longer needed himso much as a regular escort, for their mutual obsession had cooled. Now her attraction to powerful men had heated up her longtime friendship with the recently widowed, paper-dry, encyclopedically brilliant, alpha-squared Robert McNamara, who had been defense secretary duringthe Kennedy and Johnson administrations. McNamara was the onetime architect of the military¡¯s ¡°war of attrition¡± strategy; many people considered Vietnam ¡°McNamara¡¯s War.¡± It was also he who had ordered the study of U.S. government involvement in Southeast Asia known as the Pentagon Papers¡ªthe very same Pentagon Papers that had catapulted Grahamand her newspaper into journalism textbooks for their courageous reporting. Before long, McNamara became Graham¡¯s ¡°Husband Number Three,¡± as one of her board members referred to him. True to form, she put himon the Post board. From the beginning, McNamara and Buffett ¡°were not the best of friends,¡± though over time, their relationship resolved into a sort of mutually respectfultruce. 
Buffett could handle people like McNamara through diplomacy; a greater¡ªand unanticipated¡ªproblemwas the physicaldanger he found himself in because of his fame. Two men arrived at Kiewit Plaza, one wavinga chrome-plated replica of a .45, intendingto kidnap Buffett and hold himfor $100,000 ransom, which the 
kidnapper later explained would be a ¡°loan¡± to buy a ranch.16 The security guards and police handled it, and Buffett, unharmed, started jokingly referringto the man as ¡°Billy Bob¡± to Gladys. He would not hear of hiringa bodyguard, for that would restrict his cherished privacy and freedom, but he did have a security 
camera installed, alongwith a three-hundred-pound security door to shield the office.17 
Strangers called often now, insistent, wantingto speak with him. They¡¯d only take a minute, nobody else 
could help them, they knew he¡¯d be interested in what they had to say. Gladys told themin crisp tones to write a letter spellingout their requests.18 Buffett started gettingletters askingfor Berkshire stock¡ªin exchange for advice to take hawthorn herbal remedies¡ªor requestingfundingto create an unspecified new type of ice cream. People wrote to say: Mr. Buffett, I am tired of livingan average life. I have a burning 
desire to be rich. You have money, give me some. 19 And a lot of letters said, I¡¯ve gotten in over my head with credit cards or gamblingdebt.20 
Buffett the collector kept so many of the letters that they began to fill up his files. Many of themconfirmed the way he thought of himself, as a role model, as a teacher. Occasionally, somethingtouched himand struck him as real. If he thought it would do some good and he had time, he wrote a debtor or gambler back with firm but kind insistence that they take responsibility for their problems. As if they were his kids, he suggested they buy time to bailthemselves out by tellingtheir creditors how broke they were and negotiatingeasier payment terms. He always added a little soliloquy about the perils of too much debt¡ªespecially debt from credit cards, the junk bonds of the personal-finance world. 
*** 
His own kids had received little trainingabout how to handle large sums of money, but one thingthey had learned was the perilof debt¡ªa fortunate lesson, because their father was almost as inflexible about requests for money from themas he was fromstrangers. He was stillwilling, however, to make financial deals with family members to manage their weight. 
With her shoulder-length brown bob and heart-shaped face, the thirty-somethingSusie Jr. could pass for twenty-five, but she struggled with a few extra pounds. Her father made a dealin which, for losinga certain amount of weight, she could shop for clothes for a month, no limit. The only catch was that she had to pay him back if she regained the weight in a year. This dealwas better than the proverbial win/win: It was also a no-risk dealin which Buffett won either way. He was out the money only if Susie Jr. did as he wanted and kept the weight off. She got the clothes. So Susie Jr. dieted, and when she got down to the goal weight, Big Susie mailed credit cards to her daughter with a note¡ª¡°Have fun!¡± 
Susie Jr. dared not spend a dime at first, frightened by the thought of askingher father to pay the bills. Bit by bit she worked herself up, untilfinally she shopped in the blind daze induced by havingunlimited money for the first time in her life, tossingthe receipts unread each day on the dining-roomtable, too afraid to add the total. ¡°Oh, my God!¡± said her husband, Allen, each night as he returned home to his wife¡¯s mountingpile of sales slips. After thirty days, she added themup. She had spent $47,000. 
¡°I thought he was goingto die over how much it was,¡± she says of her father. Susie Jr. went for reinforcement. Her mother was powerful, but she knew who had even more leverage with Warren when it came to money. While Kay Graham barely knew Peter and was an ¡°unreachable¡± figure to Howie¡ªhe was always afraid he would sit in the wrongplace or break somethingin her house¡ªSusie Jr. had developed a 
warm, close relationship with her.21 She called Graham, who agreed to parachute in as backup if needed. 
But since a dealwas a deal, Buffett paid the bill without strong-arming. Then he immediately started polling his friends in shock, asking, ¡°If your wife spent that much, what would you think?¡± The men allagreed it was outrageous, while their wives agreed that he should count his blessings because it could have been so much 
22 
worse. 
The deal that Buffett made with Howie concerningthe rent for Howie¡¯s farm was similarly linked with weight; the amount rose and fell with Howie¡¯s poundage. Warren thought his son should weigh 182.5 pounds. When Howie was over the limit, he had to pay twenty-six percent of the farm¡¯s gross receipts to his father. When he was under, he paid twenty-two percent. ¡°It¡¯s the family version of Weight Watchers,¡± Howie said. ¡°I don¡¯t mind it, really. He¡¯s showinghe¡¯s concerned about my health. But what I do mind is that, even at 
twenty-two percent, he¡¯s gettinga bigger paycheck than almost anybody around.¡±23 So Warren couldn¡¯t lose on this dealeither. He got either more money or a thinner son. 24 Allof this was classic Buffett. As one of his friends put it, ¡°He¡¯s the master of win/win¡­but he never does anythingthat isn¡¯t a win for him.¡± 
Peter and his family had moved fromtheir apartment on Washington Street, in the buildingwhere his mother now lived, to a house on Scott Street. Peter got a gigwritingmusic for some fifteen-second animated spots for a new cable channel, MTV. Success led to a business scoringcommercials. Even though he was the least financially savvy of the Buffett kids, he had managed to tether his Berkshire stock to his musical talent and thus establish a career and a life that freed himfrom the money games. But by the mid-eighties, Peter pondered his father¡¯s homily: ¡°Nobody goes to the supermarket to buy Howie Buffett¡¯s corn.¡± Nobody ever hired an ad agency because of Peter Buffett¡¯s music either, he realized. If he wanted to pursue his own art, he needed to free himself fromcorporate lackeyship, whatever the cost. While he continued doing 
commercialwork, he cut a demo record and signed with the New Age label Narada to do an album.25 
His mother, who stilldabbled in music, was often at Peter¡¯s studio; she liked to singwith Billy Rogers when 
he was in town from Los Angeles. Billy was tryingto get his life in order; he wrote his uncle sayingthat he had ¡°blown many chances¡± in life but was now ready for the next time that opportunity knocked.26 He asked Warren to help himwith a down payment on a house that he wanted to buy as a new start for his family. The letter was carefully prepared and showed unusual financialsophistication, consideringthat it was written by a jazz guitarist who was a heroin addict. BigSusie would not dare give out such a large sumherself without 
Warren¡¯s permission, but her hand was clearly behind it. 
In a lengthy but kindly worded reply, Buffett said no. He quoted Munger¡¯s sayingthat liquor, drugs, and debt are the main things that cause ¡°smart fellows to go astray.¡± Borrowingthe down payment for a house, he said, provided no margin of safety. 
¡°If you are going to drive 10,000-pound trucks across a bridge repeatedly, it is well to build one that can withstand 15,000-pound loads rather than one that can withstand 10,001 pounds¡­. It is a big mistake to have lots of financial obligations and no cash reserve¡­. Personally, I have never used more than twenty-five percent borrowed money in my life, including when I had only $10,000 and had ideas that made 
27 
me wish I had $1,000,000.¡± 
Rogers soon sent another letter, chaotically handwritten, again askingfor a loan, sayinghe was ¡°pullinghis life together piece by piece¡± and ¡°tryingto get custody of his son.¡±28 Again the answer was no. Buffett not only had boundaries of iron when it came to money but was realistic about relyingon the promises of addicts. Susie, who always wanted to believe the best of people, was too soft-hearted to give up on anyone. She would not defy Warren to give Rogers the money, but she continued to support her nephew and his troubles with large amounts of energy and small handouts from time to time. 
Susie¡¯s work as a ¡°mobile Red Cross unit,¡± as one family member put it, had expanded after she had made her confession in 1984 and she and Warren reached a new understandingabout their marriage. That year, she had suffered a painful abscess between the spleen and pancreas, and was hospitalized for exploratory surgery. Her doctors could find no cause, and she recovered without incident. Her self-image was as the healthy person whose role was to care for others, so she ministered to her usual collection of the ill, the needy, and the heartsick. She also threw masquerade parties in her tiny place on Washington Street, tried to learn to ride a bicycle, and gathered her impromptu family of gays and strays at large dinner parties and Thanksgivingcelebrations. She wore jeans and sweatsuits and put away the wigs she had once worn, her hair now a lighter brown, released into a corona around her beamingface. 
Warren¡ªwho would give his wife almost anythingshe asked for these days¡ªlet her expand and redecorate the Laguna house, which had never stopped lookinglike the rental it once was. TomNewman, Rackie¡¯s son, introduced Susie to Kathleen Cole, an interior designer who was also an exercise instructor and former nurse, and together they began to give it the bright-colored contemporary look that Susie favored. Cole also took 
over the job of buyinggifts for Susie¡¯s ever-expandinglist.29 Susie and Warren continued to spar over money, but these spats had become almost scripted; Susie¡¯s allowance expanded at an accelerating pace¡ªalthough never at quite the rate she wanted. She could afford Cole¡¯s services and those of a full-time secretary to manage her schedule, which freed her to extend herself further while also spendingmore time with the family. Howie remained the magnet who drew more of her support and energy than anyone else. She commuted back and forth to Nebraska to help with this and that and to lavish affection on Howie¡¯s children, her adopted granddaughters Erin, Heather, Chelsea, and Megan, and grandson Howie B. When Susie Jr., who lived in Washington, D.C., became pregnant with her first child, BigSusie began makingmore trips to the East Coast. 
Susie and Allen needed to remodel their little Washington house, which was allstaircases, had a kitchen the size of a baby blanket, and an inaccessible back garden. She had plans drawn up for a new kitchen big enough to accommodate a table for two, with a back door openingto the garden. It would cost $30,000. She considered how to pay for it, since she and Allen didn¡¯t have the money; she knew better than to ask her billionaire father to give it to her. Fortunately, her pregnancy had activated the one loophole in her weight deal with her father. Buffett was not gettinghis $47,000 back. Nevertheless¡ªdespite her father¡¯s belief that clothingholds its value better than jewelry¡ªshe and Allen could not hock her new wardrobe to pay for the kitchen. So she asked her father for a loan. 
¡°Why not go to the bank?¡± he asked, and turned her down. He explained that a footballplayer on the Nebraska footballteamshouldn¡¯t inherit the startingquarterback position fromhis father, a former star quarterback. Unearned position, inherited wealth drove Buffett crazy, offended his sense of justice, and 
disturbed his sense of the universe¡¯s symmetry. But applyingsuch strictly rational rules to his own children was a chilly way to look at the world. ¡°He won¡¯t give it to us on principle,¡± said Susie. ¡°All my life, my father has been teachingus. Well, I feelI¡¯ve learned the lesson. At a certain point, you can stop.¡±30 
Before long, her doctor confined Susie Jr. to bed rest for a tedious six months. She lay in a tiny bedroom watchinga small black-and-white television set. An appalled Kay Grahambrought over meals prepared by her chef and sat at Susie¡¯s bedside, then shamed Buffett into buyinghis daughter a larger color TV. When Big Susie caught wind of what was happening, she dropped everythingand flew in to care for her daughter, spendingmonths in Washington. As soon as she saw the condition of the place, she turned it upside down and renovated it. ¡°It¡¯s just terrible that Warren won¡¯t pay for this,¡± she complained. But everythingshe was spendinghad been dunned out of him. Their endless money game enhanced Warren¡¯s reputation for thriftiness, and Susie¡¯s reputation for generosity. Since they had both signed up for this arrangement, obviously they both wanted it this way. 
With the birth of Emily in September 1986, the Buffetts now had eight grandchildren and stepgrandchildren in three cities:San Francisco, Omaha, and Washington, D.C. As the Emerald Bay house renovation reached habitability, Susie slowed the pace to a steady tinkeringand began to use it as a base to entertain friends and, especially, her grandchildren. In San Francisco, she hop-scotched into an apartment in Pacific Heights, close to Peter¡¯s new home on Scott Street. This large condominiumon Broadway sat at the top of four dizzying flights of stairs and had a glorious view over the bay from the Golden Gate Bridge to Alcatraz. 
Now she hired her decorator, Kathleen Cole, as a personal assistant to help manage her life. ¡°You can just work part-time,¡± she told Cole, ¡°and you¡¯ll have all this time for your two kids.¡± The next thingCole knew, she was workingfor the Buffett Foundation, planningSusie¡¯s travelarrangements, overseeingentertainment, and hiringand managinga staff that included housekeepers, errand-runners, and friends employed partly as a favor. The gift-givinggrew every year: Cole ordered catalogs, chose gifts, wrapped them, shipped them, kept 
track of what was comingin and goingout, and maintained records so that nothingwas ever duplicated.31 She found herself managingtwo houses, includingthe ongoingrenovation of the Laguna house and the two-year renovation project that Susie had launched on her new place on Broadway. Cole¡¯s husband, Jim, a fire-fighter, stepped in as a favor to work as Susie¡¯s part-time handyman. Another friend, Ron Parks, a CPA whom Susie had met while travelingin Europe, managed the disbursements and taxes¡ªout of kindness and without pay¡ªfor what he jokingly called ¡°STB Enterprises,¡± or, as another friend put it, Susie¡¯s ¡°payrolland 
give-away roll.¡±32 Parks was the partner of TomNewman, her friend Rackie¡¯s son; Susie had become close friends with the couple. Newman, a chef, occasionally helped out with her parties, but mostly tried unsuccessfully to improve her nutritional style. By now, Susie¡¯s paid and unpaid staff had far outgrown that at Berkshire Hathaway headquarters. 
While the renovation of Susie¡¯s new Broadway apartment was under way, Billy Rogers, apparently drug-free, moved from Los Angeles to San Francisco and started collaboratingwith Susie on an album. One day when he was workingon music at Peter¡¯s studio, he borrowed twenty dollars fromPeter and left around lunchtime. After a couple of days with no word fromRogers, Susie, Peter, and Mary Buffett decided to go to his roominghouse and check on him. They found his door locked frominside. When he didn¡¯t answer their knock, they were worried enough to go to the manager to ask her to let themin. As they waited in the hallway for her to return with the key, they could hear drifts of music fromother apartments. ¡°Oh, say that you¡¯ll be true, and never leave me blue, Suzie Q,¡± came fromone doorway. From another, ¡°Que sera, sera,¡± floated through the air. Whatever willbe, will be. 
Finally the manager arrived and unlocked the door. The three of themstepped in to see Billy sittingcross-legged on the floor with his back to the door. He was tied off and a needle stuck out fromhis forearm beneath the tourniquet. Nearby, an LP spun silently on a turntable. The last songon the album had finished playingtwo days before. Billy was stone dead. Susie covered her eyes and began to wail as Peter took off 
down the hallway to find a pay phone so he could call an ambulance.33 The autopsy revealed that Billy had died of ¡°acute cocaine and morphine poisoning.¡±34 
¡°He was such a sweet guy,¡± says Buffett, ¡°and he killed himself with drugs.¡± The shock of losinga family 
member in a sordid overdose at a roominghouse would reverberate for years. When Rogers died, Doris says, ¡°That was the worst sorrow that Susie ever went through.¡± She had not only lost the nephew she had loved like a son. After so many years, all her efforts to try to save himhad come to naught. She had never suffered such a defeat. 
*** 
Warren admired his wife¡¯s desire to rescue people and her skill in helpingthose in need. Billy Rogers was only one of many she had befriended through the years. Some of them had done damage to themselves through terrible choices, others were victims of bad luck¡ªthough few came to such a terrible end. As ¡°Mama Susie,¡± she made it her mission to help people one at a time. Warren called her a ¡°retailer.¡± The emotionalopening-up of this one-on-one work was beyond him. Rather, he chose to leverage his brains and money to affect as many lives as possible; he considered himself a ¡°wholesaler.¡± His way of connectingto people was through his role as a teacher. But he was no longer teachinghis courses at the University of Omaha, and his most attentive students, Kay and Don Graham, had become thoroughly Buffettized. His most important seminar, the Buffett Group meetings, took place only in odd-numbered years. Buffett enjoyed teachingso much that he actually went lookingfor an audience. 
In 1980, he agreed to testify in a major antitrust lawsuit against IBM, the most famous case of its era. Another witness, Arjay Miller, a fellow Post director, testified reluctantly; he found beinggrilled by lawyers, before a judge who impressed himas hatingIBM, a miserable experience. Buffett, however, enjoyed showing his expertise; he relished puttingit to the test before lawyers. He put his allinto the testimony. ¡°He¡¯s a great 
testifier,¡± says Miller.35 Buffett was especially pleased that his testimony became part of the record in a landmark case in American business history. 
Buffett¡¯s earliest teachings had been preserved in the letters he had written to his former partners in the 1960s, letters that were photocopied and passed hand to hand around WallStreet until the copies became blurry and hard to read. Ever since 1977, with the help of CarolLoomis, his unusual chairman¡¯s letters to his shareholders in the Berkshire annual reports¡ªcarefully crafted, enlightening, eye-openingletters¡ªhad grown more personal and entertainingby the year; they amounted to a crash course in business, written in clear language that ranged from biblicalquotations to references to Alice in Wonderland and princesses kissingtoads. Much of their acreage was devoted to discussions of matters other than Berkshire Hathaway¡¯s financial results¡ªhow to think about investing, the harm the dismaleconomy was doingto business, how businesses should measure results. These letters brought out both the preacher and the cop in Buffett, giving people a sense of himas a man. And the man was charming, he was attractive; his investors wanted more of him. So he gave it to themat the shareholder meetings. 
The earliest meetings had taken place in Seabury Stanton¡¯s old loft above the New Bedford mill. Two or three people with Ben Grahamconnections came because of Buffett. One was Conrad Taff, who had taken Graham¡¯s class. Buffett wanted his shareholder meetings to be open and democratic, as unlike the old Marshall-Wells meetingas possible. Taff peppered Buffett with questions, and Buffett enjoyed it, as if he were sittingin an armchair at a party with people gathered round listeningto his wisdom. 
The meetings carried on like this for years, with only a sprinklingof people showingup to ask questions, even after the meetings moved to Nebraska and took place in the National Indemnity cafeteria. Buffett still enjoyed them, despite the sparse attendance. As recently as 1981, only twenty-two people attended. Jack Ringwalt actually had to recruit employees to stand in back of the National Indemnity cafeteria so as not to embarrass his boss with an empty room. When the meetingwas adjourned after fifteen minutes of routine legalizingand half a dozen perfunctory questions, the stenographer whomConrad Taff had flown in to take 
notes for him had written nothingdown. She looked frantically at Verne McKenzie, who just shrugged.36 
Then in July 1983, coincident with the Blue Chip merger, a little crowd of people suddenly showed up at the cafeteria to hear Buffett talk. He answered as many questions as they asked in his plain-spoken, unpretentious style: He was teaching, and he came across as democratic, Midwestern, and refreshing, just as he did in his letters to the shareholders. 
Buffett spoke in metaphors the audience understood, usingthe emperor¡¯s new clothes and the bird in the hand versus the two in the bush. He told plain-spoken truths that other businessmen would not acknowledge, and routinely burst the bubble of corporate double-speak. He developed a memorable way of fabulizinglife and businesses into instructive tales that rangfamiliar¡ªRose Blumkin as the Cinderella of Berkshire Hathaway, or Ajit Jain as Buffett¡¯s Rumpelstiltskin, who ran his reinsurance division by spinningstraw into gold. His style was so engagingand his meaningso illuminatingthat word began to spread. The way he expressed himself made people see old problems in new ways. The meetings took on a quality associated with almost everythingthat Buffett touched. They began to snowball. 
In 1986, Buffett moved the meetingto the Witherspoon Auditorium of the Joslyn Art Museum. Four hundred people came, then five hundred the next year. Many of them worshipped Buffett, who had made themrich. In between questions, some people read poems of praise from the balcony.37 
Buffett¡¯s anomalous success, and the fame it had brought him, was puttinghimon the road to becominga brand just as surely as Skippy peanut butter. Inevitably, therefore, he became the target of a group of finance professors who were at that very moment attemptingto prove that someone like Buffett was a mere accident who should not be paid attention, much less worshipped. 
These academics had started by positingthe reasonable but not necessarily obvious truth that if a whole lot of people were tryingto be better than average, they would become the average. PaulSamuelson, an MIT economist, revived and circulated the 1900 work of Louis Bachelier, who observed that the market is made 
up of speculators who cohere into a whole that operates accordingto a ¡°randomwalk.¡±38 A professor from the University of Chicago, Eugene Fama, took Bachelier¡¯s work and tested it empirically in the modern-day market, which he described as ¡°efficient.¡± The scrabblingefforts of legions of investors to beat the market made those very efforts futile, he said. Yet an army of professionals had sprungup who charged everything from modest fees to the soon-to-be-legendary hedge-fund cut of ¡°two-and-twenty¡±(two percent of assets and twenty percent of returns) for the privilege of managingan investor¡¯s money and tryingto predict the future behavior of stocks. Stockbrokers raked their cut from all the individuals who were encouraged by TVshows and magazines to pick the next hot stock and compete with the pros. Every year, the sumof all these people¡¯s labors added up to exactly what the market did (less the fees). 
Charles Ellis, a consultant to professional money managers, blew the whistle on the market¡¯s pickpockets in 
1975 in ¡°Winningthe Loser¡¯s Game,¡± an article that showed that professional money managers failed to beat the market ninety percent of the time.39 Ellis¡¯s work also had dishearteningimplications for individual investors and the readers of books and attendees of seminars like ¡°Invest Your Way to Millions.¡± He said the best way to make money in the market was to simply buy an index of the market itself without payingthe high fees that the toll-takers charged. Over the longterm, the market tended to outperformbonds, so investors would receive the payback fromthe entire economy¡¯s growth. So far, so good. 
The professors who had discovered this efficient-market hypothesis (EMH) kept hackingaway at their computers over the years, however, to turn these ideas into an even tighter version, one that had the purity and rigor of physics and mathematics, one to which there could be no exceptions. They concluded that nobody could beat the average, that the market was so efficient that the price of a stock at any time must reflect every piece of public information about a company. Thus, studyingbalance sheets, listeningto scuttlebutt, diggingin libraries, readingnewspapers, studyinga company¡¯s competitors¡ªallof it was futile. The price of a stock at any time was ¡°right.¡± Anybody who beat the average was just lucky¡ªor tradingon inside information. 
Most people who actually worked on Wall Street could cite examples of stocks that had traded inefficiently.40 But it was certainly true that exceptions to the efficient market had grown rarer¡ªand the people who exploited themgenerally had a steady pulse and deep knowledge based on longstudy, and the willingness to put in full-time concentrated effort. Yet the proponents of EMH denied all exceptions, and to them Buffett¡ªthe most visible exception of all¡ªand his lengtheningand increasingly acclaimed record 
became an inconvenient fact. They saw himas like a man who could sail blindfolded through a sea of icebergs: in theory impossible; it was only a matter of time before he would drown. The ¡°randomwalkers¡± ¡ªSamuelson at MIT, Fama at the University of Chicago, MichaelJensen at the University of Rochester, William Sharpe at Stanford¡ªkicked around the Buffett conundrum. Was he a one-off genius or a freak statisticalevent? A certain amount of derision was heaped on him, as if such an anomalous stunt were not worthy of study. Burton Malkiel, a Princeton economist, summed the whole thingup by sayingthat anyone who outperformed the stock market consistently was no different from a lucky monkey that had a winning 
streak at pickingstocks by throwingdarts at the Wall Street Journal stock listings.41 
Buffett loved the Wall Street Journal; he loved it so much that he had made a special deal with the local distributor of the paper. When the batches of Journals arrived in Omaha every night, a copy was pulled out and placed in his driveway before midnight. He sat up waitingto read tomorrow¡¯s news before everybody else got to see it. It was what he did with the information the Wall Street Journal gave him, however, that made hima superior investor. If a monkey got the Wall Street Journal in its driveway every night just before midnight, the monkey still could not match Buffett¡¯s investingrecord by throwingdarts. 
Buffett made sport of the controversy by playingwith a Wall Street Journal dartboard in his office. The 
efficient-market hypothesis invalidated him, however. Furthermore, it invalidated Ben Graham. That would not do. He and Munger saw these academics as holders of witch doctorates.42 Their theory peddled bafflemath, teachinga whole generation of students somethingdisprovable. They offended Buffett¡¯s reverence for rational thinkingand for the profession of teaching. 
Columbia held a seminar in 1984 to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of Security Analysis. Buffett was by then so identified as Ben Graham¡¯s intellectual heir that Grahamhimself had asked himto revise and update The Intelligent Investor. The two were not able to agree on certain things¡ªprincipally Buffett¡¯s belief in concentration versus Graham¡¯s devotion to diversification¡ªand in the end Buffett wrote only the introduction. Nevertheless, Columbia invited Buffett to represent the Grahamian point of view at the seminar, which was actually more of a debate over EMH. Conveningin the auditoriumat Uris Hall, his opponent on the panel, Michael Jensen, stood up and said he felt like ¡°a turkey must feel at the beginningof 
a turkey shoot.¡±43 His role in the morality play was to cast witheringcomments at the antediluvian views of the Grahamian value investors. Some people could do better than the market for longperiods, he said. In effect, if enough people flip coins, a few of themwillflip heads over and over. That was how randomness worked. 
Sittingin the first row alongside Buffett, the frail, aged David Dodd leaned over and whispered, ¡°Take his pants off, Warren.¡± 
Buffett had spent weeks preparingfor this event. He¡¯d anticipated the coin-flippingargument. When he got up for his turn, he said that while this might be so, the row of heads would not be randomif allthe successful coin-flippers came fromthe same town. For example, if all the coin-flippers who kept flippingheads came from the tiny village of Graham-and-Doddsville, somethingspecific that they were doingmust be making those coins flip heads. 
He then pulled out a chart with the track record of nine money managers¡ªBillRuane; Charlie Munger; 
Walter Schloss; Rick Guerin; TomKnapp and Ed Anderson at Tweedy, Browne; the FMC pension fund; himself; and two others.44 Their portfolios were not similar; despite a certain amount of coattailingin the early years, they had largely invested on their own. Allof them, he said, came fromthe village of Graham-and-Doddsville, had been flippingstraight heads for more than twenty years, and for the most part had not retired and were stilldoingit. Such a concentration proved statistically that their success could not have come by random luck. 
Since what Buffett said was obviously true on its face, the audience broke into applause and lobbed questions at him, which he answered gladly and at length. The random-walk theory was based on statistics and Greek-letter formulas. The existence of people like Buffett had been waved away usingbafflemath. Now, to the Grahamites¡¯ relief, Buffett had used numbers to disprove the absolutist version of the efficient-market hypothesis. 
That fall, he wrote up ¡°The Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville¡± as an article for Hermes, the magazine of the Columbia Business School. Firinga flamethrower at the edifice of the EMH, this article did much to cement his reputation amonginvestors. And over time, the randomwalkers revised their argument 
into ¡°semi-strong¡± and ¡°weak¡± forms that allowed for exceptions.45 The one great service EMH would have performed, if anybody listened, was to discourage the average person frombelievingthey could outwit the market. Nobody except the toll-takers could object to that. But the tendencies of humankind beingwhat they are, EMH became de rigueur in business school classrooms, yet the number of individual investors and professionalmoney managers who assumed that they were smarter than average only grew, the toll-takers kept takingtheir cut, and the market went on as before. Thus the main effect of ¡°The Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville¡± was to add to the growinglegend, even the cult, that was buildingaround Warren Buffett. 
Meanwhile, EMH and its underpinning, the capitalasset pricingmodel, drove extraordinary and deep roots into the investingworld; it launched a view of the stock market as an efficient statistical machine. In a reliably efficient market, a stock was risky not based on where it was tradingversus its intrinsic value, but based on ¡°volatility¡±¡ªhow likely it was to deviate from the market average. Usingthat information and newly unleashed computingpower, economists and mathematicians started goingto WallStreet to make more money than they ever could in academia. 
Knowingevery stock¡¯s volatility allowed investment managers to shape and carve portfolios usingstocks of greater and lesser volatility built around a core list of stocks that made up a near-replica of the market index and acted as ballast in the middle. Knowinga stock¡¯s volatility allowed portfolio managers to pair up stocks and arbitrage them while consideringtheir ¡°betas¡± (the Greek letter assigned to volatility) to refine these 
bets.46 Arbitrage was the idea behind a ¡°hedge fund¡± in its simplest form: Its manager sold a group of stocks short to help cushion results if the market went down.47 That was less risky than buyinga stock or bond outright. 
But to make bigmoney on arbitrage¡ªbuyingand sellingtwo nearly identicalthings to profit fromtheir 
difference in price¡ªrequired scaffoldings of debt, in which more and more assets were sold short to buy more and more assets on the ¡°long¡± side.48 This expansion of leverage fromhedge funds and arbitrage was related to the rise of junk bonds and takeovers occurringat the same time. The models that supported the argument for leveraged buyouts usingjunk bonds were, like the models used by arbitrageurs, variations of the efficient-market hypothesis. Leverage, however, was like gasoline. In a risingmarket, a car used more of it to go faster. In a crash, it was what made the car blow up. 
This is why Buffett and Munger considered definingrisk as volatility to be ¡°twaddle and bullshit,¡± as Munger 
would later put it. They defined risk as not losingmoney. To them, risk was ¡°inextricably bound up in your time horizon for holdingan asset.¡±49 Someone who could hold an asset for years could afford to ignore its volatility. Someone who was leveraged did not have that luxury¡ªleverage costs; moreover the lender¡¯s (not the borrower¡¯s) time horizon defines the length of the loan. Thus a risk of leverage is that it takes away choices. The investor may not be able to wait out a volatile market; she is burdened by the ¡°carry¡± (that is, the cost) and she depends on the lender¡¯s goodwill. 
But bettingon volatility seemed to make sense when the market rose as predicted. When enough time passes and nothingbad happens, people who are makinga lot of money tend to think it is because they are smart, not because they are takinga lot of risk.50 
Throughout these profound changes in WallStreet¡¯s ways, Buffett¡¯s own habits had changed little.51 What still made his pulse race was buyinga company like Fechheimer, which made prison-guard uniforms. People like TomMurphy had to worry about whether they would be targeted by corporate raiders wieldingjunk bonds, but Berkshire Hathaway was impregnable because Buffett and friends of Buffett owned so much of its stock; his reputation made Berkshire a fortress where others could shelter. Berkshire had made $120 million on Cap Cities/ABC in the first twelve months it owned the stock; now the very mention that Buffett had bought a stock could, allby itself, move its price and revalue a company by hundreds of millions of dollars. 
Ralph Schey, the head of Scott Fetzer, an Ohio conglomerate, got his company into a jamby tryingto take it private in a leveraged buyout. With its stable of profitable businesses, from Kirby vacuums to the World Book encyclopedia, Scott Fetzer made appealingprey, and corporate raider Ivan Boesky quickly intervened to make a bid of his own. 
Buffett sent Schey a simple letter saying, ¡°We don¡¯t do unfriendly deals. If you want to pursue a merger, call me.¡± Schey leaped at the proffer, and $410 million later, Berkshire Hathaway owned Scott Fetzer.52 Two and a half years after buyingthe Nebraska Furniture Mart, Buffett had bought a company eight times its size. For the first time, the CEO of a public¡ªrather than private¡ªcompany had approached Buffett because he would rather work for Buffett than work for (or be fired by) someone else. 
The next to recognize the power of Buffett¡¯s reputation was Jamie Dimon, who worked for Sanford Weill, the CEO of the brokerage firmShearson Lehman, an American Express subsidiary.53 American Express wanted to sellits insurance arm, Fireman¡¯s Fund, to Weill in a management buyout. Weillhad already recruited Jack Byrne to leave GEICO and run Fireman¡¯s Fund. Dimon approached Buffett to invest his money¡ªand his reputation¡ªin the deal. 
Despite their friendship, Buffett was not sorry to lose Byrne. After repairingGEICO¡¯s woes, the perpetually itchy Byrne had embarked on a series of acquisitions and entered into new business lines. Buffett wanted GEICO to concentrate on a sure thing, its core business. Furthermore, he had hired a new chief investment officer for GEICO, Lou Simpson, a retiringChicagoan who had a distaste for rapid tradingand expensive growth stocks. Buffett had added Simpson to the Buffett Group right away, and by now Simpson had become the only person besides himself whomBuffett trusted to invest in other stocks¡ªhe allowed Simpson to manage all of GEICO¡¯s investments. But Simpson and Byrne acted like brothers who fought and made up. Periodically, Simpson tried to bolt; Buffett lured him back. Without Byrne, keepingSimpson would be easier. 
Nonetheless, Buffett knew that Byrne was a powerful moneymaker for any business he touched. ¡°Never let go of a meal ticket¡± was Buffett¡¯s verdict when asked to invest in the Fireman¡¯s Fund deal. American Express decided to cut Weillout of the deal, however, and unload Fireman¡¯s Fund in a public offering, with Byrne as CEO. To keep Buffett on the menu to attract investors, it offered Berkshire a sweetheart reinsurance deal. Buffett took the deal, and became an informaladviser to Byrne and his board. Weill, feelingdouble-crossed, blamed Buffett. He went on to buy Travelers Insurance and build it into a small empire, but by some accounts carried a grudge against Buffett fromthen on. 
From American Express to Sandy Weill, however, the financialworld now understood the power of Buffett¡¯s name. At this point, Buffett was tendingto so many major investments and advisingso many managements that he was either an actual or de facto board member of Cap Cities, Fireman¡¯s Fund, the Washington Post Company, GEICO, and Omaha National Corp. And now he reached a turningpoint, the moment when he had to consider whether to cross the Rubicon. 
Buffett had for some time played a dualrole. He ran Berkshire Hathaway as if he stillmanaged money for his ¡°partners¡±¡ªalbeit without collectingany fee. He wrote themletters explainingthat he made decisions based on personalcriteria; he set up the shareholder contribution program, a personalsolution to the problem of corporate giving; he refused to split the stock, had never listed it on the New York Stock Exchange, and considered the shareholders tantamount to members of a club. ¡°Although our formis corporate, our attitude is partnership,¡± he had written¡ªand meant it. 
At the same time, he enjoyed livingthe life of a major-company CEO. He served on board after board; he bumped with the biggest elephants. He took pride in the way politicians, journalists, and other CEOs sought out his knowledge and advice. More recently, his clout on WallStreet had become so great that entire deals¡ªimportant deals¡ªturned on whether he would participate. Above all, he was now so attached to Berkshire that it had become a virtualextension of himself. 
The loosely defined dualrole he was playinghad so far suited himand his shareholders. Now, however, a decision faced him that required himto choose¡ªhe could either run a de facto partnership or continue his role as a major-company CEO. But he could no longer do both. 
The reason was taxes. Berkshire was already burdened with corporate income taxes, a cost the partnership had not faced. On the other hand, Buffett charged his Berkshire partners no ¡°fee¡± to manage their money. That was a good deal (for everyone but Buffett) or at least the shareholders¡¯ loyalty suggests they saw it that way. Now, however, in 1986, Congress passed a major tax-reformact that, amongother things, repealed what was called the General Utilities Doctrine. Formerly, a corporation could sellits assets without paying any taxes as longas it was liquidatingand distributingthe assets to the shareholders. The shareholders would be taxed on their gain, but the gain would not be taxed twice. 
Once the General Utilities Doctrine was repealed, any liquidation of a corporation and distribution of its assets would result in a tax on the corporation¡¯s profits and another tax on the shareholders upon distribution. Since the double tax added up to a staggeringamount of money, closely held and family corporations all over the country rushed to liquidate themselves before the act went into effect. Buffett, who regularly said in his shareholder letters that Berkshire had gotten so large that its money was a barrier to investingsuccess, could have distributed its assets, then raised a more manageable sum¡ªstill in the billions¡ªset up a new partnership, and started over investingwithin weeks (collectinghis fee again, to boot). With $1.2 billion of unrealized profits on Berkshire¡¯s balance sheet, had Buffett liquidated Berkshire, he could have given his shareholders a total tax avoidance of more than $400 million and the chance to start over in a partnership 
free of the corporate double tax.54 But he didn¡¯t. 
Buffett wrote a lengthy dissertation on taxes in his annual letter, in which he addressed this topic and dismissed the idea of liquidatingout of hand: ¡°If Berkshire, for example, were to be liquidated¡ªwhich it most certainly won¡¯t be¡ªshareholders would, under the new law, receive far less from the sales of our 
55 
properties than they would have if the properties had been sold in the past.¡± 
The Warren Buffett of old would not have sneered at an extra $185 million in his own bank account and the chance to start over earningfees without the corporate income tax¡ªwhich is what his decision not to liquidate Berkshire Hathaway in 1986 cost him personally. But ordinary greed no longer drove his decisions¡ªfor this cost himfar more than any other shareholder. His long-standingattachment to Berkshire held himso firmly in its grip that he gave up the option of keepingBerkshire as a virtual partnership. Otherwise, he would have liquidated without a second¡¯s hesitation. 
Instead he had crossed the Rubicon and chosen the role of beingthe CEO of a major corporation, like Procter & Gamble or Colgate-Palmolive, one that would continue to exist after he was gone. 
This company, Berkshire, with its disparate parts, was hard to value. Munger liked to joke that Berkshire was the ¡°Frozen Corporation,¡± since it would grow endlessly but never pay a penny in dividends to its owners. If the owners couldn¡¯t extract any money from their money-makingmachine, how much was that company really worth? 
But Buffett was growingBerkshire¡¯s book value far faster than his shareholders could have accumulated such wealth themselves, and he had the scorecard to prove it. Moreover, it was a long-termscorecard, far more comfortable for himthan the year-to-year pressure of beatingthe market¡¯s bogey. By shuttingdown the partnership, he had freed himself from that tyranny; in fact he no longer presented numbers in a fashion that 
allowed someone to calculate his investingperformance from inception.56 Besides, beingCEO of the Frozen Corporation was fun. He got to own a newspaper in Buffalo; he got to use his shareholder letters as the editorial column in a newspaper. Yet even though he had now officially joined the CEO club, he had no desire to acquire most of their habits¡ªvisitingfive-star resorts, collectingwine or art, buyinga yacht, or acquiringa trophy wife. ¡°I¡¯ve never seen a trophy wife yet that looks like a trophy,¡± he would later say. ¡°To me they always look like a booby prize.¡± 
One day in 1986, however, he called his friend Walter Scott Jr., a down-to-earth hometown boy who had 
worked for Peter Kiewit Sons¡¯, Inc, all his life, just like his father before him. Scott was businesslike yet refreshingly open and relaxed. He had succeeded Peter Kiewit, then made his reputation duringa federal highway bid-riggingscandal that threatened Kiewit¡¯s existence by disqualifyingit frombiddingon any contracts that got government funds. By forthrightness, ¡°groveling,¡± and thorough reforms, Scott led the company through a longrestoration¡ªa modelfor dealingwith the government in a corporate life-or-death 
situation.57 He was such a trusted friend of Buffett that Katharine Grahamstayed in the Scotts¡¯ apartment on the few occasions that she visited Omaha. 
¡°Walter,¡± Buffett asked, ¡°how do you justify buyinga private airplane?¡± Buffett knew that Kiewit had a fleet of private jets because it was always havingto ferry its employees to remote construction sites. 
¡°Warren,¡± said Scott, ¡°you don¡¯t justify it. You rationalize it.¡± 
Two days later, Buffett called back. ¡°Walter, I¡¯ve rationalized it,¡± he said. ¡°Now, how do you hire a pilot and maintain a plane?¡± 
Scott offered to let Buffett piggyback the maintenance of his proposed new jet on Kiewit¡¯s fleet, and Buffett 
went off and sheepishly bought a used Falcon 20¡ªthe same type of plane that Kiewit employees flew¡ªas Berkshire¡¯s corporate jet.58 It gave himan extraordinary degree of privacy, as wellas controlover his travel schedule¡ªprivacy and controlover his time rankingin the top handful of things that Buffett cared most about on earth. 
Of course, buyinga private jet conflicted with another of the things he cared most about: not wastingmoney. Buffett had never lived down an incident in an airport in which Kay Grahamhad asked himfor a dime to make a phone call. He pulled out the only coin he had, a quarter, started to bolt off to get change, but Graham had stopped him by teasinghim into lettingher waste fifteen cents. So, for Buffett, it was like leapingin one bound over Mount Kilimanjaro to go from justifyingtwenty-five cents for a phone call to rationalizingtwo pilots and an entire airplane to carry himaround like a pharaoh on a litter. But he was doing a fair amount of rationalizingthis year, havingjust rationalized givingup $185 million in tax avoidance as well. 
Still, it bothered him¡ªthe jet so plainly contradicted his upbringingand self-image. His tortured rationale to 
his former roommate fromPenn, Clyde Reighard, explained with great earnestness and obvious embarrassment, was that the plane was goingto save him money by gettinghim around faster.59 Next he started to make fun of himself to the shareholders, saying, ¡°I work cheap and travel expensive.¡± 
The plane ushered in a new phase of his life. Buffett clungtenaciously to his corn belt¡ªeven while wearing black tie¡ªyet fraternized ever more often with hoity-toity sosoity, as CEO of the Frozen Corporation. In 1987, Ambassador Walter Annenbergand his wife, Leonore, invited Warren and Susie out to PalmSprings for a weekend with their friends Ronald and Nancy Reagan. Buffett had dined at the White House and already knew both the Reagans fromvisitingKay Graham¡¯s house on Martha¡¯s Vineyard, but he had never spent a whole weekend with a sittingpresident. 
¡°It was kind of like an elaborate minuet or something. Sunnylands was designed to be sort of a court for Walter. You had two people living there and fifty-something servants. You had a billion dollars¡¯ worth of art on the walls, and I¡¯m the only guy that was ever there that didn¡¯t ooh and aah over the art. I¡¯d just as soon have a bunch of old Playboy covers on the walls.¡± (Susie, however, might not have enjoyed herself quite as much.) 
¡°They put us in the Blue Room. The bedspreads, the covers on the books were all blue. Everything was blue. The jelly beans were blue. Every guest room had two maids, so they could serve us breakfast in bed at the same time, and the trays would be placed down at the exact same time and they would lift the covers at the exact same time. 
¡°When we would walk out in the evening dressed for dinner, there would be one maid on each side of the 
door. And Susie¡¯s maid would say, ¡®Madame looks beautiful tonight.¡¯ And then my maid would look at me and just sort of gurgle. She¡¯d had a week to prepare for me and think of what to say, and she can¡¯t come up with anything. 
¡°Walter had his own private nine-hole golf course at Sunnylands. He had his own driving range with ten tees lined up and all these golf balls piled in perfect little neat pyramids. And there wasn¡¯t anybody there. The course was immaculate. If he had four foursomes, Walter would say, ¡®That¡¯s too much play for my course,¡¯ and send one of them off to play at Thunderbird Country Club. I¡¯d go out there and hit four golf balls, and somebody¡¯d run out and replace the pyramids. And that was the day at Sunnylands. It was as fancy as living gets.¡± 
Buffett, of course, had his own views about pyramids and pharaohs, but he liked Annenbergand was happy to play golf with him. Though he would never spend his money that way, Buffett believed that people had the right to spend their own money any way they chose. Besides, he would never dreamof criticizingthe ambassador. Annenbergpaired Buffett that weekend with Reagan as a golf partner, so Secret Service agents trailed them¡ªbut refused to fetch golf balls out of water traps as Buffett had hoped. 
Buffett had a mixed view of Reagan as President. He admired Reagan¡¯s handlingof geopolitics. However, under Reagan the United States went from beingthe world¡¯s largest lender to its largest borrower. Just as junk bonds and leverage were ballooningon Wall Street, the government had been runningup mountains of debt¡ªwhich Buffett considered the Wimpy style of economics:I willgladly pay you Tuesday for a 
hamburger today.60 Buffett¡¯s style was to own the cattle ranch¡ªand he had the balance sheet to prove it. 
Armored by Berkshire Hathaway¡¯s balance sheet¡ªand a golf scorecard signed by the President of the United States¡ªBuffett was now a fortress of power, a fount of widely acclaimed wisdom. After his role rescuing Scott Fetzer, people thought of himas a high-profile protector. Every financialstatistic pertainingto him and his company rangwith exclamation points. Berkshire Hathaway¡¯s book value per share had grown by more than twenty-three percent a year for twenty-three years! Buffett¡¯s first group of partners had reaped $1.1 million for each $1,000 put into the partnership! Berkshire was tradingat the dizzyingprice of $2,950 per share! Buffett himself had a net worth of $2.1 billion! A WallStreet money manager¡ªan investor¡ªwas the ninth-richest man in the U.S.! Never in history had anyone climbed fromthe ranks of those who managed other people¡¯s wealth to join the celebrated few on top of the feedingchain of riches. For the first time, the money from a partnership of investors had been used to grow an enormous business enterprise through a chess-game series of decisions to buy whole businesses as well as stocks. Inevitably, more people were going to call himfor help. 
The next person to pick up the phone was John Gutfreund, the man who ran Salomon Brothers and had endeared himself to Buffett by helpingto save GEICO in 1976. 
That he had done so showed both the strength and weakness of Salomon. The GEICO stock underwritinghad been based on the opinion of one equity research analyst. If the firmhad any stature in the marketplace of sellingstocks, it would have passed on the deal as far too small to be worth the legal liability if it failed¡ªas all the other firms had done. But Salomon, bold and decisive rather than bureaucratic, dared the risk because it needed the business. Buffett had always taken a likingto people who extended themselves and helped him make money. And Gutfreund¡¯s reserved, intellectualprep-school personality, coupled with a domineering brutality, seems to have added to Buffett¡¯s trust in him as overseer of an unruly-by-nature investment bank. 
Gutfreund had grown up the son of a well-to-do meat-truck company owner in Scarsdale, New York, a golf-course-ringed suburb of commuters close to New York City. He¡¯d majored in literature at Oberlin College and considered teachingEnglish, but was drawn to the tradingfloor by a golfingfriend of his father¡¯s, Billy Salomon, a descendant of one of the firm¡¯s three foundingbrothers. 
Salomon Brothers was born in 1910 when Arthur, Herbert, and Percy Salomon, carrying$5,000 of capital, knocked on Wall Street¡¯s doors to broker short-termloans. Less than a decade later, the U.S. government became the tiny firm¡¯s client by addingSalomon to its list of registered dealers of government securities. With this endorsement, Salomon, a game little terrier, scrapped its way to respectable size over the next three decades by stickingto its core business of tradingbonds usingits wits, nerve, and fidelity to clients.61 Meanwhile, dozens of other smallbrokers closed shop or were swallowed up by larger ones. 
Billy Salomon had installed Gutfreund as a tradingassistant. Joininga roomful of men who spent their days buyingand sellingbonds for clients on the phone, Gutfreund, like the rest, carved off a little slice of everythingfor Salomon in return for his labors. He proved a deft trader and made partner in 1963 at the age of thirty-four. Partners at Salomon were bound by the edict of Billy Salomon, allof their interests welded together by the capitalhe forced them to leave at risk in the firm¡ªinstead of takingit out year by year as bonuses and profits. 
In 1978 Billy Salomon promoted Gutfreund to head of the firm, then retired. Three years later, Gutfreund showed up on his friend and mentor¡¯s beachfront porch in East Hampton to say that he was sellingSalomon to Phibro, a giant commodities dealer, to create Phibro-Salomon Inc. Gutfreund and his partners walked away with an average of nearly $8 million apiece in profit from the sale, while those who had built the firm 
and were now retired¡ªlike Billy Salomon¡ªgot zero, zilch.62 One former partner thought it a Greek tragedy: the story of Oedipus, who had killed his own father. 
Gutfreund became co-CEO with Phibro¡¯s David Tendler. Runninga firm with a co-CEO is like tryingto balance two ends of a seesaw in the air. When Phibro¡¯s business slumped after the sale just as Salomon¡¯s was soaring, Gutfreund wasted no time. He slammed his end of the seesaw to the ground and sent Tendler flying. 
After Gutfreund took control, he added a foreign-currency business, broadened into equity tradingand underwriting, and expanded the bond business into Japan, Switzerland, and Germany. For the next few years, the witch doctors fromacademia with their computers and formulas filtered onto Wall Street, and Phibro-Salomon¡¯s floor became populated with PhDs who unlocked the mathematicalsecrets of stripping, slicing, packaging, and tradingmortgages and other bonds. By inventinga whole new segment of the bond market, Salomon (for the Phibro-Salomon name never quite replaced ¡°Solly¡± in people¡¯s minds and was dumped in 1986) grew in a few short years froma second-tier firm to the top of the Street, with a swagger to match, as its traders stayed many steps ahead of other banks. 
They ruled from ¡°The Room,¡± Solly¡¯s tradingfloor, a smoky palace about a third the size of an airplane hangar, filled with longdouble rows of desks where the traders, salespeople, and assistants crouched in front of banks of screens with a slice of pizza in one hand and a telephone receiver in the other. The daily battle took place as a symphony of groans and curses and farts and screams punctuatingthe background babble, yelps, and mutterings of trader talk. Eccentrics were welcome, as longas they produced. Gutfreund shot down the aisles every morningfromhis desk on the floor as if fired froma cannon. He glared through horn-rimmed spectacles, chompinghis stogie, and shredded screwups into piles of mulch on the tradingfloor. 
The characters on the tradingfloor bartered with a camaraderie born of competition and a united obsession 
with killingthe other team. They so dominated the bond-underwritingmarket that BusinessWeek crowned Salomon ¡°The Kingof Wall Street.¡±63 The story also said it was the kind of place where the ¡°longknives¡± could come out if things went south¡ªin other words, that Gutfreund would purge anyone suspected of 
dissent in order to stilla revolt.64 
Salomon¡¯s profits peaked in 1985, when the firmmade $557 million after tax. But the new businesses ¡ªprincipally equities¡ªdidn¡¯t earn their keep; thus, internal competition started to get out of hand. The traders who had built Salomon¡¯s unique and profitable business started to leave, enticed by million-dollar offers from other firms. Soon they populated Salomon¡¯s competitors. Gutfreund ratcheted the pay upward to stem the tide. But he did not crack down on departments like equity tradingand investment bankingwhen they failed to produce, then came in with new five-year plans to fix their failures. His intimidatingpersonality covered a soft underbelly: He shrank fromhard decisions and substantive confrontations. As time passed, he spent less time in The Roomand presided with a somewhat distracted air over a kingdomin which the threat 
of poison hungin the air. ¡°My problemis that I amtoo deliberate on people issues,¡±65 he would later say. Somewhat unfairly, observers blamed not himbut his wife, Susan. 
Tied to her husband by a long, longleash, all through the 1980s Susan Gutfreund had raced headlongup Fifth Avenue, draggingthe once-retiring, silver-haired CEO of Salomon behind her into international society. Gutfreund came to tolerate and even enjoy it because, he said, she expanded his horizons. With Susan blowingwith the force of a nor¡¯easter, he turned his rudder and ran into the wind. Modesty and thrift were the first to go overboard. 
¡°It¡¯s so expensive to be rich,¡± the former flight attendant complained¡ªperhaps facetiously but nonetheless famously¡ªto Malcolm Forbes.66 Susan¡¯s party guests received chauffeur-delivered invitations tied with yellow roses for events that featured four types of caviar. She chilled her perfume in a refrigerator next to her bathtub. She yanked up her Chicago roots to become such a Francophile that her butler answered the phone in French. She greeted First Lady Nancy Reagan, at their first meeting, ¡°Bonsoir, Madame.¡± At the couple¡¯s 
River House livingroomin New York City, millions of dollars¡¯ worth of French antiques sat atop a million-dollar rug. She redid Salomon¡¯s executive meetingroom, drenchingit with so much passementerie and ormolu that it ¡°looked like a French bordello.¡±67 She wore the collection of designer Hubert de Givenchy, 
who lived across the courtyard from the Gutfreunds¡¯ eighteenth-century Paris pied-¨¤-terre. In New York, their righteously indignant neighbors sued themwhen an allegedly unauthorized crane appeared on their penthouse terrace to hoist a twenty-two-foot, five-hundred-pound Christmas tree into the Gutfreunds¡¯ living 
room. 68 Thus did Susan Gutfreund become 1980s Nouvelle Society¡¯s most beloved object of parody. The Gutfreunds graced magazine covers and Susan earned a role in TomWolfe¡¯s roman ¨¤ clef, The Bonfire of the Vanities.69 Susan¡¯s friends defended her, but however overdone the satire might be, nobody, not even her husband, questioned that this outpouringof opulence had diverted his attention, at least a little bit.70 
A corporate history published around this time included a tellingremark. Instead of makinga decision and expectingothers to follow, it said Gutfreund ¡°liked to involve the people who would be affected¡± and ¡°would bend over backward to make themcomfortable with what was to be done.¡± Nevertheless, wrote the author, protestinga bit too heartily, Gutfreund ¡°is in ultimate control¡± and ¡°his decisions after consultations are 
final.¡±71 In fact, some of Gutfreund¡¯s former partners, now retitled ¡°managingdirectors,¡± were mountinga major challenge to his authority. Havingkept their commitment to grow, they now blamed him for the bloated costs and vied with one another for territory. 
By the end of 1986, when earnings had begun to sink from the burden of the newly swollen payroll ¡ªSalomon had increased its staff by forty percent that year¡ªthe managingdirectors nearly dethroned Gutfreund in a coup. The firm¡¯s largest shareholder, the South African company Minorco, grew impatient and told Gutfreund it wanted to sellits block of stock. But when ¡°nothinghappened,¡± accordingto severalof the managingdirectors, and Salomon¡¯s stock languished as the Dow rose forty-four percent, Minorco found its own buyer:Ron Perelman, the feared corporate raider who had taken over Revlon. 
The executive teamdid not want to work for Perelman and whomever he brought in at the top.72 Gutfreund pushed the panic button and called Buffett, askinghim to invest in Salomon as ¡°white knight¡± to save Salomon from Perelman¡ªmuch as Buffett had saved Ralph Schey at Scott Fetzer fromBoesky.73 
Owninga company that sold vacuumcleaners was one thing. Even though Salomon was dominated by trading, which Buffett liked, the firmwas musclingits way into investment bankingand had recently caved to market pressure and set up a merchant bankingbusiness to finance takeovers usingjunk bonds, a technique 
he despised. The firmwas late to the highly competitive merger business, still a novice.74 In tryingto launch Salomon in these rough waters, Gutfreund seemed uncomfortable; he had aged visibly in just one year. 75 
Yet Salomon¡¯s expertise in reshapingthe bond market appealed to Buffett at a time when good stock ideas had become scarce. 76 While he denigrated junk bonds, he didn¡¯t shun the takeovers that were done using them. In fact, he opportunistically arbitraged those deals¡ªshortingthe stock of the acquirer and buyingthe stock of the acquiree. Since Salomon¡¯s bond arbitrage unit made most of the firm¡¯s profits, the firmin fact was an arbitrage machine, and he had a deep affinity and respect for this corner of Wall Street. 
Moreover, Buffett¡¯s nostrils had caught the rich warm scent of money, for Gutfreund had the air of 
desperation. So he said that Berkshire would buy $700 million of Salomon preferred stock, as longas it made fifteen percent.77 Gutfreund ordered his horrified employees to design a security that would deliver to Buffett the kind of returns normally earned only on a junk bond. Over the weekend of Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish New Year, when Gutfreund knew the observant Perelman would be neutralized, Buffett flew to New York, and he and Gutfreund met at Salomon¡¯s lawyers¡¯ offices. Buffett walked in by himself, without a briefcase or even a pad of paper in his hand. Over a handshake, he agreed to buy a preferred stock with a 
nine percent coupon that would convert to common stock at the price of $38.78 
The nine percent yield gave Buffett a premium return until the stock went to $38, when he had the right to convert to equity. So the upside was unlimited. But if the stock went down, he had the right to ¡°put¡± the security back to Salomon and get his money back.79 The dealworked out to an expected fifteen percent profit, on an investment that carried very little risk.80 
The annual dividends on this preferred stock¡ª$63 million¡ªwere more than Blue Chip and Berkshire had spent on the Buffalo Evening News and See¡¯s Candies together. Inside Salomon, people were outraged.81 
They felt that Gutfreund had dithered on the Minorco request, then called Buffett in desperation, and had to overprice the convertible as a result. And thus, for his huge fifteen percent return, Buffett was, as writer Michael Lewis would later explain, making ¡°only the safe bet that Salomon would not go bankrupt.¡±82 
What the firmhad bought with all this money was Buffett¡¯s reputation, which came partly at the expense of Gutfreund¡¯s power. Alongwith the deal, Buffett and Munger each got board seats. Before signingthe papers, Buffett climbed aboard his new jet and flew to New York. He met Munger at One New York Plaza to inspect Salomon. 
Standingoutside Gutfreund¡¯s office next to the tradingfloor, he beheld The Roomfor the first time. Hundreds of disheveled people sweated in front of tiny green screens. Most had phones glued to each ear as they jostled, spat, puffed, and spun their way through multimillion-dollar deals. Curses and screams cut through the low roar that filled the air. Above the scene hunga hazy fog. So many traders calmed their nerves with tobacco, why bother to abstain? Everyone¡¯s lungs were always filled with nicotine anyway. 
Munger crossed his arms and turned to Buffett. ¡°So, Warren,¡± he said. ¡°You really want to invest in this, huh?¡± 
Buffett stood, gazingout through the haze over the pandemoniumthat he was about to buy. ¡°Mmmm-hmmmm,¡± he said, after a longpause.83 
47 
WhiteNights 
New York City . 1987¨C1991 
Observers stood slack-jawed that the Midas fromOmaha had gilded the mighty Salomon Brothers with his touch. Buffett¡ªthe burger-chompingbillionaire next door, who drove an eight-year-old Cadillac, lived in his original$31,500 house, and possessed few of the tokens of the rich and famous¡ªowned a major investment in a Wall Street bank. 
He routinely railed against the WallStreet of which he was now very much a part. He wrote the Berkshire 
shareholders excoriatingthe junk bonds used to finance takeovers¡ªincludingSalomon¡¯s¡ªwhich, he said, 
were ¡°sold by those who didn¡¯t care to those who didn¡¯t think.¡±1 ¡°I never talk to brokers or analysts,¡± he said. ¡°You have to think about things yourself¡­. Wall Street is the only place people ride to in a Rolls-Royce to get advice from people who take the subway.¡±2 On the pages of the Washington Post, he had 
decried the ¡°casino society¡± that was makingthe corporate raiders rich. Why not tax one hundred percent of the speculators¡¯ profits?3 There was certainly a lot to tax. From1982 to 1987, the Dow Jones Industrial Average had streaked from777 to 2,722. If you want to make money, he told business-schoolstudents, ¡°hold your nose and go to Wall Street.¡± But he was already there. 
The image of WallStreet seducinga Midwestern populist into bed was too good to leave alone. Asked by a reporter why he owned the largest single chunk of Salomon when Wall Street was such a sinkhole, Buffett did not hesitate. He had placed his faith in one man. John Gutfreund, he said, ¡°is an outstanding, honorable 
man of integrity.¡±4 
Buffett always did fallin love with people, and observers said he was noticeably in love with Gutfreund¡ªat first. Yet the man who once quit his job as a ¡°prescriptionist¡± to escape the inherent conflict of interest with his customers couldn¡¯t shield himself with John Gutfreund from the basic fact that he owned part of an investment bank, which was riddled with conflicts of interests with its customers. How had he gotten himself 
into the¡ªat best awkward¡ªposition of sittingon the board of such a company?5 It was as if, duringa dry spell, Buffett¡¯s urge to make money had once again overwhelmed his high hopes, high aspirations, and high principles. And as had been true throughout his life, whenever his avarice got the upper hand, trouble followed. 
At the time that Buffett invested in Salomon, the market was near a breakingpoint. In his shareholder letter the previous March, he had said that money managers were so hyperkinetic they made ¡°whirlingdervishes appear sedated.¡± He didn¡¯t have a partnership to dissolve, but over the next few months he started dumping stocks. He knew that as the market continued upward, part of what was drivingit was a new invention, the ¡°S&P 500 future.¡± Salomon, like all major banks, now traded derivative contracts that were a way of betting 
how high or low the index of S&P 500 stocks would be on a certain date.6 Derivative contracts work like this: In the Rockwood Chocolate deal, the value of the futures contract was ¡°derived from¡± the price of cocoa beans on a certain date. If the beans turned out to be worth less than the price agreed to by the contract, the person who had bought the futures contract as insurance ¡°won.¡± Her losses were covered. If the beans were worth more, the person who had sold the futures contract as insurance ¡°won.¡± The contract entitled himto buy the beans below the then-current market price. 
Suppose that in the weight dealBuffett had made with Howie for the rent on his farm, he didn¡¯t want to risk Howie¡¯s actually losingweight, which would drop the rent. Since this was under Howie¡¯s control, Warren might want to buy insurance from someone else. He could say to Susie, ¡°Lookit, I¡¯ll pay you a hundred bucks today. If Howie loses twenty pounds and keeps it off for the next six months, you¡¯ll pay me the two thousand dollars of rent that I¡¯ll lose. If he doesn¡¯t keep it off for the whole six months, you don¡¯t have to pay me the rent and you get to keep the hundred bucks.¡± The index that determined the gain or loss was ¡°derived¡± from Howie¡¯s weight, and whether or not Buffett would make such a dealwas based on a handicap of the odds that Howie would be able to lose the weight and keep it off. 
Another example:Suppose that Warren made a deal with Astrid to give up eatingpotato chips for a year. If he ate a potato chip he had to pay her a thousand bucks. This would not be a derivative contract. Warren and Astrid were simply makinga deal. Whether Warren ate a potato chip was not ¡°derived from¡± anything. It was under his own control. 
However, if Astrid and Warren made that agreement and then Astrid paid Warren¡¯s sister Bertie a hundred bucks as insurance, in exchange for a thousand dollars if Astrid lost the bet, the deal with Bertie would be a derivative contract. It would be ¡°derived from¡± whether Warren ate the potato chips, which was not under either Bertie¡¯s or Astrid¡¯s control. Astrid stood to lose the hundred bucks to Bertie if Warren didn¡¯t eat the chips, and Bertie would lose a thousand bucks if he did. ¡°Derivatives,¡± therefore, are either a type of insurance (for Astrid) or an outright gamble (for Bertie).7 
Most people buyingand sellingderivative contracts do so based on an impersonal index, settingthe contract without ever meetingtheir counterparty. The S&P ¡°equity index futures¡± that money managers were buying as insurance in 1987 paid themback if the stock market fellbelow a certain level. People who assumed the market would keep goingup were often ¡°gambling¡± by ¡°selling¡± the insurance. They wanted income fromthe premiums. 
Buffett had written to Congress citingthe risk inherent in these deals and urgingregulation of this market as longago as 1982, but nothingchanged.8 Since then, equity index futures had swarmed like gnats in July. If stocks started to fall, all the bills would be presented to the sellers of insurance at once. They would have to dump stocks to meet their claims. The buyers of the index futures, meanwhile, were often usingthem to insure ¡°programtrades¡± that would sell automatically as the market fell, triggeringa cascade of sales. 
By the early fallthe market got nervous, and began to stutter and stall. On Black Monday, October 19, 1987, stocks plunged a record-breaking508 points as everybody tried to squeeze through the keyhole at once. The market came close to a tradinghalt, as it did in 1929, and suffered its largest one-day percentage drop in 
history.9 
*** 
The Buffett Group happened to be meetingon the third day of the avalanche, this time in Colonial Williamsburg. Kay Graham had been put in charge of the arrangements, and she used Williamsburg¡¯s atmospheric celebration of America at its purest, most patriotic moment to elevate the meetingfromits formerly ¡°slapdash, amateur effort by whoever,¡± as Buffett put it, to a whole new standard. The group was chauffeured everywhere, and members who were used to bran flakes at breakfast woke to find ¡°enough food for a thousand people,¡± as one member described it, with chicken, steak, ham, and chicken livers served alongside their eggs. Grahamhired Carter¡¯s Grove Plantation, a historic eighteenth-century mansion fronting the James River, for a formaldinner one night and rented out a theater to screen a movie produced by Rick Guerin, some of whose money had been funneled directly into Hollywood. As the events crescendoed, each more elaborate than the last, the group was awestruck by the contrast with prior years, as wellas by the expense. ¡°How wonderful of Kay to have us as her guests,¡± Chuck Rickershauser said, as everybody in earshot nodded. On the final evening, Grahamhired costumed chamber musicians to play Haydn duringa 
private dinner at the DeWitt Wallace museum. 10 
The topic planned for discussion as stocks were peakinghad been ¡°Is the Group finished with the market?¡± Instead, with the market crashingaround their ears, for three days Buffett, Tisch, Gottesman, Ruane, Munger, Weinberg, and the others glowed like fireflies as they flickered in and out of the room, checking stock prices and phoningtheir traders with controlled excitement. Unlike the many people devastated by 
losses, they were buying stocks.11 
When the avalanche survivors were dugout of the snow, however, Warren¡¯s sister Doris¡ªnow livingin Fredericksburg, Virginia, the town she had fallen in love with when the family followed Howard to Congress ¡ªturned out to be one of the many people who had been ¡°selling¡± the insurance. She had sold what were called ¡°naked puts,¡± a type of derivative peddled by a Falls Church, Virginia, broker. Naked puts were promises to cover somebody else¡¯s losses if the market fell¡ª¡°naked¡± because they were unclothed by 
collateraland thus unprotected against loss.12 The broker had emphasized that the naked puts would provide Doris with a steady streamof income, which she needed. It is hard to imagine that the broker gave her any kind of realistic description of the risk she was taking, especially usinga scary termlike ¡°naked put.¡± Doris was unsophisticated about investingbut highly intelligent, with a hard-nosed common sense. She had not talked to Warren about the investment, however. He was famous for recommendingonly extremely safe, low-return investments, like Treasury or municipalbonds, especially when counselingdivorced women. These were investments that he would never make himself. Doris had trusted him enough to become one of his first partners; she trusted himimplicitly when it came to investingfor Berkshire. But that long-ago childhood episode when Cities Service Preferred went down after he bought it for himself and Doris might have loomed large in both their minds, had she asked him for advice. She didn¡¯t ask. 
Now, actingon her own, Doris had incurred losses so large that they wiped out her Berkshire stock and threatened her with bankruptcy. Compoundingher desperation, she had recommended the broker to some of her friends and felt responsible for the money they had lost as well. 
Doris romanticized her brother, viewed himas a protective figure, and kept a little shrine to him, featuring miniature golf clubs, Pepsibottles, and other symbolic accoutrements of his life. But when she had a problem, instead of goingto Warren, she called Susie as a go-between, as everyone in the family did. By this time Doris had been married and divorced three times. She felt she had rushed into her first marriage out of insecurity; her second had failed in part because she had felt coerced into it and thus hadn¡¯t fought hard enough to save it. Her third marriage, to a college professor in Denver, had been a terrible misjudgment. By now, Doris had experienced a great deal of mistreatment in her life, but rather than lettingit cow her, she fought back. This time, however, she didn¡¯t know what to do. 
¡°You don¡¯t ever need to worry,¡± Susie had told her about her brother after her third divorce. ¡°He¡¯ll always take care of you.¡± 
After she confessed to Susie what she had done and asked for help, Warren called her early on a Saturday morning. He said that if he gave her the money to pay her creditors, it would only help the businesses to whom she owed money¡ªthe counterparties whomshe had insured. His logic was that they were speculators; therefore he would not bailthemout. As she realized that this meant he was not goingto help her, she broke out in a cold sweat and her legs started shaking. She was sure this meant that her brother despised her. He felt, however, that his decision was simply rational. 
¡°I could have given a couple million dollars to her creditors if I¡¯d wanted. But, you know, the hell with them. I mean, this broker woman who sold this stuff to Doris¡ªshe¡¯d busted everybody in that particular branch.¡± 
Doris hoped that Susie would save her. Susie had so much money of her own, and Warren gave her so much money, most of which she gave away. However, just as Susie had not given money to Billy Rogers for a down payment on a house, she did nothingnow to help Doris financially. 
The story hit the Washington Post that the sister of ¡°a highly successful investor¡± had done something extremely dumb. DamagingWarren¡¯s reputation was a serious transgression in the Buffett family, and Doris¡¯s timingwas terrible. The Buffetts were still tryingto recover from Billy Rogers¡¯s fatal overdose just seven months before, another event that had publicly bared the problems beneath the family¡¯s wholesome surface. Warren may have known¡ªon some level¡ªthat he was rationalizing. Certainly he feared Doris¡¯s ire; when she felt threatened¡ªlike Kay Graham¡ªDoris defended herself as if cornered. Warren, of all people, genuinely understood his sister¡ªbut he could not tolerate shrillbehavior fromanyone, not even her. So he retreated. He stopped calling, and nobody else in the family contacted Doris. She felt as though the family had cut her off. Frightened at beingabandoned and deeply wounded, Doris browbeat her mother for money 
and loans to prevent her from losingher home.13 Ironically, the Federal Reserve had lowered interest rates, companies were buyingtheir own stocks, and the market was recoveringquickly fromthe debacle, leaving only victims like Doris behind in its wake. In a sort of panic, she married Al Bryant, the lawyer who was helpingher with her legal difficulties. 
But behind the scenes, Warren was arrangingto advance his sister $10,000 a month fromthe trust left by Howard¡¯s will. ¡°That was more money than I have ever spent in my whole life,¡± she says. The tension deescalated; they were able to speak. She was almost prostrate with gratitude¡ªuntil she realized that this was her own money, which she was simply beingpaid early. At the time, her share of the trust, havinggrown from a little over 2,000 shares of Berkshire that were worth $30,000 in 1964, was valued at about $10 million. The trust was not structured to pay out until Leila died, when Doris and Bertie would receive the money in four installments. As a further olive branch, however, her brother set up the Sherwood Foundation, which paid out $500,000 a year in charitable gifts. Doris, Warren¡¯s children, and Astrid could each allocate $100,000 to any causes they chose. The annual income produced was as if her brother had put around $7 million into a trust for the five of them. Doris¡¯s share, therefore, was almost as much as if Warren had given her the money after all, but in a different form. 
Of course, it was not in a formshe could use to pay her debts or save her house¡ªWarren never gave money outright, only in an earmarked manner that he controlled. Still, as the storm subsided, Doris regained perspective. She was gratefulthat he had gotten over his embarrassment and had helped her, in his own way. She was acutely aware that without himshe would have had nothingin the first place. As she scraped together the money to pay her debts, their relationship gradually returned to normal, and the shrine stayed in place on her wall. 
The other victim of the crash that Buffett had to dealwith was Salomon. Only three months after Berkshire¡¯s 
investment, he and Munger attended their first board meeting. The topic of the day was the slump in trading and merger business at Salomon and the $75 million that Black Monday had cost the firm.14 Salomon faced the cleanup fromBlack Monday weakened by the fact that, only days before the crash, Gutfreund, his moon-shaped face impassive, had head-chopped even highly valued longtime employees, laid off eight hundred people, and discontinued marginally profitable businesses such as commercial paper trading(a backwater of the bond business) so abruptly that the disruption hurt relationships with some important clients 
almost beyond repair.15 These and the losses fromBlack Monday were goingto gouge a deep hole in the shareholders¡¯ pockets that year. And with that, Salomon¡¯s stock fellinto the tank. 
The shareholders were suffering, yet the compensation committee¡ªwhich Buffett had joined at the request of its chairman, Bob Zeller¡ªbegan to discuss loweringthe price at which the employees¡¯ stock options could be exercised. 
These options were rights to buy stock at a specified price in the future. If Salomon had been See¡¯s Candies, it would be as if Buffett paid the line workers partly in pieces of paper that gave them the right to buy candy at a set price. If the price of candy kept goingup every year, those pieces of paper kept increasingin value as time went along. 
However, right now the candy factory was havinga bad year. See¡¯s was goingto lose money and its employees would suffer a cut in wages. The compensation committee was talkingabout loweringthe price the workers would have to pay for candy to make up the difference. Buffett argued against this. The candy 
factory belonged to the owners¡ªthe shareholders¡ªnot the employees.16 He wanted the employees¡¯ share of candy trimmed by exactly the amount that earnings had declined.17 The other members of the committee, however, felt the workers had been promised candy worth a certain amount when Gutfreund announced their packages a couple of months before, and when the candy went on sale, they were obligated to make up the difference. Perhaps they were tryingto forestall the traditional WallStreet bonus-day stampede that occurs whenever people are unhappy:Take the money and run. 
Buffett felt this was morally wrong. Since the shareholders weren¡¯t gettingtheir earnings, why should the employees get their candy?The others outvoted himtwo to one. He was outraged.18 But his role on the Salomon board was mostly titular. His advice was rarely sought and less often taken. Even though Salomon stock by then was startingto recover, the repricingof the stock options, he says, ¡°almost immediately¡± made his investment in Salomon ¡°way less attractive financially than it had been. 
¡°I could have fought harder and been more vocal. I might have felt better about myself if I did. But it wouldn¡¯t have changed the course of history. Unless you sort of enjoy combat, it doesn¡¯t make sense.¡± 
Buffett¡¯s willingness to do combat¡ªeven in a roundabout way¡ªhad diminished markedly since the days of Sanborn Map, Dempster, and the Buffettingof Seabury Stanton. 
¡°I don¡¯t enjoy battles. I won¡¯t run from them if I need to do it, but I don¡¯t enjoy them at all. When it came to the board, Charlie and I didn¡¯t even vote against it. We voted yes. We didn¡¯t even abstain, because abstaining is the same thing as throwing down the gauntlet. And there were other things at Salomon. One thing after another would come up that I thought was nutty, but they didn¡¯t want me to say anything. And then the question is, do you say anything? I don¡¯t get in fights just to get in fights.¡± 
Buffett had been originally attracted to Gutfreund, the reserved, thoughtful man in love with his work, who 
arrived every day at seven a.m., lit up the first of his huge Temple Hall Jamaican cigars, and wandered among the shirtsleeved traders to tell them, ¡°You¡¯ve got to be ready to bite the ass off a bear every morning.¡±19 Indeed, it appeared to employees who made presentations in board meetings that Buffett was a ¡°relatively 
passive¡± board member.20 He seemed to understand little of the details of how the business was run, and 
adjustingto a business that wasn¡¯t literally made of bricks-and-mortar or run like an assembly line was not easy for him. 21 Since he had made the investment in Salomon purely because of Gutfreund and now didn¡¯t like the way it was workingout, he always had another choice, which was to sellhis investment and resign 
from the board.22 Wall Street boiled with rumors that Buffett and Gutfreund had had a fallingout; that Buffett was either goingto sell or to fire Gutfreund and bringin someone else to run the firm.23 But it hadn¡¯t come to that. Someone as prominent as Buffett sellingand resigningfromthe board as a major investor would be a shockinggesture that would drive down Salomon¡¯s stock price and cost his own shareholders, as well as make himlook capricious or vindictive or unreliable. By now his reputation had become part of Berkshire¡¯s value. Moreover, he hadn¡¯t given up on Gutfreund. His whole reason for investingwas Gutfreund, and when Buffett threw his arms around someone, it took an ax to split them apart. Thus, as the holidays approached, he and Gutfreund struggled uneasily to work out their differences. 
Meanwhile, the high cost of 1987 was not quite over. A belated note fromKatharine Grahamto members of the Buffett Group arrived two weeks before the end of the year. Some of themwent into shock. She had sent them a bill. As it turned out, they had not been her guests. Instead, they themselves had been payingfor the extravaganza in Williamsburgthat Kay had put on! The total was ¡°somewhat breathtaking,¡± she acknowledged, adding, ¡°I¡¯mreally sorry it¡¯s so late and so much. I hope Xmas is stillmerry and I¡¯mstill your 
friend.¡±24 
Buffett did have a merry Christmas, but for another reason:His present to himself was Coca-Cola. It would make up for a great dealof the unhappiness from Salomon. At a White House dinner some time earlier, he had reconnected with his old friend Don Keough, who was now president and chief operatingofficer of the company; Keough had convinced himto switch fromhis own concoction of Pepsi dosed with cherry syrup to the newly introduced Cherry Coke. Buffett tried it and liked it. His family and friends were gobsmacked when the man so famously loyal, especially to Pepsi, performed this turnaround. For years, however, KO stock had been too expensive for Buffett to consider. Now, however, the company had gotten into trouble, its bottlers locked in a fierce price war with Pepsithat had taken the price of Coke down to around $38 a share. Rumor said that it had become a takeover target of the dreaded Perelman, and the company was buyingback its own stock. Although still expensive, it had the same quality of a great brand under duress as American Express had had earlier. 
The way Warren looked at it, Coca-Cola was no cigar butt, yet it was pouringforth a waterfall of cash, and spendingonly a small portion of that to operate. Its cash flow each year had value; that was somethinghe could quantify in his head. Since he had studied the company for years, he knew how much money it had made in the past and he could make a sensible judgment of how much Coca-Cola¡¯s businesses were goingto 
grow for many years in the future.25 Addingup those estimates of cash flow year after year gave himan ultimate value. 
Predictingthe company¡¯s prospects many years fromnow wasn¡¯t a precise science, however. Buffett applied a margin of safety to his estimates. He did this simply by takinga whack at the number, rather than using some complicated modelor formula. He used no computers or spreadsheets in doingany of these calculations; if the answer didn¡¯t hit him over the head like a caveman¡¯s club, in his view, the investment wasn¡¯t worth making. 
After the estimate came the decision. He had to compare what Coca-Cola would ultimately be worth as a business¡ªthe bird in the bush¡ªto the bird in the hand, which was Berkshire¡¯s cash. Simply by investingthe 
cash in government bonds that had no risk of losingmoney, Berkshire could earn a certain amount over that same period. He compared the two. By that yardstick, Coca-Cola was a beauty, and in fact, there wasn¡¯t any other stock he knew of that stacked up better. Buffett started buyingit. 
When Coca-Cola products turned up at Buffett¡¯s shareholder meetingin 1988, Berkshire shareholders began swiggingCoke in imitation of him. They had no idea that, through Berkshire, they also owned the stock. The meetingtook on a whole new tenor that year when a thousand people showed up at the Joslyn Art Museum auditorium. This was the year that the Frozen Corporation, no longer a quasi-partnership, officially joined big-time corporate America and listed itself on the New York Stock Exchange. The Berkshire meetinghad to be delayed because so many people showed up that shareholders were havingtrouble findingparkingspots. Buffett had an inspiration. He rented two schoolbuses and persuaded a few hundred shareholders to follow him after the meeting, like the Pied Piper of commerce, to the Nebraska Furniture Mart. Part of the appeal was the chance to meet the indomitable Mrs. B, about whom Buffett had been writingand talkingfor five years. The shareholders were so charmed by the tiny tank of a woman perched on her electric cart in the 
carpet department¡ªand by her prices¡ªthat they spent $57,000.26 
By year¡¯s end, the shareholders stilldid not know that Berkshire had purchased more than fourteen million shares of KO at a cost of almost $600 million.27 Because his every action now moved markets, Buffett had gotten specialdispensation fromthe SEC not to disclose his trades for a year. He was buyingso much KO 
stock and the company itself was repurchasingso much that, rather than compete against each other and bid up the price, ¡°they would buy half and Buffett would buy half¡± of the daily tradingvolume, accordingto Walter Schloss.28 Berkshire soon owned more than six percent of the company, worth $1.2 billion.29 In 
March 1989, when his position was revealed, the resultinghullaballoo caused so much demand that the New York Stock Exchange had to stop tradingthe stock to keep the price fromskyrocketingout of control. 
Coca-Cola¡¯s CEO, Roberto Goizueta, had glowed with delight at the famous investor¡¯s endorsement. He asked Buffett to join his board, possibly the most prestigious in North America. Buffett had accepted with alacrity, steeped himself in all things Coca-Cola, and met a number of new people who were fellow board members, includingHerbert Allen, the blunt-spoken, straight-shootingchairman of Allen & Co. The two became allies. Allen invited the Buffetts to his Sun Valley conference, which was emergingas the quintessentialelephant-bump for corporate CEOs. At Sun Valley, investors, Hollywood, and media moguls met to mingle and play every July. 
Buffett knew this meant addinga new annual event to his calendar, but Sun Valley was important and he wanted to attend. Moreover, he now had the means to arrive in style. In keepingwith his risingstature as a member of the CEO Club, he had just swapped the used Falcon for a fancy new Challenger jet that cost nearly $7 million. He revealed the airplane¡ªwhich he had dubbed the Indefensible¡ª in his shareholder letter, makingsport of himself with St. Augustine¡¯s prayer: ¡°Help me, oh Lord, to become chaste¡ªbut not yet.¡± He would soon write his shareholders that he wanted to be buried in the jet. 
On his way to the airport to fly to Sun Valley, Buffett visited his sister-in-law Dottie in the hospital. Frail, twig-thin, a longtime alcoholic, Susie¡¯s sister had contracted a severe case of Guillain-Barr¨¦ syndrome, an autoimmune disorder of unknown origin and sudden onset that can cause almost totalparalysis of the nervous system, includingthe respiratory systemand other organs. Dottie was in a coma. She was so debilitated that her doctors recommended discontinuingtreatment and lettingnature take its course. 
Susie, distraught, refused to allow this. She remained in Omaha throughout the summer and fall to nurse Dottie, who underwent a slow and arduous process of extensive care and physical therapy. Since Susie was in Omaha for an extended stay, she had taken an apartment in Dottie¡¯s building, across the hall fromher sister. While there, she helped Howie campaign for Douglas County commissioner, an office that governed Omaha and its environs. He was runningas a pro-choice Republican, in a race where beingRepublican helped and beingpro-choice didn¡¯t hurt. Buffett had chosen not to back his son financially, once again confoundingthe perception that a rich man¡¯s son had plenty of cash, so Howie had to raise his own funds. But Susie stuffed envelopes and attended fund-raisers, coveringherself with campaign buttons and showingher break-front smile everywhere, in order to put the family imprimatur behind her son. Her presence made everything easier.30 When Howie won the race, Buffett was exceptionally pleased. Farminghad never resonated with him; politics made his heart race. He felt that Howie was startingto mature and detected the stirrings of ambition in his son. The Buffetts began to talk of Howie¡¯s runningfor Howard¡¯s old seat in the second Congressionaldistrict. 
While Peter remained in San Francisco, two of Buffett¡¯s three children were now nearby¡ªthe two who had always wanted his attention the most. Susie Jr. had recently moved back to Omaha followingthe birth of her second child, Michael, after mentioningto her father¡ªwithout tellingher husband¡ªthat Allen wanted to run the Buffett Foundation, which needed professionalmanagement after undergoinga strategic reorganization under the direction of family friend and activist Shirley Smith. Warren seized this chance by the throat. It not only brought his daughter home but also looped BigSusie closer to him. 
Havinghis daughter around pleased Warren in another way. Susie Jr. shared her mother¡¯s caretakingquality, although packaged in a more businesslike style. He would now have two women in Omaha to look after him. More women to look after himwas somethingthat he had always rationalized. ¡°Women don¡¯t mind taking care of themselves,¡± he said. ¡°Men mind taking care of themselves. I think women understand men better than men understand women. I¡¯ll eat asparagus before I give up women.¡± His desire to be taken care of by women was so overwhelmingthat he mostly left it up to the women to settle any differences in their hell-bent desire to do what, in each of their opinions, was in his best interest. Susie Jr. and Astrid began to work out their respective roles. 
The network of connections he had forged now brought Buffett a business that would certainly put him in favor with all his women¡ªBorsheim¡¯s, an Omaha jewelry store. Louis Friedman, the brother-in-law of Mrs. B, had founded this company, which carried high-and mid-range merchandise at discount prices. Buffett had learned how strongly women preferred jewelry to clothes, no matter how well clothing ¡°held its value.¡± The person most likely to be pleased by this purchase was BigSusie, who had been assemblingan impressive collection of jewelry given by her contrite husband. Susie Jr. also appreciated jewelry, as did Warren¡¯s sisters and Kay Graham. The only one not that interested in jewelry was Astrid, who was uncomfortable with expensive things, though if he gave her jewelry, she certainly wouldn¡¯t turn it down. 
So Warren¡¯s Christmas shoppingfor the women in his life was simplified in 1989. He worked out a system: earrings, pearls, watches, everybody would get a variation on some theme each year. But he himself got nothingto equalthe hefty chunk of Coca-Cola that he¡¯d bought so happily the year before. Worse still, he got a lump of coalin his stockingin the form of a new book, Liar¡¯s Poker, written by former Salomon bond salesman MichaelLewis. Named after a bluffinggame that traders played usingthe serialnumbers on dollar bills, the book captured Salomon¡¯s swaggering, innovative, energetic culture and how it had begun to break down in 1986 and 1987. Liar¡¯s Poker turned into a whoppingbestseller; it depicted the firm¡¯s eccentricities so memorably that Salomon would never again live down its reputation as a sort of zoo for the most 
aggressive and uncouth people on Wall Street.31 The end of the 1980s takeover boom was another problem for Buffett, for while he was still arbitragingannounced deals, his usual feedingterritory was empty. With no great businesses to buy, Buffett once again lowered his standards as he had when buyingHochschild-Kohn. 
The lure this time was other CEOs, who, fearingfor their jobs or their autonomy, began to offer himmore special deals to invest. For Berkshire, he bought three apparently lucrative ¡°convertible preferred¡± stocks, all structured alongthe lines of the Salomon deal, payinghim on average nine percent, which gave hima floor on his return while also givinghimthe right to convert in case the companies did well. Each of these companies was quite different. Champion, a poorly managed paper business, was thought to be ¡°in play¡± 
amongtakeover artists.32 Gillette, a business with a huge ¡°moat¡± around its brand¡ªlike See¡¯s Candies, invulnerable to competition¡ªwas beingtemporarily shunned by investors. And Pittsburgh-based USAir, formerly called Allegheny Airlines, a weak regional player in a newly deregulated industry, was also ¡°in play.¡± 
Like the Salomon preferred stock, the terms of these special deals meant that critics suddenly viewed Buffett as protectingthe interests of entrenched CEOs. It was of course in the interest of his own shareholders to maximize their returns while protectingthem fromrisk, but Buffett now looked like one of those boardroom insiders who depended on specialdeals to get ahead. 
In the age of the buyout funds and corporate raiders, this level of greed was chump change. Buffett could have easily been a buyout kinghimself. But what his determination to stay friendly and on the side of management did make clear was that he was now one of the guys at the country club. Ben Graham had always felt that if someone traded in stocks, this necessarily made himan outsider¡ªbecause he had to be willingto displease a company¡¯s management. Buffett, who wanted to be liked by everyone, had been trying to bridge that gap since his earliest investingdays when he became friends with Lorimer Davidson at GEICO. Now, ¡°Many WallStreet investors say Mr. Buffett¡¯s special deals amount to a kind of gentlemanly protection 
game,¡± said one news story.33 
In the end, what looked like sweetheart deals turned out to be no more than finely handicapped bets. Only Gillette turned into a winner, ultimately earningBerkshire $5.5 billion. USAir was the worst. Buffett had made a number of remarks over the years about the stupidity of investingin things with wings. Then the company suspended its dividend and, like Cleveland¡¯s Worst Mill, the stock plunged. ¡°That was the dumbest fuckingthing, goinginto that deal!¡± one friend exploded. ¡°What the hellare you guys doing? You violated 
every one of your principles!¡±34 Buffett would later agree, saying, ¡°As soon as the check cleared, the company went into the red and never came out. I have an 800 number I call and say, ¡®My name is Warren Buffett and I¡¯m an Air-aholic.¡±35 Charlie Munger¡¯s dry comment was, ¡°Warren didn¡¯t call me on that one.¡± 
Salomon, the model for these deals, was also not doingwell. After the crash and the near-escape from Perelman, the merger business had been slow to get back on its feet, and talented bankers left for elsewhere. Gutfreund had restructured the firmonce again in another round of layoffs. But the managingdirectors no longer feared him. ¡°People kept threateningJohn and he would try to buy them,¡± said one vice chairman. At first the firmhad three, then seven vice chairmen. ¡°Honk if you¡¯re a vice chairman¡± became a joke around The Room. 
Already fragmented into disparate power bases, Salomon now evolved into a systemof warlords: a corporate-bond warlord, a government-bond warlord, a mortgage-bond warlord, an equities warlord.36 
One ruled above themall: the warlord of bond arbitrage, a soft-spoken, brilliant mathematician, the forty-year-old John Meriwether. The shy, self-effacing ¡°J.M.,¡± a former PhD candidate, expressed his outsize ambitions through a team of professors he had lured with Wall Street salaries fromschools like Harvard and MIT. These ¡°arb boys¡± hunched protectively over their computers, fiddlingwith mathematical models portrayingthe bond universe, an oasis of intellect amid the belching, sweatingtraders, who more often swung from their gut. Like handicappers assemblingthe financial version of the Daily Racing Form, the arbs were launchinga revolution in the bond business, and the edge their computer tip sheet gave themagainst the rest of the suckers produced most of Salomon¡¯s profits. They lived inside Meriwether¡¯s little bubble on the trading floor and felt they had earned their arrogance. J.M. was enormously forgivingof mistakes but relentless toward anyone he considered stupid, and the arbs were his personally chosen elite. He had a deeply complex personal relationship with his team, and spent nearly all his time with them, engagingin one of his three obsessions: work, gambling, and golf. Many an eveningafter the markets closed the arbs sat together, playing 
liar¡¯s poker to hone their handicappingskills.37 The boyish-looking, blank-faced Meriwether usually won. 
Despite his passivity and limited influence as a board member, Buffett certainly understood arbitrage. But the board¡¯s knowledge of Salomon¡¯s business details went only so far, and Buffett did not understand computers, which were becomingimportant to every business and intrinsic to the new Wall Street. He did know, however, that he was now a director of a corporation that was utterly dependent on computers, and he had certainly figured out that computers increased risk. He once visited Mark Byrne, the son of Jack Byrne, who traded foreign exchange options for Salomon. 
¡°Mark was bright and young, and he had a computer in his home so he could trade all the time. He had it rigged so that if the Japanese yen moved more than a certain amount, it rang a bell or something and woke him up in the middle of the night. 
¡°I said to Mark, ¡®Now let me get this straight. You¡¯ve got this computer here, and at three in the morning, after you¡¯ve been doing who knows what¡ªwe won¡¯t even ask¡ªuntil one or two in the morning, you¡¯re asleep, and this bell rings. And you get up and stagger over to the computer, and you see that the yen-dollar relationship is such-and-such. 
¡°¡®Tell me, is there any limit to what you can punch in to the computer in terms of the size of the trade that you¡¯d do? Does the computer rebel if you make a mistake?¡¯ 
¡°And he said, ¡®No, I can type whatever I want.¡¯ 
¡°¡®So,¡¯ I said. ¡®Well. If you¡¯ve had a little too much to drink, and you punch three extra zeroes in there by mistake, is the firm committed? Does it have to follow through with the trade?¡¯ 
¡°And he said, ¡®Yeah.¡¯ 
¡°So I had these nightmares of this guy, at three in the morning, maybe with a girl still in the bed or something, going over there in a daze and sort of punching something into the computer in the middle of the night and then staggering back to bed. And finding out the next morning that instead of a trillion yen, he¡¯d put in a quadrillion yen.¡± 
To Buffett, it was obvious that the combination of fallible human beings and judgment-free computers in a completely unmonitored, unsupervised environment, meant an almost unlimited potentialfor things to go wildly out of control. But as a board member, he lacked authority to make changes and could only try persuasion. By now he and Munger had wrangled repeatedly¡ªand unsuccessfully¡ªwith Salomon¡¯s management. Munger had taken over the audit committee¡ªwhich had not formerly been a bastion of zealous oversight¡ªand put it through six-and seven-hour dissections of the firmand its accountants. Munger discovered that Salomon¡¯s derivatives business had grown immensely, usingtrades for which no ready market existed. The trades would not settle for longperiods, sometimes years. With minimal cash changing 
hands, the derivatives were valued on Salomon¡¯s books usinga model.38 Since the modelwas created by 
those whose bonuses it would determine, not surprisingly the models usually showed the trades were quite profitable. As much as $20 million of profits had been overstated through such accountingmismarks.39 The audit committee, however, addressed only trades and deals already approved, and usually completed. The real oversight took place before the fact. 
There, in the one area in which Buffett and Munger unequivocally had more skillthan anyone else¡ªmaking investments¡ªthey weighed in loudest of all¡ªand were ignored. Their protestations only alienated themfrom the employees. In one example, Salomon¡¯s Phibro unit had formed a joint venture with a seven-year-old Houston company, Anglo-Suisse, to build oilfields in West Siberia, south of the Arctic Circle, that would supposedly revolutionize oil production in Russia. The White Nights venture brought peace offerings to Russia, amongthema recreation center, food, and clothing, all flown over from the United States. 
¡°Anglo-Suisse,¡± Munger said when the idea was floated. ¡°This is an idiotic idea. There are no Anglos and no Swiss involved in this company. The name alone is reason not to get involved.¡± 
But Salomon put $116 million into the joint venture anyway, thinkingthat oilwas goingto be integral to Russia¡¯s future and that Western capitalwas needed to extract the oil. But, while ¡°the country isn¡¯t goingto go away,¡± as Buffett said, and ¡°the oil isn¡¯t goingto go away,¡± the Russian political systemcould go away. 
No margin of safety could cover that.40 
Sure enough, as soon as the White Nights joint venture got going, the Russian government began toyingwith a tax on oil exports. The tax nearly wiped out White Nights¡¯s profit. Then the volume of oilproduction proved disappointing. Russian nabobs flew to the United States and expected to be entertained with prostitutes. The Russian government was unpredictable and uncooperative, resultingin setbacks fromstart to finish. Somebody was goingto make a lot of money from oil in Russia, but it wasn¡¯t goingto be Salomon Inc. 
Russia, however, was merely a sideshow at the time. In 1989, the United States had become obsessed with the possibility that the whole country would be eclipsed by the risingsun of Japan. Salomon had invested large sums in Japan and was doingwell in its start-up business there, which had grown rapidly to hundreds of employees and was makingmoney under its head, Deryck Maughan, who had wisely given localtalent the reins. Buffett, who generally did not buy foreign stocks and who believed Japanese stocks in particular to be outrageously expensive, had shown little interest in anythingrelated to Japan. Katharine Graham, however, had developed a fascination with Akio Morita, one of the world¡¯s most brilliant businessmen. Morita was chairman of Sony, one of the world¡¯s most successful corporations. Grahambrought the two men together at one of her dinners, but they did not click. 
Finally, duringone of Buffett¡¯s trips to New York, Morita-san held a smalldinner for Graham, Buffett, and MegGreenfield at his Fifth Avenue apartment overlookingthe Metropolitan Museum. Buffett, who seemed slightly mystified by Graham¡¯s interest in this powerful, visionary man¡ªobservinggrudgingly that Graham ¡°was sort of enchanted by Morita¡±¡ªagreed to go. 
Buffett had never eaten Japanese food but knew it might be problematic. He went to plenty of events where he touched nothingmore than the dinner rolls. He could easily go seven or eight hours at a time without eating. He disliked offendinghis hosts, however, and as his reputation had grown, he found that there was no way to fake eatingby cuttingthings up and movingthem around. People noticed. 
One side of the Moritas¡¯ apartment had a sweepingview of Central Park, the other a sweepingview of the sushikitchen. A highlight for guests was the opportunity to watch the four chefs preparingthe elaborate meal behind a glass window. 
As they were seated for dinner, Buffett looked at the chefs. What was this goingto be like? he wondered. As guest of honor, he was seated facingthe kitchen. There were chopsticks on a little stand and tiny cruets and miniature bowls of soy sauce. He already knew he didn¡¯t like soy sauce. The first course was brought out. Everyone slurped it down. Buffett mumbled an excuse. He motioned for his full plate to be taken away. The next course arrived. Buffett could not identify it but looked at it with dread. He saw that MegGreenfield, who had eatinghabits similar to his, also was havingdifficulties. Mrs. Morita, seated next to him, smiled politely and barely spoke. Buffett gurgled another excuse. He nodded again for the waiter to remove his plate. As his untouched dishes returned to the kitchen, he was sure the chefs noticed. 
The waiter brought out another unidentifiable course of somethingthat looked rubbery and raw to him. Kay and the Moritas tucked in with enthusiasm. Mrs. Morita smiled politely once again when he offered a third excuse. Buffett squirmed. He liked his steaks bloody but did not eat raw fish. The waiter cleared the plates. The chefs kept their heads down. Buffett was sweating. He was runningout of excuses. The chefs looked busy, but he was sure they must be peekingsideways from behind the glass to see what he would do. Course after course arrived, and each of his plates went back, untouched. He imagined that he heard a slight buzz from the kitchen. How many more courses could there possibly be? He had not realized there were this many things on the planet that could be eaten raw. Mrs. Morita seemed slightly embarrassed for him, but he wasn¡¯t sure, because she smiled politely allthe time and said so little. Time crawled more slowly with each course. He had been counting, and the number of courses now exceeded ten. He tried to make up for his culinary lapses with witty, self-deprecatingconversation about business with Morita-san, but he knew he was disgracinghimself. Even in the middle of his bonfire of embarrassment, he could not help but think longingly of hamburgers. He was sure that the beehive in the kitchen was humminglouder with every plate he sent back. By the end of fifteen courses, he had still not eaten a bite. The Moritas could not have been more polite, which added to his humiliation. He was desperate to escape back to Kay¡¯s apartment, where popcorn and peanuts and strawberry ice creamawaited him. 
¡°It was the worst,¡± he says about the meal he did not eat. ¡°I¡¯ve had others like that, but it was by far the worst. I will never eat Japanese food again.¡± 
Meanwhile, hundreds of Salomon employees who would have crawled up Fifth Avenue on their knees blindfolded to eat this same dinner with the Moritas were instead diningat high-priced Japanese restaurants and mutinyingover the size of their huge bonus checks. The hugeness of their checks was not the point. It was the hugeness of their checks compared with others¡¯ huge checks that mattered. Buffett and Munger knew little of the trouble fomentingat Salomon. Meriwether¡¯s arbs had been agitatingfor more money. The former college professors, hired away fromsalaries of $29,000, felt they were subsidizingmoney-losing 
departments like equity investment banking. They viewed sharingtheir profits as ¡°socialist.¡±41 The arbs 
could have made more on their own. They wanted a cut of the hundreds of millions they earned for the firm.42 Although he was so shy that he had trouble maintainingeye contact, Meriwether now became the world¡¯s most aggressive and successful bonus pimp. Gutfreund caved and gave the arbs fifteen percent of 
what they made,43 which meant they had the potentialto come away with much more money than the traders, who shared their bonus pool. The dealwas made in secret between Gutfreund and Salomon¡¯s president, TomStrauss; the board never knew, nor did other employees at Salomon¡ªyet. 
By 1991, Buffett and Munger had been through a series of disappointments and setbacks at Salomon. The financial results they got were not always up-to-date. Staff demands for bonuses continued to spiral. They disagreed with much of what went on in the boardroom. The stock price had not moved for eight years. Earnings were down $167 million, mostly because of employees¡¯ pay. 
Buffett, havingso far let Munger be the Appointed Bad Guy, now roused himself, met with the executive committee, and told themto cut back. Yet when the finalbonus pool number came through, it was $7 million higher than before. Under the new formula that Meriwether, as bonus-pimp, had procured for his arb boys, 
one of them, Larry Hilibrand, got a raise from$3 to $23 million.44 When word of Hilibrand¡¯s bonus leaked to the press, some of his colleagues went crazy with envy and felt cheated¡ªthe millions they were making forgotten. 
Buffett himself had no problemwith the arbs¡¯ bonuses. ¡°I believe in paying talent,¡± he says, ¡°but not, as 
Charlie would say, as a royalty on time.¡± The arrangement was like a hedge fund¡¯s fee structure and bore some resemblance to his old partnership.45 It would put more pressure on the rest of the firmto perform. What he objected to was not beingtold. He objected even more to the fact that other people did not get haircuts for their lack of performance. Gutfreund had showed a better sense of proportion than most of his 
traders, optingto take a thirty-five percent pay cut, in line with the decline in earnings.46 This helped him with Buffett, who thought Gutfreund had more class than his employees. But Buffett¡¯s sense of decency was so offended by the employees¡¯ greed that he overcame his naturalinertia and voted against the bonuses for the traders. He was overruled. When word of Buffett¡¯s ¡°no¡± vote raced through the hallways of Salomon, people were outraged. A billionaire who loved money had called themgreedy. 
Buffett considered Salomon a casino with a restaurant out front.47 The restaurant was a loss-leader. The traders¡ªespecially Meriwether¡¯s people¡ªwere the casino:the purity of risk-takingdone without conflicts of interest. That was the part of the business Buffett liked, and the new pay systemwas designed to keep the 
arbs from bolting.48 But by tryingto operate the firmunder two distinct pay systems, as if it really were a casino with a restaurant out front, Gutfreund had driven a rift through Salomon¡¯s heart. 
Now Meriwether and Hilibrand asked Gutfreund for permission to approach Buffett to buy back his convertible preferred stock. The terms were so rich that it was costingSalomon too much. They were no longer under threat of a takeover. Why pay for Buffett¡¯s protection? Gutfreund said they could talk to Buffett and try to convince himhe was better off without the preferred stock. When approached, Buffett said that he was amenable. But havingBuffett as an investor must have made Gutfreund feel more secure, for in 
the end he got cold feet.49 
Thus, Buffett was held to his original deal. Havinginvested both Berkshire¡¯s $700 million and his own reputation in John Gutfreund, by 1991 it was too late to back out. 
48 
Thumb-Sucking,andItsHollow-CheekedResult 
New York City . 1991 
On Thursday afternoon, August 8, 1991, Buffett was drivingto Reno, Nevada, fromLake Tahoe on his annual weekend with Astrid and the Blumkin boys. He always looked forward to this trip and was in a relaxed and jovialmood. John Gutfreund¡¯s office had called himthat morning. Where will you be tonight between nine p.m. E.S.T. and midnight?they asked. We want to talk to you. 
Thinkingthis was really unusual, he said he was goingto a show. They told him to call Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz, the law firm that represented Salomon, at seven-thirty p.m. Hmm, he thought. Maybe they¡¯re goingto sellthe firm. It sounded like good news to him. The stock was tradingaround $37, close to $38, the price at which his preferred stock would convert to common, and he could take his profits and be done with Salomon. Gutfreund, who had a long-standinghabit of callinghimfor advice, might need help in negotiating terms. 
Buffett and company whiled away the afternoon in Reno. Buffett reminisced. In 1980 he had been offered the entire contents of a Reno landmark, the Harrah Collection fromthe National Automobile Museum:1,400 cars coveringacres and acres, a 1932 Rolls-Royce salamanca, a 1922 Mercedes Targa Florio Racer, a 1932 Bugatticoupe, a 1955 Ferrari, a 1913 Pierce-Arrow. It would have cost himless than a million dollars for the whole collection. He had wavered, then passed. A few years later, part of the collection¡ªhundreds of cars¡ªhad been gradually auctioned for a totalof $69 million. One car, the Bugatti Royale, had recently been sold to a Houston real estate developer for $6.5 million. 
By seven-thirty p.m., they had returned to Lake Tahoe. ¡°We got to the hotel and the rest of them went into the dining room of the steak house. I told them, ¡®This may take a while.¡¯ I found a pay phone outside on the wall and dialed in to the number they gave me.¡± Buffett expected to be connected with Gutfreund, but Gutfreund was on a plane fromLondon, where he had been tryingto save the firm¡¯s mandate in an investment bankingdealfor British Telecom. His flight had been delayed, and Buffett sat on hold for quite a while as a conversation took place on the other end about whether to wait for himto arrive before continuing. Finally TomStrauss and Don Feuerstein got on the phone to tell Buffett what was goingon¡ªor a version of it, anyway. 
Tom Strauss, forty-nine years old, was there to protect Gutfreund¡¯s flank. He had been appointed Salomon¡¯s president five years earlier, duringthe Great Purge of 1987.1 Responsible for the firm¡¯s international business, he was also charged with the Sisyphean task of lickingthe perennially laggingequity division into shape. As recent history showed, however, management was not a skill cultivated at Salomon. The warlords reported straight to Gutfreund, to the extent that they reported to anyone at all. Their clout came from their groups¡¯ production of revenues. Strauss might be technically president of Salomon, but he had been promoted so high that he now floated distantly above the tradingfloor like a heliumballoon. Periodically, the warlords batted himout of the way. 
Don Feuerstein, the head of Salomon¡¯s legaldepartment, had once played an important role at the SEC and was regarded as an excellent technical lawyer.2 He was Gutfreund¡¯s consigliere, nicknamed POD, the ¡°Prince of Darkness,¡±3 for the behind-the-scenes dirty work he did. Salomon¡¯s warlords, accustomed to 
doingwhatever the hell they wanted, worked through lawyers who reported to Feuerstein, includingZachary Snow, the assistant generalcounselassigned to the tradingoperations. The warlord structure made the legal department both powerful and weak; it stewarded the firm¡¯s franchise in much the way that everything happened at Salomon:by cateringto factions and reactingto events. Salomon¡¯s tradingculture had embedded itself so strongly that even Feuerstein was a trader, lovingly operatinga wine syndicate on behalf of severalmanagingdirectors. His fax machine constantly spewed forth notices of wine auctions that were a 
profitable sideline for the syndicate¡¯s participants, its product more traded and collected than drunk.4 
This eveningno one was toastinganything, however. Feuerstein knew that Buffett and Gutfreund were friends. He felt awkward givingsensitive information to Buffett when Gutfreund should have been in on the call. Usinga set of ¡°talkingpapers,¡± he and Strauss told Buffett that ¡°a problem¡± had arisen. A Wachtell, Lipton investigation had uncovered the fact that Paul Mozer, who ran Salomon¡¯s government-bond department, had broken the Treasury Department¡¯s auction-biddingrules severaltimes in 1990 and 1991. Mozer and his deputy, who was complicit, were now suspended, and the firm was notifyingthe regulators. 
Who the hell is PaulMozer? Buffett wondered. 
Paul Mozer, thirty-six years old, had been swooped up by New York from sellingbonds in the Chicago office. He was as intense as a laser beamand started his day before the sun came up, parked in front of a tradingscreen in his bedroom takinga callfromLondon, then galloped a couple of blocks fromhis tiny apartment in Battery Park City over to Salomon¡¯s enormous new tradingroom, housed in the gleaming pink-granite space of 7 World Trade Center. There he stared at another set of screens until past sunset, and oversaw twenty traders, most of whomtowered over his short, wiry frame. Mozer was smart and hyper-aggressive, but he also struck people as frustrated and insecure, an odd duck. Although he¡¯d grown up on LongIsland, he seemed like a greenhorn fromthe Midwest amongthe slick New Yorkers. He had been one of Meriwether¡¯s arbitrage boys until CraigCoats, the head of the government desk, resigned and he was asked to take over. Now he stillworked for Meriwether, but was on the outside lookingin at his former gang. Gutfreund, who was under pressure from Buffett and the board to improve the numbers, had added the foreign-exchange department to Mozer¡¯s duties; in a few months he had turned a ¡°black hole¡± around and 
made it profitable.5 So Gutfreund had reason to be gratefulto Mozer. 
While Mozer could be abrasive and condescending, as though he considered other people morons compared to himself, those who worked closely with himwere fond of him. Unlike people on Salomon¡¯s infamous mortgage desk, he did not abuse trainees by hurlingfood at themor sendingthemracingout the door to buy twelve pizzas at a time. Sometimes he even talked to the trainees. 
For his labors, Mozer had been paid $4.75 million that year. It was a lot of money, but it was not enough. Mozer was World Cup¨Ccompetitive, and Mozer was pissed. Somethinghad snapped in himwhen he found out that his former colleague, Larry Hilibrand, had gotten 23 million bucks froma secret pay deal. He used to 
earn more than the arb boys,6 and he now went ¡°ape-shit.¡±7 He copped such an attitude that he demanded that his department not be audited¡ªas if, somehow, oversight did not apply to him.8 
Mozer was one of a few dozen men who communed regularly with the U.S. government on its financing needs, talkingto the Federal Reserve staff nearly every day and diningquarterly with Treasury Department bureaucrats at the Madison Hotel. RepresentingSalomon as a ¡°primary dealer,¡± he offered the government market chatter and advice and, in turn, stood first in line as its largest customer whenever the government wanted to selldebt, like a member of the College of Cardinals who sat at the right hand of the Pope. 
Only the primary dealers could buy bonds fromthe government. Everyone else had to do it by submitting bids through the primary dealers, who acted as brokers. This gave the dealers the clout that goes with access and enormous market share. Knowingthe needs of both their clients and the government, the dealers clipped off a profit fromthe gap that lay between the supply and the demand. But with that position of power went a commensurate dose of trust. The government expected primary dealers to behave like cardinals who were celebratingMass. Yes, they drank first fromthe communion cup, but they must not get loaded and embarrass the Church. 
As an auction neared, the primary dealers would work the phones, pollingcustomers to gauge their appetite for bonds. Mozer¡¯s sense of how hot the market was runningtranslated into Salomon¡¯s bid. A few seconds before the clock struck one p.m. on the appointed day, the dealers phoned ¡°runners,¡± who stood by a wall of phones at the Federal Reserve Buildingdowntown, waitingto scribble down orders by hand and dash to the Fed clerk¡¯s wooden box, where they jammed theminside. At the stroke of one p.m., the clerk placed his hand over the slot. That ended the auction. The government had used this antiquated systemfor decades. 
The inherent tension of the market lay in the opposinginterests of the Treasury and the dealers regarding pricingand amounts. The Treasury auctioned only a certain amount of bonds and wanted the highest price, while the dealers wanted to pay just enough in the auction to win a larger share than anyone else yet no more than necessary, for that would hurt their profit on resale. So finely calibrated were these bids that the traders used increments of 1/1,000th of a dollar. That sounds like almost nothing, but clippingoff 1/1,000th of enough dollars amounted to a fortune. On $100 million, it was worth $100,000. On a billion dollars, it was worth $1 million. Because government bonds were less profitable than mortgages and corporate bonds, Treasury bonds had to be traded in blocks this size in order for the dealers and money managers to make enough money for it to be worth their while. 
Dovetailingwith the need for such large trades was the government¡¯s need to work with large dealers¡ªthose who knew the market welland had the power to distribute a lot of bonds. Salomon was the largest dealer by far. In the early 1980s, the Treasury had allowed any individualfirmto buy up to half of a given bond issue for its own account. Salomon commonly ¡°couped¡± an auction this way, then held on to the bonds long enough to ¡°squeeze¡± anybody who was ¡°short¡± Treasuries¡ªhavingbet that prices would fall¡ªbecause there were no bonds available for short-sellers to buy to cover their positions. Prices shot up, the short-sellers screamed, the tradingfloor erupted in cheers, and Salomon gloated over its huge profits and swunga bigstick as the Kingof Wall Street. Coupingthe auctions fattened the usually thin profits on government bonds and sent a heady mist of testosterone driftingabove the formerly stodgy section where the humdrum government-bond traders sat at their desks. 
In response to grumbling, the Treasury lowered the limit and said no individualdealer could buy more than thirty-five percent, which made it harder to coup the auction. Smaller squeezes stilloccurred, but Salomon no longer owned the market unchallenged. Naturally, the new rule was unpopular at Salomon. Since the total of bids exceeded all the bonds on offer, the Treasury also prorated everyone, which meant a firm that wanted thirty-five percent had to bid more than thirty-five percent, a jugglingact. 
Thus in various ways the clampdown made it harder to profit at the government desk at Salomon. The mist of testosterone did not dissipate, however. Mozer tested the Treasury¡¯s patience twice in 1990, biddingmore than one hundred percent of allthe bonds to be issued. MichaelBasham, who ran the auctions, told himnot to do it again. Mozer was sent to an ¡°apology breakfast¡± with Bob Glauber, an undersecretary of the Treasury. He squeaked out some words but did not exactly apologize. He claimed that overbiddingwas in the 
government¡¯s best interest because it increased demand for bonds.9 Not mollified, Bashamchanged the rules so that no individualfirm could even bid more than thirty-five percent for its own account. The limit on bids meant Salomon might not even get its fullthirty-five percent limit of bonds. 
Now Feuerstein read Buffett a copy of a Salomon press release to be issued the next morning, which was beingexplained to all board members that night. It described how Mozer had responded to this stare-down with Basham. He had proceeded to submit unauthorized bids in excess of the government¡¯s biddinglimit in the December 1990 and February 1991 auctions. 
Feuerstein gave Buffett a scripted version of events and told himthat he had already spoken at length with Munger, who was at his cabin in Minnesota.10 Munger had said to him somethingabout thumb-suckingand added, ¡°People do that all the time.¡±11 Buffett recognized the term ¡°thumb-sucking¡± as a Mungerism for 
procrastination but wasn¡¯t terribly concerned. Feuerstein did not mention anythingelse discussed in the lengthy conversation with Munger, and Buffett did not ponder whose thumb was beingsucked. Seven or eight minutes later he got off the phone, recognizingthat this wasn¡¯t the good news for which he had been hopingbut not feelingalarmed enough to call Munger immediately. He¡¯d check in with Munger over the weekend, he decided, but for now he was goingto enjoy Lake Tahoe. Then he wandered back to join Astrid and the Blumkins in the diningroom, where they were havinga steak before seeingJoan Rivers and Neil Sedaka perform. 
While Buffett was watchingthe show, John Gutfreund¡¯s plane from London finally landed. Gutfreund, Strauss, and Feuerstein had a conversation late that eveningwith Richard Breeden and Bill McLucas, top 
officials at the SEC. The three of themalso placed a call to Gerald Corrigan, the beefy six-foot-four president of the New York branch of the Federal Reserve. 
Usinga different set of talkingpapers, Gutfreund and Strauss told Breeden, McLucas, and Corrigan more of the story than Salomon¡¯s board had just heard. Mozer had not just overbid. To get around the thirty-five percent limit, at the February 1991 Treasury auction he had entered a fake bid in the name of a customer and stashed the bonds he got in Salomon¡¯s account. In fact, he had placed more than one false bid in that auction. As to why these had not been reported earlier, they explained the delay as an oversight. Yet the SEC and the Treasury were in the midst of investigatingMozer, for he had pulled a huge squeeze in the May two-year-note auction. His actions were under intense scrutiny by regulators. That should have been true at Salomon as well. How could the delay have been an oversight? Now, the regulators had to consider whether this confession indicated some major systemic problem at Salomon. 
No matter what, these admissions were goingto be highly embarrassingto the Treasury and the Federal Reserve. Corrigan was shocked that the firmhad not come to himsayingthat it had already fired Mozer and created a remedialprogram that involved institutingallsorts of new controls. But he expected somethinglike that to be announced within twenty-four or forty-eight hours, after which he could ¡°keep themon probation for a while and hope that would be the end of it.¡± He told Gutfreund and Strauss, ¡°patiently and dispassionately,¡± as he recalls, that they had an immediate obligation to release this information to the public. Based on what he knew, he surmised that the incident could blow up into a ¡°very, very, very significant 
problem.¡±12 It seemed to him, however, that Strauss and Gutfreund did not fully grasp this. Indeed, with hindsight, the fact that Gutfreund had gone off to London, thus placinghis ability to participate in the calls with Buffett, Munger, and the other directors in the hands of an airline, was itself a tellingsign. 
The next day, Friday, August 9, Buffett was enjoyinghimself with Astrid and the Blumkins, walkingalong the board sidewalks of Virginia City, the old Western gold-rush town. He called in to his office. Nothing urgent was happening. Nobody at Salomon had called him. Salomon had put out the press release describing the events in fairly bland terms. The stock had fallen five percent, however, to $34.75. 
Buffett called Munger on Saturday at his cabin on Star Island in Minnesota. Munger flatly told him a much more detailed and alarmingstory. Feuerstein, recitingfrom the list of ¡°talkingpoints,¡± had said that ¡°one part of the problemhas been known since last April.¡± While these same words had been read to the other 
directors, includingBuffett, they had the effect of technically informingwithout really enlightening.13 But Munger picked up instantly on bullshit legalese and the passive voice, which irritated him. What did that mean, ¡°has been known¡±? What exactly had been known? And by whom?14 When pressed, Feuerstein gave Munger a much fuller description of events, similar to what Corrigan had been told.15 
As Feuerstein recounted, Mozer had gotten a letter from the Treasury Department in April sayingthey were 
investigatingone of his bids.16 Realizingthat the game was up, on April 25 he had gone to his boss, John Meriwether, and made a confession of sorts. In February, to get around the thirty-five percent limit, he had not only bid in Salomon¡¯s name, he had also submitted phony bids under realcustomers¡¯ names. 17 Mozer 
swore to Meriwether that this was the only time, and he would never do it again. 
Meriwether had recognized immediately that this was ¡°career-threatening,¡± had said so to Mozer, and had reported the situation to Feuerstein and Strauss. On April29, the three of themwent to Gutfreund and told him what Mozer had confessed. Gutfreund, they said later, had been red-faced and pissed off when he heard the news. 
Therefore, in April, Gutfreund knew. Strauss knew. Meriwether knew. Feuerstein, the generalcounsel, knew. They all knew. 
Feuerstein had informed Gutfreund at the time that Mozer¡¯s actions appeared criminal. He didn¡¯t believe that the firm technically had a legalreportingrequirement. Still, Feuerstein was sure that Salomon would run seriously afoul of the regulators if it didn¡¯t do something, and therefore the FederalReserve must be told. Gutfreund said it would be taken care of. Curiously, however, no specific plans were made to march down to the FederalReserve¡¯s ornate Italianate buildingand give Jerry Corrigan the news. Moreover, having concluded that the phony bid was a ¡°one-time, aberrant act,¡± they had decided to leave Mozer in charge of the government desk. Hearingthis, ¡°Well, that¡¯s just thumb-sucking,¡± Munger had said. ¡°People do that all the time.¡± He later explained that by thumb-suckinghe meant ¡°sittingthere thinkingand doggling, musing, 
and consulting, when you should be acting.¡±18 
Munger told Buffett that he had challenged the press release:Shouldn¡¯t management¡¯s prior knowledge be disclosed? Feuerstein said that, yes, it should be, but the decision had been made not to because Salomon¡¯s management thought that disclosure would threaten the company¡¯s funding. Salomon had tens of billions of short-term commercialpaper debt that rolled over day by day. If the word got out, lenders would refuse to 
renew. To Munger, ¡°fundingdifficulties¡± was shorthand for ¡°financialpanic.¡±19 Lackingthe leverage to insist, he had given in, but he and Buffett now agreed that more disclosure was required. They mentally braced themselves for what would follow. 
Two days later, on Monday morning, August 12, the Wall Street Journal reported the alleged details, with a blaringheadline: ¡°The BigSqueeze:Salomon¡¯s Admission of T-Note Infractions Gives Market a Jolt¡ªFirm¡¯s Share of One Auction May Have Reached 85%; Investigations Under Way¡ªHow Much Did Bosses Know?¡± It mentioned the possibility of ¡°civil charges of market manipulation, violations of the antifraud provisions of securities law, misrepresentations to federalauthorities,¡± ¡°books and records violations,¡± and ¡°criminal 
charges¡± for committing ¡°both wire and mail fraud.¡±20 
Gutfreund called Buffett, soundingcalm. Buffett thought that he seemed to believe the whole situation meant 
¡°a few points on the stock.¡± In light of the disastrous article, Buffett thought this attitude was unrealistic, a sign that Gutfreund believed the whole affair could somehow be finessed.21 It seemed of a piece with Gutfreund¡¯s unwarranted composure the previous week. Buffett pressed for more disclosure. Salomon¡¯s treasury division was beginningto have trouble rollingover its commercialpaper, meaningthe firm¡¯s lenders 
were startingto show signs of nervousness. 22 
Meanwhile, Munger was tryingto get in touch with Wachtell, Lipton¡¯s Marty Lipton, who was John Gutfreund¡¯s indispensable best friend as well as Salomon¡¯s outside counsel. So entwined with Salomon was Lipton that the speed-dial buttons on Donald Feuerstein¡¯s phone ranghis wife, the Sotheby¡¯s and Christie¡¯s 
auction houses, and Marty Lipton, not necessarily in that order.23 Munger knew that Lipton and his telephone were as inseparable as Buffett and his Wall Street Journal. Cellphones still beingso rare, however, that even name partners of major law firms did not use them, Munger relied on Wachtell, Lipton¡¯s office, which, he would later observe to the SEC, had the ¡°finest phone systemfor reachingMarty Lipton at any hour of the day or night that I have ever seen in the history of the world¡­. I think even if he was 
engaged in sexual intercourse, you could get through to him.¡±24 
Whether Lipton was horizontalwhen reached by Munger was never specified, but Munger badgered himfor a follow-up press release, sayingthe first had been inadequate. Lipton agreed that the board would hold a telephone meetingto discuss it on Wednesday. 
Not surprisingly, Jerry Corrigan at the FederalReserve was even less satisfied than Munger with Salomon¡¯s muted response. On Monday, August 12, he decided to have Peter Sternlight, one of his executive vice presidents, draft a letter to Salomon Inc. statingthat the firm¡¯s actions had called into question its ¡°continuing business relationship¡± with the Fed, which was ¡°deeply troubled¡± by the failure to make a timely disclosure of what the firmhad learned. Salomon would have ten days to report on all ¡°irregularities, violations, and oversights¡± that it had discovered. 
In light of Corrigan¡¯s earlier conversation with Strauss and Gutfreund, this letter would be a death threat. If the Fed cut off Salomon¡¯s business relationship with the government, customers and lenders would desert in droves. The consequences would be huge and immediate. 
Salomon had the United States¡¯ second-largest balance sheet¡ªlarger than Merrill Lynch, Bank of America, 
or American Express. Nearly all of its loans consisted of short-termdebt that was callable by lenders in days or at most weeks. Only $4 billion of equity supported $146 billion of debt. Danglingoff the side of the balance sheet on any given day were tens more billions, perhaps as many as $50 billion a day, of uncleared trades¡ªtransactions executed, but not yet settled. These would stallmidair. Salomon also had many hundreds of billions of derivative obligations not recorded anywhere on its balance sheet¡ªinterest-rate swaps, foreign-exchange swaps, futures contracts¡ªa massive and intricate daisy chain of obligations with counterparties all over the world, many of whomin turn had other interrelated contracts outstanding, all part of a vast entangled global financial web. If the fundingdisappeared, Salomon¡¯s assets had to be sold¡ªbut while the fundingcould disappear in a few days, the assets would take time to liquidate. The government had no national policy to provide loans to teeteringinvestment banks because they were ¡°too bigto fail.¡± The 
firm could melt into a puddle overnight.25 
Corrigan sat back in his chair, confident that once Salomon received Sternlight¡¯s letter, management would understand the loaded gun cocked at its head, and would respond accordingly. 
Within Salomon, after the press release and the Wall Street Journal story, rumors were runningwild. Late Monday afternoon, it held an all-hands-on-deck meetingin its huge auditoriumon its lowest floor. Nearly five hundred people crowded in, while hundreds, maybe more, fromupstairs and fromSalomon offices around the world, watched on television screens. Gutfreund and Strauss walked the audience through a baked-Alaska version of events, a crisp well-done meringue of a surface that hid the chilly surprise. Afterward, Bill McIntosh, the head of the bond department, was summoned upstairs to Gutfreund¡¯s office, where he found Gutfreund, Strauss, and Marty Lipton, ¡°three very scared men.¡± Earlier in the day he had been callingfor Gutfreund¡¯s head, but unexpectedly, they asked what he thought of the situation. McIntosh 
demanded more explanation; he felt the all-hands version and the press release had been misleading.26 He and assistant generalcounselZach Snow ended up gettingdrafted to write another press release. 
The next morning, McIntosh and Snow began drafting. Around midday, McIntosh went to tellDeryck Maughan, the vice chairman of investment banking, who had just come back fromrunningthe firm¡¯s Asian operations, what was goingon. Maughan knew he was hearingthe harbinger of a disaster. He went to find Snow and pounced on him, sayingyou¡¯d better be tellingthe whole truth to a vice chairman. 
But Snow had no intention of hidinganythingfromMaughan. He started talking, and a tale unfolded of what had transpired behind the scenes. He explained that in April, after Mozer made his first confession about the February auction, Meriwether had pleaded that Mozer not be fired, even though Feuerstein had said he believed Mozer¡¯s actions were criminal in nature. Snow had been told¡ªin confidence¡ªabout the situation. A month later, Mozer still ran the government desk; Feuerstein was naggingGutfreund to come clean; Gutfreund was tellinghimthat he would. But in fact no one had told the government. Meanwhile, Meriwether was charged with keepingan eye on Mozer, who had supposedly reformed. 
Then Mozer had asked for fundingto bid on more than one hundred percent of the two-year-note auction in late May. Even though some of the fundingwas supposedly to put in bids for customers, John Macfarlane, Salomon¡¯s treasurer, had become alarmed. He thought it an obvious red flagand called a meetingwith Snow and Meriwether. Snow had gone to Feuerstein, his boss, who agreed that it was an outrageous request. They 
had decided not to give Mozer the funds.27 
But Mozer had secretly juggled the bids and money anyway. 28 Managingto evade his overseers, he put in one suspicious bid and pulled off an enormous auction coup. Salomon wound up with eighty-seven percent of the Treasury bonds, and it and a smallgroup of customers controlled the two-year notes afterward. The price 
shot up. 29 Others¡¯ losses from the ¡°squeeze¡± topped $100 million, and several small firms suffered so severely that they filed for bankruptcy.30 
Within Salomon, the squeeze had caused considerable angst. In the press, the firmwas painted by its competitors as the pirate of Wall Street. The board members, includingBuffett, had expressed outrage at a meetingthat Salomon had cornered the market for two-year notes. Feuerstein had had Snow commence an internalinvestigation of the squeeze in June. As it turned out, Mozer had held a dinner with two hedge-fund customers right before the auction, and these customers had placed bids involved in the squeeze. With 
hindsight, the dinner pointed to possible collusion and market manipulation. But in the absence of proof, Mozer explained it away. 31 Gutfreund had set up a meetingto see his overlords at the Treasury and the Fed to mend fences over the squeeze. When he went to see Glauber in mid-June, he sat on the sofa puffinga cigar. He offered a mea culpa to Glauber for the aftereffects of the squeeze and offered to cooperate with the Treasury¡ªbut defended Mozer against allegations of intentionally riggingthe May auction. And he made no mention of what else he knew, leavingout anythingabout Mozer¡¯s false bids in the earlier auction. In response to the squeeze and to the earlier run-ins with Mozer, however, unbeknownst to anyone at Salomon, the SEC and the Antitrust Division of the Justice Department began investigatingthe firmanyway. 
About a week after the Glauber meeting, Gutfreund, Strauss, and Meriwether met to consider whether the firm should now come clean with the Treasury about the February auction. Because the hue and cry over the squeeze had not abated, they decided to keep silent. They felt the time was not right. Days later, the SEC sent Salomon a letter askingfor information about the May auction. This was the first indication that the problem of the two-year note auction might be escalatinginstead of fadingaway. Anyone receivingthis inquiry letter might reasonably have gotten nervous about the SEC¡¯s sudden interest in the operations of the government-bond tradingdesk. 
Two days later, Gutfreund had flown to Omaha to visit Buffett, while on his way to Las Vegas to see some property that Salomon had financed. In tellingthe backstory to Maughan, Snow, who did not know about this trip, left it out. Buffett would later fillin these details. 
¡°I picked him up at the airport. John was in the office for about an hour and a half. He spent about an hour making some calls, then we talked for about half an hour. He was sort of pacing around. We didn¡¯t talk about anything in the end. It¡¯s a pain in the neck to stop in Omaha, yet he really had nothing to say.¡± 
Somewhat baffled as to the purpose of the visit, Buffett took Gutfreund to a quick lunch, then for a visit to the recently acquired Borsheim¡¯s jewelry store, near the Furniture Mart. The proprietor, Ike Friedman, Mrs. B¡¯s nephew, was cast in the same mold, and like her, somewhat larger than life. 
Friedman took Gutfreund to Borsheim¡¯s ¡°center island,¡± where the really expensive goods were displayed. 
Gutfreund picked out a $60,000 itemfor Susan. It mattered to Buffett, Gutfreund said later, that he had made a purchase.32 Then he glanced at the expensive watches strategically displayed just behind the center island, and strolled over to look at the merchandise. Friedman preferred sellingvery expensive jewelry to timepieces. ¡°Oh, watches,¡± he said to Gutfreund. ¡°You lose them, you break them. Why pay a lot of money for a watch?¡± He looked at the fancy wristwatch on Gutfreund¡¯s wrist and asked Gutfreund what he paid for it. Gutfreund told him. 
¡°$1,995,¡±33 Friedman repeated. ¡°Well. You got taken, John.¡± 
¡°And you should have seen the look on John¡¯s face.¡± 
Wearingthe watch on which he got taken, Gutfreund returned to New York at the end of June to present the burgundy-colored satin-lined Borsheim¡¯s box to Susan. 
Within days¡ªby early July¡ªthe Antitrust Division of the Justice Department formally notified Salomon that it was investigatingthe squeeze in the May two-year-note auction, which the letter from the SEC had inquired about. Gutfreund now got serious, said Snow, and hired Marty Lipton¡¯s firmWachtell, Lipton, Salomon¡¯s outside counsel, to begin its own investigation, on behalf of Salomon, of the circumstances 
surroundingthe May squeeze. 34 People within Salomon had mixed views about the squeeze. Some said the Treasury market was inherently designed to be collusive. The job of a dealer was to work with its customers to distribute huge blocks of bonds into the market. Little squeezes happened all the time. This one was big. So what? The Treasury was pickingon Salomon. It was the years of hubris, the wildness depicted in Liar¡¯s 
Poker, the gradualerosion of power that had made Salomon a punchingbag.35 
But others were furious that Mozer had once again defied the Treasury. They were baffled that he would pull a huge squeeze when it was well-known that he and Basham were already at loggerheads. Later, these questions would increase. Why did Mozer¡ªon probation, told his behavior had been ¡°probably criminal¡± ¡ªtaunt the Treasury so outlandishly that his coup splashed headlines allover the financial press, in a way 
guaranteed to draw even more attention to himself?36 
Snow, who reported to Feuerstein on tradingoperations, had been in charge of the internal investigation involvingthe May squeeze. In June, he was out of the office some of the time with knee surgery, and neither he nor Feuerstein was involved in the Glauber meeting, nor knew about the subsequent decision to further 
delay reportingMozer¡¯s actions.37 But once Snow returned full-time to the office in July, increasingly he started to realize that he was out of the loop. People began disappearinginto meetings. The situation preyed on his mind. One night he had a dream. He walked into Feuerstein¡¯s office the next morningand said he had dreamed that he and Feuerstein had actually called Warren Buffett and told himabout the false bid, because they were both so frustrated that Gutfreund and Strauss had done nothingabout it. 
Feuerstein looked at Snow cross-eyed. ¡°No, no,¡± he said. ¡°It won¡¯t come to that.¡± Feuerstein was still trying 
to influence Gutfreund. Goingto Buffett would be throwingthat relationship away. 38 Snow had not intended his account of the dreamto come across as a subtle threat to bypass his boss and call Buffett, but he thought Feuerstein seemed to have taken it that way. 39 
A few days after beginningtheir work, the Wachtell, Lipton investigators had returned with a preliminary report on the May squeeze. Only now, however, were the investigators told that senior management had known since Aprilthat Mozer had submitted an unauthorized bid in the February auction. 
With hindsight, Salomon¡¯s actions looked far worse. After learningof Mozer¡¯s false bid in February, which Feuerstein had said was criminal in nature, management had taken Meriwether¡¯s vouchingfor Mozer and Mozer¡¯s word that he had never done it before, without investigatingfurther or discipliningMozer in any way. They had left him in place, which allowed the May squeeze to occur. Once it did occur, Salomon was in more trouble, because tellingthe government they knew about Mozer¡¯s previous phony bids but had only now reported them would probably have conveyed the sense that Salomon was a gangof thieves. Worst of all, Gutfreund had met with Bob Glauber in mid-June about the May squeeze, but had said nothingabout all these earlier events. Now, as Snow explained to Maughan, when things started blowingup, everyone involved started excusingthe originaldelay by sayingthe matter was a single minor event that caused no customer any harm, cost the government nothing, and didn¡¯t make sense, even fromthe standpoint of the 
trader involved.40 Given the pressure of business, Gutfreund said, he simply hadn¡¯t deemed it that important.41 
Unfortunately, he was wrongabout that. The Wachtellinvestigators had discovered that the February auction was not the only one that Mozer had rigged. They now knew that five auctions had been compromised.42 Two of these false bids had only just been unearthed. Snow concluded by tellingMaughan about the previous evening¡¯s meetingwith all the inside and outside lawyers that had followed the half-baked explanation given to allemployees. Snow had argued that management¡¯s prior knowledge had to be disclosed. He was batted down. ¡°I¡¯m goingto take a lot of heat for this,¡± Gutfreund told him. ¡°I don¡¯t see why you can¡¯t do your 
part.¡±43 
Maughan had been deeply concerned even before hearingallthis new information fromSnow. Seven days had passed since the first press release¡ªseven days that included a salvo of stories in the media, the firm¡¯s fallingstock price, trouble rollingover the commercial paper, the discovery of new false bids, and Gutfreund and Strauss feedingbaked Alaska to the troops at an internal meeting. By the time Snow finished tellinghim all of this additional history of what Mozer had done and what others had not done, Maughan blew up and started poundingSnow to make sure there was nothingelse. Then he went down to the tradingfloor and confronted Meriwether, Mozer¡¯s boss. ¡°What the hell is goingon, John?¡± he asked. 
Meriwether hunghis head. ¡°It¡¯s too late,¡± he said. He refused to talk further.44 
Too late or not, Snow and McIntosh had to spend the eveningdraftinga second press release to try to explain things. That same night, Strauss and Gutfreund called Corrigan to respond in some fashion to the Sternlight ¡°cocked gun¡± letter, which the firmhad received that morning. Realizingthat he was on a speakerphone, Corrigan assumed that a roomfull of undisclosed lawyers was listeningto everythinghe said. The conversation started out with Corrigan beingtold that the firm had done an investigation and that ¡°industry practice¡± of other firms was to pad their bids for new issuances of municipals and agency securities to get a bigger share. Corrigan viewed this opener as ¡°a diversion, or worse.¡± It had nothingto do with the squeeze, nor with the more serious issue of phony bids¡ªin fact, nothingto do with the Treasury market. His Irish temper ignited. He yelled into the phone at Strauss and Gutfreund: ¡°I¡¯msure you¡¯ve got a roomfull of [bleeping] lawyers. This is your last chance. Is there anythingelse you have to tell me?¡± They began to describe the other violations. 
Corrigan meant to put an end to the obfuscations and rationalizations. ¡°Well, goddammit,¡± he said, ¡°get yourselves together and release all of this information to the public immediately. I don¡¯t want to hear anythingelse fromyou, just get that goddamn press release out.¡±45 
Late that evening, the lawyers met with senior management to go over the press release. Gutfreund and Strauss arrived. McIntosh said there needed to be heads on a plate. This idea was quickly dismissed, but other people, includinga board member, Gedale Horowitz, and Steve Bell, who ran Salomon¡¯s Washington office, pressed for fuller disclosure. Nobody could get hold of Buffett, but they reached Munger on the phone, who said, Look, you can¡¯t put this second press release out without names. Gutfreund¡¯s name went in automatically. Everyone knew that Strauss was not in charge and had not made any of these decisions; he had simply been present in the room. But he had gone alongwith his boss. His name went in. Feuerstein had tried to get Gutfreund to report it. Munger said that his name should stay out. 
Meriwether was known as a brilliant, careful manager who was unusually close to his teamand rarely left the desk. He had reported the matter exactly as he should.46 On the other hand, he had vouched for Mozer, 
pleaded his cause, then left Mozer¡¯s responsibilities unchanged. When Munger said Meriwether¡¯s name should go in, says McIntosh, Meriwether, listeningand seeingthe lawyers write down his name, said, ¡°Oh, my God, I¡¯m doomed.¡±47 
The next day, Wednesday, August 14, a telephone meetingtook place in which the board heard some of the story that was given to Corrigan the night before. Two board members called in fromEurope, one from Alaska, Buffett fromOmaha, and Munger fromMinnesota to hear the first ¡°orderly and halfway complete description¡± of the Mozer affair. Inside Salomon, a palace coup was well under way, with senior managers 
talkingto one another on the assumption that Gutfreund and Strauss would have to resign.48 The arbs wanted Meriwether as CEO, which was clearly unacceptable to many people given that he was Mozer¡¯s boss; the arbs then floated the idea that Deryck Maughan might serve as co-CEO with Meriwether. Meanwhile, no one on the board conference callsaid anythingabout management changes; they merely debated the wordingof the new press release, which contained three pages of details and added the two additional violations that had been discovered by the investigators. 
The draft release admitted that management had known about the February bids as far back as Aprilbut said that ¡°the press of business¡± kept Salomon fromreportingMozer¡¯s actions to the authorities. Buffett called this ridiculous, and as the board debated, Munger became incensed. Eventually, the press release was rewritten to say that the failure occurred due to ¡°lack of sufficient attention to the matter,¡± leavingthe impression that the names in the press release were the people who were not payingattention. Arrangements were made to put out the release that night. 
As the meetingconcluded, the board thought it had the fullstory. A number of things had not been mentioned, however. One was the ¡°cocked gun¡± letter just received fromPeter Sternlight at the Fed. Another was the June meetingwith Bob Glauber at the Treasury Department, at which Gutfreund had failed to mention Mozer¡¯s earlier activities. 
That afternoon, Salomon held another all-hands-on-deck meetingin the auditorium. BillMcIntosh, who ran the daily sales meeting, stood at the front as usual and had the unenviable job of readingthe new press release to the employees. With Gutfreund and Strauss in the front row, directly opposite him, McIntosh said, This is what happened. If customers calland want to know what¡¯s goingon, just tell them. Make no excuses for senior management, don¡¯t apologize for them, they did what they did. 
Afterward, the salespeople piled into McIntosh¡¯s office. What are we supposed to say? they begged. Don¡¯t make excuses for senior management, McIntosh repeated. In my view they¡¯re not goingto last very long; they¡¯re gone; they¡¯re yesterday¡¯s news; we¡¯ve got to keep this place together so we can survive and play 
another day. Focus on that.49 
That eveningthe government-bond department showed up on the terrace of McIntosh¡¯s duplex overlooking 
the Hudson River in the West Village for a previously scheduled barbecue. Eerily, TomStrauss dropped by¡ªand the temperature on the deck fell several degrees.50 Instead of hangingaround untilten or eleven swiggingbeer as usual, everyone cleared out by eight o¡¯clock. 
The morningafter the press release appeared, Thursday, August 15, rumors floated that the longknives were out and McIntosh was a goner. He stayed on the floor allday, figuringthat Gutfreund and Strauss wouldn¡¯t fire himfor insubordination in front of the whole tradingfloor. Meanwhile, market confidence in Salomon cracked. The stock, which had been sinkingallweek from the previous Thursday¡¯s close of almost $37, slumped to $27. It was tradingdown because shareholders were beginningto suspect a bigger problemthan Mozer¡¯s misdeeds: a ¡°run on the bank.¡± And, indeed, one was beginningto take place. 
PhotoInsertThree 

Image48 
ChuckRickershauser,thelawyerwhosaidaround1976oftheconvolutedbusinesscreatedbyBuffett: ¡°There¡¯sgottobeanindictmentinheresomewhere.¡± 

Image49 
Tootingatrumpetinhisbathrobe.EversincehisboyhoodfiascoatRosehillElementary,Buffettrefuses toplaythe¡°echo.¡± 

Image50 
CharlieMungerreadingwithhisgrandchildren. 

Image51 
BuffettpartneredwithSharonOsbergathisfirstbridgetournament,the1994worldchampionshipsin Albuquerque,NM.TheyqualifiedforthefinalsbutthenwithdrewbecauseWarrenwastooexhaustedto 
continue.TheWorldBridgeFederationwasappalled. 

Image52 
BuffettandBillGatesattheirfirstmeeting,inJuly1991,attheGatesfamilycompoundonWashington¡¯s HoodCanal. 

Image53 
In1993,Buffettplaceshishandonacomputermouseforthefirsttime.Hewas¡°fearless,¡±saysSharon Osberg. 

Image54 
Buffettand¡°Mr.Coca-Cola¡±DonKeoughsitsurroundedbyBuffett¡¯sfavoritebeverage(andBerkshire¡¯s largeststockholding). 

Image55 
WithsonHowieanddaughter-in-lawDevon.Theyweremarriedin1982. 

Image56 
Buffett¡¯slongtimefriendBillRuane,whodiedin2005. 

Image57 
OnEasterSunday1993,BillGatesdivertedhisplanetoOmahaandfooledMelindaFrenchintoa surprisemeetingwithWarrenandAstridatBorsheim¡¯stochooseherengagementring. 

Image58 
WarrenandAstridattendtheMay1996weddingofPeterBuffettandJenniferHeil. 

Image59 
BuffetttakesthewheelofagolfcartinSunValley,andSusieandKayGrahamtaketheirlivesintheir 
hands. 

Image60 
MungerandBuffettanswerreporters¡¯questionsduringtheBerkshireHathawayshareholdmeeting weekend. 

Image61 
BuffettatSunValleywithfriendsDianevonFurstenberg,HerbertAllen,andBarryDiller. 

Image62 
Righttoleft,Coca-ColaCEORobertoGoizueta,BillGates,andWarrenBuffettonthe1997panel moderatedbyDonKeoughatwhichGatesoffendedGoizuetabyparaphrasingBuffett¡¯sviewthat 
Coca-Colawaseasiertorunthanatechnologycompany. 

Image63 
SusieJr.pointsoutherfather¡¯sunobtrusivebaseballjerseynumber¡ª1/16becausestockswereonce pricedin¡°teenies¡±¡ª1/16thsofadollar. 

Image64 
Warrenandhissisters,RobertaBuffettBialek(left)andDorisBuffett. 

Image65 
TotallyfocusedonbridgewhileplayingfortheCorporateAmericabridgeteamagainsttheU.S.Congress 
teamin1989. 

Image66 
WithKayGrahamatherhomeonMartha¡¯sVineyard. 

Image67 
ImprovisingatoastatBillandMelindaGates¡¯sweddingreceptionin1994. 

Image68 
WhileonvacationwiththeGatesesduringtheLong-TermCapitalManagementcrisisin1998,Buffett triestogetsatellitephonereceptionintheGrandCanyon. 

Image69 
ReunionoftheoriginalGrahamGroupin1995.Fromtheleft:Buffett,TomKnapp,Munger,RoyTolles, SandyGottesman,BillScott,MarshallWeinberg,WalterSchloss,EdAnderson,BillRuane. 

Image70 
WarrenandSusieasMickeyandMinnieMouseatanABC-CapCitiesEvent,1997. 

Image71 
BuffettridesacamelinChinaduringa1995tripwithBillandMelindaGates. 
The pyramided nature of the balance sheet of any investment bank was wellunderstood by investors. Salomon was almost uniquely large, bigger than the biggest life insurer, second only to Citicorp in assets. As a major firm, Salomon¡¯s debt desk had always acted as a broker to buy and sell the firm¡¯s own medium-term notes. Suddenly, on Thursday, a longqueue of sellers and no buyers appeared. In order to honor the sell orders, the traders had to buy the notes with Salomon¡¯s own cash. Since nobody else wanted to buy the notes, they now amounted to merely pieces of paper that said that Salomon would pay Salomon in the future from Salomon¡¯s own vault. But as the vault emptied, the notes were goingto be worthless unless something 
changed. To conserve cash, the traders began to deter sellers by offeringa lower price.51 Sellers quickly figured out what was goingon. The line of sellers wantingto sell notes grew longer and longer. 
By the end of the day, Salomon¡¯s traders had reluctantly bought $700 million of the firm¡¯s own notes. Then they put up the ¡°closed for business¡± sign, like a Depression bank snappingshut the teller¡¯s window.52 No other firm would buy Solly¡¯s debt either. And with that, Salomon was teeteringprecariously close to the edge of bankruptcy. 
The next morning, Friday, August 16, the New York Times front page ran a photograph of Gutfreund with the 
headline ¡°Wall Street Sees a Serious Threat to Salomon Bros.¡ªILLEGAL BIDDING FALLOUT ¡ªHigh-LevelResignations and Client Defections Feared¡ªFirm¡¯s Stock Drops.¡±53 The story featured prominent photographs of Gutfreund and Strauss. The two of them and Marty Lipton called Corrigan¡¯s office in New York and were patched through to FederalReserve Chairman Alan Greenspan¡¯s office in Washington, where Corrigan and Greenspan had been on a conference call with Treasury Secretary Nick 
Brady since dawn ¡°tryingto figure out who the hell we¡¯re goingto get to come in and run the firm.¡±54 Strauss, a longtime friend, knew they were in trouble when Corrigan greeted himas ¡°Mr. Strauss.¡±55 The 
irate Federal Reserve Bank president, assumingthat the board knew about the Sternlight death-threat letter, had been shocked by the latest press release they had issued. He interpreted their failure to take any action¡ªsuch as firingsenior management¡ªas a sign that Salomon¡¯s board was defyinghim.56 
Gutfreund said that he was goingto resign. ¡°What about Strauss?¡± asked Corrigan. With this, it became clear that, as far as the New York Federal Reserve was concerned, resigningwas not optional, it was mandatory.57 
Gutfreund then called Buffett. It was six forty-five a.m. Omaha time and Buffett was stillasleep when the phone rang. But he came to consciousness rapidly as Gutfreund, with Marty Lipton and TomStrauss on the line, laid out the problem. ¡°I just read my own obituary,¡± Gutfreund said, referringto the New York Times. His picture on the front page had done what the sequence of events¡ªuntilthen¡ªhad not. A freighted pause ensued, as Buffett understood what they were really askinghim. He told themthat he would consider taking over the job of chairman on an interimbasis but needed to see the Times story first. He wanted a few minutes to think but was pretty sure he needed to go to New York. He told themthat he would be there as soon as he could that afternoon. Marty Lipton said that it was unthinkable for Meriwether not to be fired immediately. Buffett insisted that they do nothinguntil he could at least talk to Meriwether. 
He hungup, called Gladys Kaiser at home, and told her to cancel a lunch with the president of Grinnell. Then he said, Call George Gillespie in Martha¡¯s Vineyard. Cancel my trip for the weekend and put the pilot on alert that we may be goingto New York. 
By the time he arrived less than an hour later at the office, still empty of staff, to read the ¡°obituary¡± on the fax machine, he had made up his mind. 
Meanwhile, Gutfreund and Strauss had told Corrigan that Buffett was consideringbecominginterim 
chairman. ¡°As far as I was concerned, they were both beingless than candid with me,¡± Corrigan says. ¡°I want to talk directly to Warren Buffett immediately,¡± he told them.58 ¡°I didn¡¯t know himpersonally, but I certainly knew his reputation.¡± 
Buffett for his part needed to find out how Jerry Corrigan would feel if he did take the job. It took some time to track down Corrigan in Washington. He did not call Buffett back until after eight-thirty a.m. CST, after the market had opened. Salomon¡¯s stock did not open for trading, which told investors that major news was pending. 
When Corrigan talked to Buffett, he said somethingabout his willingness to be a little more lenient about the ¡°ten-day schedule¡± if Buffett took the job. Though Buffett did not grasp what Corrigan meant, he gathered that the FederalReserve must have been askingfor information about something. Corrigan sounded angry. He said that he would make no promises about anythingif Buffett did take the job, and insisted that Buffett see him personally to talk about the role of interim chairman in New York that very night. 
At Salomon, all that the tradingfloor knew was that Buffett was supposedly flyingin to rescue the firm and that Salomon¡¯s stock was not trading. People speculated that he was consideringMeriwether as a possible replacement for Gutfreund. The arb boys were crying, ¡°We can¡¯t lose John.¡± J.M. himself was nowhere to be seen. The tradingfloor stewed and seethed, but the stock was unable to open for tradingbecause Buffett had told themto hold the press release, which announced that Gutfreund was prepared to resign and that Buffett was temporarily takingover as chairman, untilafter he arrived. With the stock hangingin limbo, news stories poured out on television that itemized Salomon¡¯s problems and speculated what would come next. 
By early afternoon, Buffett had appeared. Once in the opulent executive suite on the forty-fifth floor, he hit the button on the press release, and the traders opened Salomon¡¯s stock.59 It traded furiously for the final part of the day, closingup a dollar to almost $28. 
After the market closed, Buffett went down to the amphitheater for a meetingwith the managingdirectors. Gutfreund and Strauss took the stage and Gutfreund said that they were prepared to resign.60 His face 
remained impassive, as usual. Strauss, noted Buffett, seemed shaken. Afterward, the senior management retired to the enormous conference roomon the executive floor. Eric Rosenfeld and Larry Hilibrand, the key members of Meriwether¡¯s team, bullied their way into the meeting.61 There, next to the wall of glass 
overlookingthe two-story football-field-size tradingfloor where the trouble had begun, the top brass of Salomon began to thrash out what to do next. 
People holdingdifferent viewpoints started kickingMeriwether around like a soccer ball. Nobody disputed 
that he had done the right thingby reportingMozer¡¯s actions. The debate was whether he should have done more. Some people felt, as McIntosh articulated, that he was simply too close to the flame.62 Meriwether had a reputation as a tight manager; in his areas, as one said, ¡°no sparrow fell that Meriwether didn¡¯t see it.¡± Meriwether had not been involved in the false bids, but how could Salomon expect clemency while keeping him on? It seemed obvious to themthat the government would treat the firmmore harshly if he stayed. 
Although Strauss and Gutfreund were not present, they, too, had told Buffett that they thought Meriwether should resign alongwith them.63 
With uncanny timing, Meriwether himself arrived and leaned silently against a wall, watchingas most of his peers demanded his head. Buffett had told Marty Lipton earlier that day that, unlike Strauss and Gutfreund, Meriwether must not be forced to resign (unless he chose to do so voluntarily). Buffett wanted time to deliberate. He did not agree with those who thought Meriwether had to go. Meriwether had not sucked his thumb; he had reported Mozer to Gutfreund and Strauss. It was not so much that they thought Meriwether had done anythingwrong, Buffett decided. Rather, they were panicked. Their lives were simply goingto be so much easier the next morningif Meriwether was gone. The consequences of puttinghis name in the press release now loomed large to Buffett. 
After the meeting, he climbed into a waitingblack Town Car with Gutfreund and Strauss and they wove their way through downtown rush-hour traffic to Corrigan¡¯s office. 
Corrigan had felt it necessary to maintain his previous schedule in the interest of secrecy. He arrived directly 
from playingin the FederalReserve¡¯s annual officers-versus-employees softball game, his tallframe clad in jeans, sneakers, and a Liberty Street Blues T-shirt.64 But the chillin the air was such that ¡°he could have been wearingblack tie and I wouldn¡¯t have noticed, given my state of mind,¡± TomStrauss later said. Buffett opened disarmingly: ¡°Look, the only thingI owe personally is $70,000 on a second home I have in California because the interest rate is cheap.¡± He promised complete cooperation with the regulators. Corrigan refused to be charmed. Interimchairmanships usually didn¡¯t work very well, he said. Buffett had better not seek help for Salomon from his ¡°Washington friends.¡± 
Corrigan demanded a thorough housecleaning. Buffett agreed to all sorts of fundamental changes to strengthen Salomon¡¯s policies, controls, and documentation. ¡°His verbalcommitment to me was absolute,¡± says Corrigan, ¡°and I trusted him.¡± 
Nevertheless, Corrigan made no promises. GivingBuffett a steely look, he said, ¡°Prepare for all eventualities.¡± 
¡°It was a Dutch-uncle type of talk. It was cordial enough, but the Dutch-uncle aspect was there. We owed more money than virtually anybody in the country, and we owed it on very short terms. I tried once or twice to suggest how worried I was about the funding problem, hoping he might figuratively put his arm around me a little bit, but he didn¡¯t do it. Prepare for all eventualities¡ªthat was something I didn¡¯t know quite how to do. I certainly thought of strychnine or something of the sort.¡± 
Then Corrigan sent Buffett out of the roomso he could talk to Gutfreund and Strauss. ¡°You have a problem 
with an employee in your firm,¡± he said, ¡°that¡¯s his problem. You¡¯ve got a problemwith an employee in your firm and you fail to do somethingabout it, that¡¯s your problem.¡±65 Then, with tears in his eyes, he told them how much he regretted endingtheir careers. 
On the way out, while ¡°Tomwas in much more of a state of shock,¡± Gutfreund again seemed ¡°quite composed.¡±66 He seemed to be blamingCorrigan for forcinghimto resign. ¡°I¡¯ll be damned if I¡¯mgoingto grant himabsolution,¡± Gutfreund said.67 They rode back across downtown to Salomon, then went off to have 
a steak in a back roomat Joe & Rose¡¯s steak house on 49th Street. Strauss and Gutfreund insisted again that Meriwether had to go. 68 They talked about the candidates for chief operatingofficer. Close to midnight, Buffett stumbled back to Katharine Graham¡¯s apartment at the UN Plaza, and tried to sleep. 
Later, many people wrote many things about why Buffett took the job. Some said it was his $700 million, and some said it was his duty to the other shareholders. ¡°Somebody had to take the job,¡± he said. ¡°I was the logical person.¡± Other than the people who were resigning, no one had more at stake. But it was not just the money, it was what he cared about just as much:his reputation. When he invested in Salomon and gave John Gutfreund his imprimatur, it was like nailingthat reputation to Salomon¡¯s door like a shield. 
Buffett had told his children, ¡°It takes a lifetime to build a reputation and five minutes to ruin it.¡± He thought of that risk primarily in terms of his own actions. Yet the people he had endorsed had put his reputation at risk. If he had made a mistake, it was to invest in Wall Street yet distance himself fromit by relyingon someone else; his judgment about Gutfreund¡¯s ability to oversee the runaway culture of Salomon was flawed. 
By this time Buffett was the second richest man in the United States.69 Berkshire¡¯s per-share book value had grown by more than twenty-three percent a year for twenty-six years. His first group of partners had an incredible $3 million for each $1,000 they had put in. Berkshire Hathaway was tradingat $8,000 per share. Buffett had a net worth of $3.8 billion. He was one of the most respected businessmen in the world. 
At some point duringthat long, horrible Friday, he recognized with a sickeningjolt that investingin Salomon, a business with problems over which he had essentially no control, had fromthe beginningput all that at risk. 
He did not want to become interimchairman of Salomon. That way lay greater peril. If Salomon went down afterward, he would be even more closely associated with shame and disaster. But if there was anybody who could get himself and the other shareholders out of this mess, he was that person. 
To do so he would have to extend the umbrella of his reputation, already at risk, even further to protect the firm. There was no way to avoid this challenge. Deryck Maughan and John Meriwether could not do it. He could not send somebody fromMunger, Tolles, or Charlie Munger, or Tom Murphy, or Bill Ruane. He could not solve it by passingan idea alongto Carol Loomis for an incisive article in Fortune. Even BigSusie could not solve this. For once, nobody could be his proxy. Only he could save Salomon. And if he walked away, the odds were high that Salomon would implode. 
There is an old sayingin the military: To advance, a generalmust expose his flanks. Buffett could be a hero or he could fail. But he could not hide and he could not duck. 
At eight o¡¯clock on Saturday morning, August 17, he arrived to a surrealscene at Wachtell, Lipton¡¯s offices. Gutfreund was not there; despite miserable weather he had decided to fly up to his Nantucket house, where Susan was staying. Allthe warlords¡ªtheoretically, candidates for CEO¡ªhad begun to gather outside an ¡°interview room.¡± Only a few of them made sense or actually wanted the job, but he had to interview every one. Meanwhile, a pair of ¡°plenty smart,¡± tough investigative lawyers from Munger, Tolles¡ªLarry Pedowitz and Allen Martin¡ªgave ¡°a masterfulpresentation¡± to Buffett and Munger, who had flown in to participate in person. For the first time¡ªto their outrage¡ªthey learned that the Treasury Department had investigated 
Mozer¡¯s earlier trades.70 
Next, Buffett had to make what he considered the most important hire of his life:to decide who would lead the firm. If he made a mistake, he could not reverse the decision later. Before startingthe fifteen-minute interviews, he told the group, ¡°J.M. is not comingback.¡±71 
With that, he began to interview the candidates one by one. He asked themall the same question: Who should be the next CEO of Salomon? 
¡°I was going into a foxhole with this guy, and he had to be the right choice. The question was, who would have all the qualities that would provide leadership to the firm, cause me not to worry for a second about whether anything was going on that was going to subsequently embarrass the firm or even put us out of business? As I talked to these people, what was really going through my mind was essentially the same questions that would go through your mind if you were deciding who you wanted to be a trustee under your will, or who you wanted to have marry your daughter, or anything of this sort. I wanted the kind of person who was going to be able to make decisions as to what should get to me and what could get solved below the line¡ªwho would tell me all the bad news, because good news always takes care of itself in business. I wanted to hear every bit of bad news as soon as it happened, so we could do something about it. I wanted 
someone who was ethical, who wouldn¡¯t stick a gun to my head later on knowing that I couldn¡¯t fire him.¡± 
Buffett found that all but one of the other candidates thought it should be Deryck Maughan, who had 
returned three weeks earlier fromrunningSalomon¡¯s Asian operations.73 Maughan, forty-three years old, now headed the investment-bankinggroup. He was not a trader, and he was English, not American. He had the least resemblance to Mozer or any of Salomon¡¯s frat-house tradingboys of anyone that could be found. He was viewed as both ethical and possessed of common sense. Thanks to Liar¡¯s Poker, the public thought of Salomon as a place full of people who stuffed their faces with onion cheeseburgers for breakfast and 
dangled strippers¡¯ panties fromtheir tradingscreens.74 Salomon, after all, was the firmwhere, as Lewis had written, a vice chairman was more like a chairman of vice.75 Maughan, however, was the very portrait of a dignified, impeccably tailored Englishman. Since he had spent the past several years in Tokyo, the chance that he was tainted by the Treasury auction scandal was remote. 
Of allMaughan¡¯s qualifications, possibly the most valuable was his distance from the crime. Within Salomon, land of the longknives, allof the other candidates had enemies. Maughan was a question mark, like the token black guy in the movie Putney Swope, who gets elected to the job of CEO of a backstabbingadvertising agency when the old CEO croaks duringa boardroommeeting. The other executives try to sabotage one another¡¯s chances of gettinghis job by votingfor Putney Swope, who ends up beingelected by a huge 
majority.76 Maughan was respected, but no one knew himallthat well. As one of the other warlords put it, they allvoted for Maughan because it¡¯s ¡°better to choose someone you don¡¯t know than someone you think is bad.¡± 
In the movie, Putney Swope had had the sense to vote for himself. When Buffett asked Maughan who should run Salomon, Maughan replied adroitly: ¡°I¡¯mafraid you¡¯re goingto find out that it¡¯s me,¡± then added that he would serve whomever Buffett chose.77 
Two other things got Buffett¡¯s attention. Maughan did not ask him for protection against beingsued. And Buffett¡ªwho, as much as he hated admittingit, did not enjoy payingpeople¡ªwas mightily impressed that Maughan did not ask how much the job would pay. 
Maughan and two others were told to come to the office for the board meetingthe next day. That afternoon, Buffett taxied back uptown to Graham¡¯s UN Plaza apartment, where the arb boys met himto plead ¡°with passion and logic¡± for Meriwether¡¯s job. If J.M. left, Buffett knew, there had to be a risk that the arb boys 
would eventually join him.78 Without Meriwether, the main source of Salomon¡¯s profits would drain away. Buffett¡¯s investment in Salomon could become worth far less. Then Meriwether himself arrived, shaken. He did not want to resign, and he talked to Buffett at length. Buffett began to waver. He focused on Meriwether¡¯s straightforwardness in reportingthe problem. 
¡°After listening to all of this, my reaction was not to ask for his resignation. As best I knew at the time, and this is still my belief, when he had heard of his subordinate¡¯s misdeeds, he had gone straight upstairs to his superiors and the general counsel and had reported it. It seemed to me that it was the job of his superiors and the general counsel of the firm to then take action. No one, at this point, was suggesting that the general counsel should resign.¡± 
Then Gutfreund called. His flight to Nantucket had been thwarted by Hurricane Bob and he was headed back to New York. ¡°I have no future,¡± he said, agitated.79 They made plans to go to dinner. Gutfreund insisted that first they talk to his newly hired lawyer, Philip Howard, about severance pay. 
Buffett and Munger called Howard, with Munger doingmost of the talking. Gutfreund felt the firm owed him $35 million. 
¡°As he was laying all this out, I was listening like the Japanese, saying, ¡®Yes, I understand your position.¡¯ Not ¡®Yes, I agree with you.¡¯ We had no interest whatsoever in trying to arrange a compensation agreement with anyone who was in the middle of a scandal of this proportion without knowing the full facts.¡± 
Buffett then said that they could not agree upon an overall number, because no matter what the figure was, ¡°Salomon Gives $XX Severance Package to Gutfreund¡± would ¡°be the headline,¡± rather than the break with 
former management.80 They laid on praise of Gutfreund¡¯s character, however; they told Howard that Gutfreund would be treated fairly, that they had the power to make it happen and had never broken a promise before. Buffett said, ¡°The only way this won¡¯t happen is if both Charlie and I die.¡± He later explained that this was a way of avoidingconfrontation; that is, ¡°deflectingMr. Howard and gettinghim off this kick¡± because it would be a ¡°little abrupt¡± to say they didn¡¯t want to reach a settlement because ¡°we don¡¯t know the full facts¡± yet. 
Buffett and Munger then went out for a steak with Gutfreund at Christ Cella. Gutfreund offered to stay on as a consultant at no charge in the days ahead. ¡°I¡¯m goingto need all the help I can get,¡± Buffett said fervently. They talked about the problems of the firm, and Gutfreund said he thought Deryck Maughan was the right guy to run Salomon. 
At one point, however, Gutfreund¡ªwho still knew a number of facts of which Buffett was not yet aware¡ªsaid somethingthat contradicted the warmand cozy scene of a few minutes before. ¡°You guys are smarter than I am,¡± he told them. ¡°You guys are goingto fuck me.¡±81 
It was with relief that Buffett and Munger escaped and went back to Kay Graham¡¯s apartment. A large suite filled with Asian art, it had many happy associations for Buffett. Graham always kept the kitchen stocked with his favorite foods. He, CarolLoomis, and George Gillespie often got together there for a bridge game, orderingin deli sandwiches on the side. But he was not havingnearly as much fun tonight. 
Almost as soon as they arrived, Philip Howard showed up, carryinga sheaf of papers about Gutfreund¡¯s severance, which he wanted Munger to sign.82 He talked to both of themfor a while, until Buffett left them alone and went off to make some phone calls. Munger started gettingirritable. They discussed the matter for perhaps an hour or more. 
Munger had already made up his mind that he was goingto say no to this deal. As he recalled later, ¡°I was deliberately not listening. I was beingpolite, but I wasn¡¯t payingmuch attention¡­. I sort of turned off my mind¡­. I was just sittingthere politely with my head turned off.¡± 
When Howard reached the end of his lengthy list of demands, Munger refused to sign the papers, but stressed 
that Gutfreund would eventually be treated fairly.83 On the way out the door, Howard hesitated. It bothered him that he still had nothingin writing. ¡°You can¡¯t get paid after the divorce,¡± he said. Munger reassured him: ¡°Phil, you have to practice law the way my father did, by trustingin a man¡¯s word.¡±84 
While Howard and Munger were talking, Meriwether and his lawyer, Ted Levine, arrived. Meriwether had changed his mind. He said that he was in an impossible position and had to leave Salomon. 
He ¡°at least partially understood the seriousness of the company¡¯s situation. He was pacing back and forth, and he was smoking cigarettes as fast as he could light them. He said that the best thing for him to do was to resign.¡± 
Munger would later express feelings of guilt over agreeingto put Meriwether¡¯s name in the press release, which he viewed as a mistake he had made under pressure. 85 Both he and Buffett thought Meriwether could stay and fight it out, but they accepted his resignation. 
¡°We talked for a considerable length of time. They stayed until midnight.¡± 
Finally, it was just Buffett and Munger. Buffett went to bed, feelingthat matters were, if not under control, at least startingto be straightened out. 
The next day, Sunday, August 18, no one would rest. 
Early in the morning, Buffett, Gutfreund, and Strauss met in one of the many conference rooms on the forty-fifth floor of Salomon¡¯s office downtown before the meetingat which the board would ratify Buffett¡¯s 
role as interimchairman. The board gathered outside, and one of the members, Gedale Horowitz, took Marty Lipton aside and told himthat he and several others had been talkingfor two days. He said that Meriwether had failed to keep Mozer under control and they would resign unless Meriwether was fired for the good of the firm. He told Buffett a softer version¡ªthat he would not attend the board meetingif Meriwether was still employed. Buffett said the situation had resolved itself, because Meriwether was goingto step down on his 
own. 
Suddenly, a lawyer appeared in the conference roomwhere Buffett was meetingwith Gutfreund and Strauss, wavinga message fromthe Treasury Department. It was goingto announce in a few minutes that Salomon was barred from biddingat Treasury auctions, both for customers and for its own account. Allof them understood that in minutes, Salomon would be shot in the head. ¡°We immediately saw that this would put us out of business¡ªnot because of the economic loss, but because the message that would go out to the rest of the world in headlines in the papers on Monday would be ¡®Treasury to Salomon: Drop Dead.¡¯ In effect, the response to installation of new management and banishment of the old would be an extraordinary censure delivered at an equally extraordinary time exactly coincident with the first actions of the new management.¡± 
Buffett went off to another conference room to call the Treasury, seekinga stay of execution. The phone was busy. He got the phone company to agree to interrupt the call. They called back and said it was not a working phone. After many minutes of confusion, problems, and delays, Buffett finally spoke to someone in the Treasury Department. It was too late, he was told; the announcement had already gone out. The world now knew that Salomon was banned fromdoingbusiness with the government. 
Many of the board members were seeingtheir net worth evaporate in front of their eyes. Another slew of lawsuits, on top of those they already anticipated, would arrive on Salomon¡¯s doorstep. Buffett appeared calmbut determined. He had come to a realization. Gutfreund was beingdrummed out for havingcreated a nightmare. Now he, Warren Buffett, was actually on the brink¡ªnot of overseeingthe salvation of a business¡ªbut of steeringa zombie Salomon through the night of the livingdead. Buffett balked. 
He said to the board that he was goingto tell Treasury Secretary Brady he would not serve as interim chairman; he had come to save the firm, not to oversee its dismemberment. His reputation would be shot either way, he thought, and the fallout fromresigningwould be less than the grief fromstayingon. The board understood and agreed. It was the only card that Buffett had to play with Brady. Meanwhile, the board decided to pursue two other courses simultaneously. Buffett turned to Marty Lipton. ¡°Do you know a bankruptcy lawyer?¡± he asked. Everyone sat frozen for a split second. Then Feuerstein and Lipton went off and began to set in motion the wheels of filingfor bankruptcy. If necessary, the firmwould fail in an orderly manner, rather than a rout. 
Four and a half hours remained to try to reverse the Treasury¡¯s decision before a press conference that Salomon had already called for two-thirty p.m. to announce that Buffett would officially become interim chairman. Less than seven hours remained until the Japanese markets would begin to open for the week¡¯s 
business, and London seven hours after that. When Tokyo opened, the landslide would begin.87 Lenders would start pullingtheir credits immediately. To plead for clemency had become immeasurably harder. They had not only to change the Treasury¡¯s mind but to convince it to reverse itself in public. 
John Macfarlane, Salomon¡¯s treasurer, came in wearinga warm-up suit, directly fromcompetingin a triathlon. He talked to the board about what the Treasury¡¯s action meant to the firm.88 Banks had already started notifyingSalomon they were pullingthe firm¡¯s commercial paper lines. Solly was careeningtoward what would almost certainly be the largest failure of a financial firmin history. If the government withdrew its endorsement of Salomon and the firm lost its funding, it would have to liquidate assets at fire-sale prices. That would be followed by severe consequences in the world markets, as some of Salomon¡¯s creditors and counterparties, themselves unpaid, also began to fail. It was all goingdown the tubes. Buffett feared the regulators were goingto regret their uncompromisingstance. 
¡°If I¡¯d been free to act and wanted to maximize my gain in the ensuing week, not only would I have shorted 
any Salomon security that I could have in Tokyo that afternoon and in London late that night, but I would have also shorted equities everywhere. 
¡°We were going to find a judge someplace in Manhattan, walk in on him while he¡¯s watching baseball probably and eating popcorn at two in the afternoon, and tell him, we¡¯re handing you the keys. You¡¯re running the place now. By the way, what do you know about Japanese law, because we owe ten or twelve billion dollars in Japan? We owe ten or twelve billion in Europe. London will open at two in the morning. And as of this very moment, you¡¯re running the place.¡± 
Corrigan was hard to reach. Askingto speak directly to Treasury Secretary Nick Brady, Buffett found that he was not available either. 
Brady was the patrician former CEO of brokerage firm Dillon, Read & Co., and MalcolmChace Jr.¡¯s nephew, thus a member of the family that had sold Berkshire Fine Spinningto Hathaway Manufacturing. It was he who had written his college thesis on Berkshire, which depressed himso much that he had decided to sellhis stock. Through Malcolm Chace, Buffett had once gone to visit Brady at Dillon, Read. The two weren¡¯t close friends, but they had a ¡°fine feelingabout each other,¡± Buffett says. There was no particular reason, however, why the blue-blooded Brady, who hailed fromthe old-line firmDillon, Read, would have a fine feelingabout a social parvenu like John Gutfreund¡ªor a fine feelingabout an arrogant upstart firm like Salomon. 
Nonetheless, Brady called Buffett back. He expressed empathy but made it clear that reversingthe decision was an enormous problem. 
¡°They were going to look silly. And I felt they looked silly too, but they would look a whole lot sillier a few 
89 
days later when financial carnage was spread from this act.¡± 
Brady said he thought Buffett was overreactingbut agreed to callback again. He needed to consult with SEC Chairman Breeden, with Corrigan, and with Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan. 
Buffett sat and waited for Brady¡¯s call. He couldn¡¯t call Brady. He didn¡¯t know that Brady was sittingon Ogden Phipps¡¯s porch in Saratoga Springs, at the horse races. It was Brady¡¯s prerogative to call him¡ªor not. 
The phone systemon the conference floor didn¡¯t ringon Sundays. To keep from missingan incomingcall, someone had to stare continually at the phone to see whether a little green light lit up. For a while, Buffett stared at the phone, ¡°as depressed as I have ever been.¡± Finally, someone enlisted a hastily-called-in secretary to stare at the light. 
Behind the scenes, the regulators were talking. Corrigan had contacted Paul Volcker, former chairman of the FederalReserve Board and now chairman at a prestigious investment-bankingfirm. Volcker, like Breeden, was incensed at Salomon. None of the regulators believed that Buffett would walk; they felt he had too much money and reputation at stake. They knew the decision would have an adverse impact on Salomon and they thought that was appropriate. They didn¡¯t believe that Salomon would fail even if the Treasury pulled its imprimatur. The markets had so much confidence in Buffett that they assumed that simply by standingover Salomon holdinghis umbrella, he could save the firm. But they could not be certain of that. They considered whether the financial markets could survive a meltdown of one of its largest firms. The Federal Reserve would have to pump huge sums of money into the market to keep other banks afloat after Salomon failed to pay them. No rescue on this order of magnitude had ever been attempted. They were wellaware of the likely second-order effects. The global financialmarket could potentially collapse. Did they think the Federal Reserve could handle it? ¡°I was always an optimist,¡± Corrigan says. ¡°I always said to myself, ¡®You do what 
you have to do.¡¯¡±90 
Hours passed while Buffett waited for the phone to ring. Alan Greenspan called once, saying, no matter what, he wanted Buffett to stay. ¡°It was a plea to just sort of stand there at the bridge regardless of what happened.¡± 
Little by little, the tradingfloor began to fill with people, as if summoned by some invisible jungle drum. They lit their cigarettes and their cigars, sat around The Room, and waited. The arbs huddled, mourning Meriwether. Nobody knew what was goingon upstairs. Slowly, the clock ticked toward the hour when tradingwould begin in Tokyo, soundingthe firm¡¯s death knell. 
Upstairs, the board milled around uselessly, waitingwhile the regulators talked. Brady called Buffett back periodically but had nothingmeaningfulto say. Severaltimes Buffett repeated his case in the gravelly voice that always betrayed him when under stress. He told Brady that Salomon¡¯s attorneys were workingon a bankruptcy filing. He invoked Salomon¡¯s importance to the markets. He told Brady of the domino effect that the firm¡¯s failure could cause. 
¡°I said to Nick, I¡¯d talked to Jerry Corrigan. This thing was going to implode. Tokyo was going to open, and we weren¡¯t going to buy back our paper. It was over. Hour after hour, from ten o¡¯clock, I kept telling the consequences of all these things, and it didn¡¯t mean anything to him.¡± 
Brady went back to his fellow regulators and talked. Most of them felt that this was special pleading. Buffett was askingfor some kind of gold-star treatment for Salomon, and the firmdid not deserve it.91 
Salomon¡¯s board couldn¡¯t understand why Buffett¡¯s arguments weren¡¯t gettingthrough to the regulators. They ran the financial markets. Why wasn¡¯t it obvious to them that Salomon was goingdown? 
As the afternoon wore on, Buffett¡¯s logic failed, on this most criticaloccasion, to win over a key ally. 
He had only one choice left. Of all avenues open to him, of all resources on which he could draw, this one was the most precious, the huge pool of crystal essence that he was most reluctant to tap. Buffett would undertake almost any itemfrom his short list of most-loathed tasks¡ªget into an angry, criticalconfrontation; fire someone; cut off a longfriendship carefully cultivated; eat Japanese food; give away a vast sumof money; almost anything¡ªthan make a withdrawalfromthe Bank of Reputation. For all these many decades, he had brooded over, nurtured, cultivated, and stored that priceless commodity in its vault. Never had he drawn down so much as a drop on behalf of himself or anyone else, except when the odds hugely favored gettingback even more in return. 
Now the debacle at Salomon had exposed himutterly, puttingthe entirety at stake. And the only remaining hope was to ask, to literally begas a personal favor, drawn purely on his own credibility, for help. 
He would be puttinghimself eternally in Brady¡¯s debt. He was stakinghis entire reputation¡ªthe reputation that takes a lifetime to build and five minutes to lose¡ªon whatever happened afterward.92 He had to summon more courage than he knew he had. 
Buffett¡¯s voice cracked. ¡°Nick,¡± he said, anguished, ¡°this is the most important day of my life.¡± 
Brady had his own problems to deal with. He didn¡¯t think Buffett¡¯s arguments were any good. But he heard the feelings behind the words. He could hear in Buffett¡¯s voice that the man thought Salomon had thrown him over Niagara Falls in a barrel. 
¡°Don¡¯t worry, Warren,¡± Brady finally said. ¡°We¡¯llget through this.¡± He hungup the phone and went off to consult. 
But as the clock crawled toward two-thirty p.m., when the press conference was scheduled to begin, Brady had not called back. 
Buffett decided to play the one card he could use with Corrigan. He picked up a phone. ¡°Jerry,¡± he said, ¡°I haven¡¯t taken the job yet as interimchairman. We did not hold our meetingthis morningbecause of what the Treasury did. So I am not the chairman of Salomon now. I could become the chairman in thirty seconds, but I am not goingto spend the rest of my life shepherdingthe greatest financialdisaster in history. I¡¯mgoingto get sued either way by fifty people, but I don¡¯t want to spend my life tryingto mop up a total disaster on Wall Street. However, I don¡¯t mind spendingsome of my life tryingto save this damned place.¡± 
Charlie Munger was tellinghimnot to do it under any circumstances. ¡°Forget it,¡± he said. ¡°Some sort of surprise could happen the first day and you won¡¯t be able to extricate yourself and will spend the next twenty years of your life in court.¡± 
Corrigan took Buffett¡¯s threat to leave more seriously than the other regulators had, however. ¡°I¡¯llcallyou back,¡± he said. 
Buffett sat and waited, envisioninghis next move. He pictured himself gettingon an elevator, ridingdown six floors, walkingonto the stage at the press conference all alone, and openingwith the words ¡°We¡¯ve just declared bankruptcy.¡± 
Downstairs, in the August heat, more than a hundred reporters and photographers who had been pulled away unexpectedly from their baseball games and swimmingpools and family picnics swarmed into Salomon¡¯s auditoriumfor the press conference. The only thingthey had to fill their interrupted Sunday afternoon was the sight of Salomon¡¯s blood-drenched gladiators, gutted before their eyes on the sand of the Colosseum. 
¡°This crowd was sitting there expecting big news. And I was thinking about the old story about the reporter sent to file a story on a wedding, and he went back and told the editor, ¡®Well, there wasn¡¯t any story, because the groom didn¡¯t show up.¡¯ That was the mood those reporters were in.¡± 
As the minutes passed, a white and shaken Meriwether arrived. He had gone, as instructed, to see Dick Breeden, chairman of the SEC, askingfor help. Meriwether reported that Breeden had turned themdown flat. Twice in the conversation, Breeden had said Salomon was ¡°rotten to the core.¡± 
¡°Rotten to the core,¡± Meriwether repeated in shock, ¡°rotten to the core.¡± Allof themsuddenly realized that the Treasury¡¯s move had been a joint decision amongthe Federal Reserve, the Treasury, and the SEC, their condemnation a sudden reversal of the world¡¯s opinion of Salomon, a dramatic payback for years of pride and arrogance. 
The hour of the press conference came and went, while the reporters fidgeted and grew more irritable downstairs. Brady did not call. The phone sat unblinking. 
Finally, Jerome Powell, assistant secretary of the Treasury, called. The Treasury would not fully reverse itself, he said. Salomon could not bid in Treasury auctions for customers. Yet it would compromise on Salomon¡¯s most important point: The firmcould bid for its own accounts. 
¡°Willthat do?¡± Powellasked. 
¡°I think it will,¡± Buffett said. 
He loped back into the boardroomand told them. The room erupted with relief and joy. As rapidly as he could talk, Buffett oversaw the election of himself as interimchairman and Deryck Maughan as director and operatinghead of Salomon Brothers. At about a quarter to three, he walked outside and had somebody call downstairs to the tradingfloor. 
Maughan was sittingwith the traders, watchingthe clock. At a nearby desk, John Macfarlane¡¯s teamwas workingon a contingency plan to dump the firm¡¯s assets in Japan as fast as they could work the phones. Somebody called fromupstairs and told Maughan to meet Buffett at the elevator bank for a talk. Maughan was uncertain whether he was about to be made the boss¡ªor told he had a new one. He walked over to the elevator. The door opened, and he saw Buffett standinginside. ¡°You¡¯ve been tagged,¡± Buffett said, and motioned for Maughan to get in. Instead of ridingback up to the boardroom, they descended two more floors 
into the jaws of the waitingpress.93 
¡°The press was unruly. They were like animals. Every question was a trick question. It was a big story, and 
they wouldn¡¯t have minded if it had gotten bigger. It was their chance to shine. The TV people were particularly obnoxious. They wanted us to hurry up for the five o¡¯clock news, or the six o¡¯ clock news, and I wouldn¡¯t cooperate with them. And I could just feel it. I could just tell it. I had to fall on my face. I had to be found a phony. They wanted it to develop that way. There were all kinds of book contracts floating around that room, but only if somehow Salomon failed.¡± 
Sittingon the dais, Buffett crossed his arms; he looked weary. Maughan, his light brown hair brushed into a neat pouf, stared wide-eyed at the crowd like the proverbial deer caught in the headlights. Both were clad in navy suits, white shirts, and funereal ties. ¡°I had no preparation, zero,¡± Maughan says. ¡°¡®You¡¯re tagged¡¯ was my complete set of instructions.¡± He did not know a single detail that had transpired upstairs. They began. 
What happened? the reporters wanted to know. 
Buffett, suit jacket bunched up around his ears, explained: ¡°The failure to report is, in my view, inexplicable and inexcusable. I have seen similar dumb things happen in other operations that I am more intimately involved in but not with such consequences.¡± 
Had the culture contributed to the scandal? ¡°I don¡¯t think the same thingwould have happened in a monastery,¡± Buffett said. 
Somebody asked himwhat he would get paid. ¡°I¡¯m goingto do this for a dollar,¡± he said. The board, sittingin the audience, was dumbfounded. This was the first they had heard of it. 
The reporters declined to be soothed. Were records altered? Who altered them? Was there a cover-up? Who participated in the cover-up? 
Yes, some records had been altered. There had been somethingresemblinga cover-up. At that, the pack grew excited, throwingquestions hard and fast. Here, perhaps, was the stumblingprey they were hunting, close to capture, ready to be torn apart by their sharp teeth. Alas, the trail grew cold when the cover-up included no one significant beyond those who had already been sacked. 
Someone came out to the stage and told Buffett he had a phone callfromthe Treasury. He hurried fromthe dais, leavingMaughan, astonished, twistingin the wind alone. Nevertheless, Maughan managed to answer some questions in the perfectly articulated monotones of a BBC announcer narratinga documentary about the matinghabits of the wildebeest. 
Buffett returned with a press release fromthe Treasury Department, announcingthat Salomon had part of its credibility back. The journalists were not mollified. They pressed on. 
Did the ex-executives really resign or had they left through arm-twisting? Buffett assured themrepeatedly that Gutfreund, Strauss, and Meriwether had resigned voluntarily. Were the ex-executives gettingspecial compensation? Was Salomon payingtheir legal fees?How much money did illegal actions earn the firm? 
After well over an hour, one of the directors who was sittingnext to Munger nudged himand said, ¡°Isn¡¯t Warren ever goingto end this thing?¡± 
¡°Maybe he doesn¡¯t really want to,¡± Munger said. ¡°Warren knows what he¡¯s doing.¡±94 
How much did the phony trades cost the government? How many customers had told Salomon they wouldn¡¯t do business with the firm? What severance would be paid to the ex-executives? Why didn¡¯t Wachtell, Lipton take the situation more seriously?What were the details of the strange fraudulent trade the investigators had discovered, the one referred to in the press release as the ¡°billion-dollar practicaljoke¡±? 
¡°It is not a joke. I suppose if you had to characterize it in some way¡ª¡± began Buffett. 
¡°Those were your words in the release,¡± retorted the reporter, sharply. 
¡°Those were not my words. It was in the release. My name is not on the bottomof the release. You can characterize it as a bizarre incident. My definition of a practicaljoke is one you can laugh at after hearingit. I don¡¯t see it as the least bit funny.¡± 
The reporters, most of whomhad read Liar¡¯s Poker, waited for an explanation. Salomon, they knew, was famous for its ¡°goofs.¡± Traders were constantly stealingthe clothes out of each other¡¯s suitcases and replacingthemwith wet paper towels or lacy pink panties. The most famous goof at Salomon concerned the game of liar¡¯s poker itself, which Gutfreund once allegedly offered to play Meriwether for a million dollars on a single bet, no tears. Meriwether supposedly countered with ten million, causingGutfreund to stand down. While even this story was thought to be a sort of goof, containingapocryphal elements, until now ten million dollars was the outside limit that anyone had ever imagined for a Salomon goof. 
But for a billion dollars, you could fillNew York Harbor with rubber chickens as high as the Statue of Liberty¡¯s thighs. What, then, could have been the ¡°billion-dollar practical joke¡±? 
¡°Apparently a woman was leavingthe department after many, many years¡ªretiring, I guess,¡± Buffett said. ¡°An order was worked out with somebody, to give her a very large order. A billion dollars. A billion-dollar order on a new offeringof thirty-year Treasury bonds. Then¡ªand this gets vague¡ªI guess the plan was to maybe convince her somehow that the order was not submitted and have the client question the fact that it was not submitted. It was to try to scare the hell out of her or something. I don¡¯t know. 
¡°The bid actually did get submitted.¡± 
A hundred fifty reporters sat in silence. Salomon had bought a billion dollars¡¯ worth of bonds in a practical joke gone wrong. Buffett was not kiddingthat the culture of Salomon was goingto have to change. 
¡°It should have been crossed out. My guess is that whoever did it did intend to cross it out. It has to be the dumbest joke ever attempted to be perpetrated.¡± 
No one said a word. 
Maughan: ¡°Any more questions?¡± 
The hot air had been let out of the room. After this bit of truth-telling, what could anyone ask? Only a few more mild questions followed. 
The press conference ended. Buffett looked at his watch as they walked off the stage. ¡°I¡¯ve got to get back to Omaha,¡± he said. 
¡°Warren, what¡¯s happeninghere?¡± asked Maughan. He had never spoken to any of the angry government officials, had never attended a Salomon board meeting, and the ship was sinking. ¡°Do you have any views on who should form the management? Is there any direction you want to give me as a strategy?¡± 
¡°If you have to ask me questions like that, I picked the wrongguy,¡± Buffett said. He walked away without another word, leavinghis $700 million and his reputation in the hands of a man he had met thirty hours 
before.95 
¡°And then, when it was over, they were swinging cameras in our faces and banging us. It was a mob scene. I went out and got in a cab. And one or two reporters noticed that, which they felt was the new Salomon. Instead of a string of black cars waiting for us out there.¡± 
On Monday morning, Maughan went out to The Roomto shore up the staff¡¯s devastated morale. He took off his jacket and rolled up his sleeves. The firm, he said, had faced three tests. The first was character. By firing Mozer and his number two, Thomas Murphy, and acceptingthe others¡¯ resignations, the firmhad passed that test. 
The second was confidence. By regainingat least partially the Treasury Department¡¯s good graces, Salomon had passed that test. 
The third was will. ¡°This is not the same firm,¡± said Maughan, ¡°but we must keep aspects of the old culture while we bringin a new one.¡±96 
Some of the traders stirred uneasily. What did that mean, a new culture? 
But at least Salomon had gotten one lucky break. Overnight, news had flashed over the wire that Soviet Premier MikhailGorbachev had been ousted in a coup. The stock market immediately dropped 107 points. Business coverage, which had been drillingon Salomon all day Friday, suddenly shifted focus as the world turned its attention toward Gorbachev, held under house arrest by eight of his own military and state officials. With tanks rollinginto Moscow and Russians demonstratingin Parliament and protestingin Leningrad, customers got on the phones, and the bond desk did a brisk business that morning. 
¡°There are lots of ways of gettingoff the front page,¡± said a salesman, ¡°but sendingin the Red Army has got to be the most creative.¡±97 
49 
TheAngryGods 
New York City . 1991¨C1994 
The regulators¡¯ confidence that Salomon could survive on Buffett¡¯s reputation alone was almost certainly misplaced. Salomon barely survived even after the Treasury partially reversed itself. Some of its biggest customers simply felt revulsion toward the firm. First the huge and influential California Public Employees¡¯ Retirement System, then the World Bank washed their hands of Salomon. Buffett fellasleep each night with visions of the hundreds of billions of dollars of Salomon debt that would fall due over the next few weeks staggeringthrough his dreams like sickly sheep. He had a sense that, for once, matters were simply not under his control. ¡°Events could do me in, and I couldn¡¯t get off the train. I didn¡¯t know where the train was going 
to go. 
¡°I couldn¡¯t do anything about what the troops were going to do every day. I couldn¡¯t do anything about discovering things that I didn¡¯t know existed when I went in. I couldn¡¯t do anything about what Jerry Corrigan felt about everything that had taken place, or what the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York or the Antitrust Division of the Justice Department would do. I knew it was terribly important that it get worked out right, and I knew that was something that¡ªno matter how hard I worked¡ªI had no control over. I could stay up all night and think about things, but that wasn¡¯t necessarily going to guarantee a good outcome. And it made a lot of difference to a lot of people. It would change my whole future life.¡± 
Buffett had to return to New York the followingweek. Senator DanielPatrick Moynihan wanted to see him about Salomon, and there were many other matters that required his presence. He and Munger took Moynihan up to a private diningroomon Salomon¡¯s forty-seventh floor, where the chef prepared a proper WallStreet meal for Moynihan, includingthe correct wines. Moynihan looked at Buffett and Munger, who had ordered sandwiches, in disgust. The aftermath of Hurricane Bob was stillpoundingthe East Coast. Suddenly, cascades of rain began pouringin through a leak in the windows. ¡°The gods are angry with 
Salomon,¡± Buffett remarked.1 
Later that week, he and Munger went down to Washington to see BillMcLucas and Dick Breeden at the SEC. They came into the office lookinglike ¡°two guys you would see at the Greyhound bus station,¡± accordingto McLucas. Then they started talkingand layingout their plan to save Salomon; McLucas then understood, he says, why one person he was talkingto was considered a legend and the other could finish the 
legend¡¯s sentences.2 
Afterward, Buffett visited the Treasury Department himself to see Nick Brady, who told himthat he had 
thought Buffett was bluffing. ¡°Warren,¡± he said, ¡°I knew you were goingto take the job no matter what we did.¡±3 It was only the sincerity of Buffett¡¯s plea that had touched him. Wind up the job as fast as you can, Brady said, and get out of there. 
Buffett was determined that whatever was wrongat Salomon be found, confessed, and fixed right away. ¡°Get it right, get it fast, get it out,¡± he said. When he said fast, he meant fast; he talked to his new secretary, who had worked for Gutfreund and knew everybody well. Paula, he suggested, why don¡¯t you start talkingto the 
board members and ask themquestions about what they knew and when.4 Bob Denham, the cautious, thorough Munger, Tolles lawyer who had been airlifted in from Los Angeles to head the investigation, got wind of this plan and put a stop to it. The investigatingwould be done by lawyers. 
The first thingDenham did was interview Don Feuerstein. Afterward, Feuerstein was fired summarily. He 
asked to talk to Buffett, who told himonly ¡°You could have done more.¡± Since Buffett had known that from the beginning, Feuerstein couldn¡¯t understand the about-face.5 Buffett, however, had gradually settled on the conclusion that in his loyalty to Gutfreund, Feuerstein had put his boss¡¯s interests ahead of Salomon¡¯s. Now Denham got the job of general counsel. As Buffett began to assume control, he discovered how much the board had been subjected to what he called adroit ¡°information rationing¡± by Salomon¡¯s management. He and Munger now learned that when Mozer had first admitted in April to submittingan unauthorized bid, the firm had also discovered that he had tried to cover it up, and had misled the customer whose name he had used by claimingtheir falsely submitted order for Treasury bonds was a clerical error. 
¡°It was as if Mozer had lit a match. And Mr. Gutfreund could, on April twenty-ninth, have blown out that match that Mozer lit, and instead he did nothing about it. 
¡°And it turned out that Mozer had certain characteristics of a pyromaniac and tended to light matches more often than we thought. Mr. Gutfreund¡¯s responsibility was to do something about that when he saw it. He at first did nothing and then later started, perhaps in panic, pouring gasoline on it. 
¡°The end result was that the shareholders of Salomon would be cost hundreds of millions of dollars, and eight thousand employees and their families would fear for their jobs. 
¡°I think it was the simplest thing in the world to do. Here you have a fellow, Paul Mozer, who admits submitting false bids to the most important client and regulator in the world, the U.S. government. And then you know he¡¯s tried to cover it up by dragging in a customer and trying to get that customer to cooperate with a cover-up so that the government won¡¯t find out. 
¡°None of that was Mr. Gutfreund¡¯s fault at all. 
¡°But when you hear about an action like that, it is very obvious in ten seconds that you pick up the phone and say, Mozer, you¡¯re fired. Then you go right over to Jerry Corrigan and say, Jerry, you know, this is the problem of running a place with eight thousand employees. This guy went off the reservation, and I fired 
6
him as soon as I heard about it. What do you want me to do next?¡± 
Of course, it wouldn¡¯t be obvious in ten seconds to many people. They would be thinkingabout allsorts of other things. Mozer was so valuable to the firm; he had turned around the foreign-exchange department; firinghimwould be unpleasant; might it be possible to rehabilitate him; it was goingto be painful to confess to the regulators; their reaction might be scorching; and no less than a major law firmhad said that reporting it wasn¡¯t technically required. Buffett skipped all that. He thought in probabilities; he extrapolated right away to whether a catastrophic outcome was possible¡ªthen worked out very fast what it would take to get to the lowest probability of catastrophe. Here, it was firingMozer and confessingright away. Buffett also thought in black-and-white terms about honesty; he had no tolerance for liars and cheaters. So that was that. 
Now he found that the situation unfortunately involved more lyingand cheatingthan he had previously been told. The investigators reported to him that Feuerstein had said at the time that Mozer¡¯s actions were ¡°criminalin nature¡±¡ªa startlingcontrast to the firm¡¯s agreeable response to later legal advice that no disclosure was required. And nobody had ever told the firm¡¯s compliance department¡ªwhich was charged with overseeingregulatory conduct¡ªof Mozer¡¯s behavior. True, Salomon had an attitude toward compliance that was best described as loose. There would later even be an argument over who should be considered a 
member of the compliance committee.7 Nevertheless, the head of compliance had been disturbed when he found out that he was out of the loop and was angry that such procedures as did exist had been ignored. 
Buffett and Munger also learned about the time in early June when Gutfreund had met with Treasury Undersecretary Bob Glauber to defend the firmagainst accusations that it had engineered the May squeeze. They found out that Salomon¡¯s management had considered whether to disclose the February false bid to Glauber immediately after that meeting, and had decided that the time was not right. Glauber later said he felt that he was played for a sucker because Gutfreund had not told him. Nothinghad inflamed relations with the government and compromised Salomon¡¯s credibility more than this meetingwith Glauber. It smacked of an outright cover-up. 
The second press release that the board had approved, sayingthat the delay occurred thanks to ¡°a lack of sufficient attention to the matter,¡± had made the board look like part of the cover-up, given that Gutfreund met with Glauber and clearly had the opportunity to tell him. But of course the board itself had been ignorant of the Glauber meeting. 
Buffett was angry that he had known nothingof these matters duringthe entire weekend of the crisis when he had been negotiatingwith the government. Everybody whose number one job was to protect the firm¡¯s franchise had failed to do so and in fact had acted in a way that actually jeopardized it. Yet even with allof this to outrage him, Buffett stilldid not know about one last thing:the ¡°cocked gun¡± Sternlight letter that had been sent and ignored. 
A few days later, the board met, and Buffett explained his thinkingbased on what he had learned. The board canceled the former executives¡¯ magazine subscriptions. It took away their secretaries and got rid of chauffeurs and limousines. It cut off their long-distance phone service and messenger services. They were barred from enteringSalomon¡¯s offices. It tried to canceltheir health insurance. Wachtell, Lipton offered to step aside as counsel. Initially, Buffett demurred, but then he agreed. The universalopinion was that Marty 

Lipton¡¯s legaladvice had not protected Salomon¡¯s reputation.8 
Denham was now helpingto oversee Salomon day to day. To augment the legal teamfor outside matters, 
Buffett brought in Ron Olson, the most recent name partner of Munger, Tolles & Olson, who had worked on the Buffalo Evening News case and now represented Berkshire Hathaway.9 MTO had finely tuned radar for how to get the best results for the client fromthe legal system¡ªand a long-standingknowledge of how Buffett thought. 
Buffett told Olson that he wanted to pursue a novel strategy.10 Already staggeringunder the near-mortal blow to its reputation, Salomon could not, in his view, survive a criminalindictment.11 It was like a late-stage cancer patient. To save it, Buffett felt, radical techniques must be applied, even if it left the patient in a weakened state. The therapy he thought was Salomon¡¯s best hope of avoidinga criminal indictment was to show extreme contrition. He would surgically digout every last cellof the cancer and, with scorching radiation, cleanse the firmand burn out any trace of a recurrence. 
On Olson¡¯s first day on the job, he was sent to see Otto Obermaier, the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York, who would make the decision whether to criminally indict Salomon. 
¡°The argument we made to Otto Obermaier was that we would set an example. This was going to be an example of the most extraordinary cooperation that a target has ever given, and the outcome would have an effect on the behavior of future defendants and how the justice system worked.¡± 
Olson had to make an extraordinary pledge. On the spot, he waived Salomon¡¯s attorney-client privilege, 
which shielded communications between the firmand its lawyers from prosecutors. He said that whatever MTO found in its investigation, Obermaier would know it as soon as MTO knew it.12 In plain English, this meant that MTO, on behalf of Salomon, had volunteered to act as an armof the government. 
Obermaier was ¡°incredulous,¡± Olson says. ¡°He thought we were some Midwest aw-shucks group, come to sellhima bill of goods.¡±13 He could not believe that any company would make an offer voluntarily that was so against its own best interest. After all, Salomon was in no imminent danger of indictment. It would have months to prove its case. Clearly, this was more than a lip-service promise to ¡°reform.¡± 
Then Olson flew to Washington and told Breeden at the SEC¡ªwho was ¡°equally skeptical¡±¡ªthe same thing.14 
Initially, it was not clear what waivingthe privilege meant. Frank Barron, an attorney fromCravath, Swaine & Moore, one of Salomon¡¯s other law firms, was put in charge of negotiatingwhat this extraordinary gift would mean to the Justice Department. Negotiatingterms was difficult, since the commitment had already been made. Salomon had little leverage. The Justice Department pressed hard for a broad interpretation of 
the commitment and largely got its way. 15 The agreement put the firmin a peculiar and paradoxical situation of prosecutingits own employees. The more evidence that MTO found that employees were guilty, the more proof it could show that Salomon had cooperated and cleansed itself. The employees, meanwhile, must 
cooperate or be fired, their statements to investigators unprotected by the normalattorney-client privilege.16 
Asked to help Buffett prepare for upcomingcongressional testimony, Gutfreund and his lawyer met with Olson a few days later. Gutfreund had volunteered to cooperate, but when his lawyers tried to lay down ground rules for the conversation, Olson refused to accept them. In the end, Gutfreund and his lawyers 
walked out.17 Olson reported back to Buffett that he had been ¡°stonewalled.¡±18 
Everythingat Salomon was turned topsy-turvy as the new culture of openness went into effect. A couple of days after meetingwith Obermaier, Olson and Buffett walked into a roomat 7 World Trade Center for a meeting. Someone, actingon autopilot, had hired a new public-relations firm. Around a large square table, two dozen people sat waitingfor them. Some worked for Salomon, but most were public-relations people and lobbyists who were billingby the hour. Buffett listened for fifteen minutes as they described how they wanted to manage the crisis. Then he stood up. ¡°I¡¯msorry, but I¡¯ve got to excuse myself,¡± he said. He leaned 
over, whispered in Olson¡¯s ear, ¡°Tell them they won¡¯t be needed,¡± and walked out of the room. 19 
¡°It isn¡¯t that we¡¯re misunderstood, for Christ¡¯s sake,¡± said Buffett afterward. ¡°We don¡¯t have a public-relations problem. We have a problem with what we did.¡± 
On his birthday, August 30, Buffett went down to Washington. He had decided to prepare for upcoming congressionaltestimony and had arranged with Steve Bell, who ran Salomon¡¯s Washington office, to gather a group to try to anticipate what questions the Congressmen might ask him. 
He checked in to the Embassy Suites hotel next to GEICO¡¯s offices. As the emergency continued, he holed up in his room for two days. He encountered a telephone operator at the hotel, Carolyn Smith, who became his de facto secretary and Daisy Mae, manningthe phones and sendingcookies upstairs for himto eat for dinner. They never met in person, but when Nick Brady from the Treasury Department called, she got word 
to Buffett even when he was tied up on the single line in his room. 20 
After a couple of days, Buffett found time to go over to Salomon¡¯s fancy offices, where Bell had gathered people to brainstorm. Bell had called New York in advance, askingwhat to feed Buffett. ¡°Something 
simple,¡± he was told. ¡°Feed himhamburgers.¡± Bellwas one of many people over the decades who thought this advice surely could not be literal. When lunchtime arrived, the chef sent out a plainly prepared fish course. Buffett didn¡¯t touch it. Then came a pretty salad with a nice imported cheese. Buffett ignored it. Veal or somethingsimilar arrived as the third course. Buffett took a bite or two and pushed the food around on his plate. ¡°Mr. Buffett,¡± Bell said, lookingworried, ¡°I¡¯ve noticed you haven¡¯t been eatingyour food. What¡¯s wrong? Is there somethingelse we can get for you?¡± 
¡°I follow a very simple rule when it comes to food,¡± said Buffett. ¡°If a three-year-old doesn¡¯t eat it, I don¡¯t eat it.¡±21 
The followingday, Buffett, Deryck Maughan, and Bob Denham went to the Rayburn House Office Building to testify before Congress. Katharine Grahamshowed up to lend moral support, sittingwith Maughan and Denham in the first row. Buffett made a strikingimpression, seated alone at the subcommittee table and 
pledgingextraordinary cooperation with Congress and the regulators.22 ¡°I want to find out exactly what happened in the past so that this stain is borne by the guilty few,¡± he said, ¡°and removed from the innocent.¡± 
The Congressmen excoriated Salomon, postured as saviors of investors, and demanded a totalbreak with the 
past. Nonetheless, they appeared slightly awed by Buffett. When he spoke, ¡°The Red Sea parted, and the Oracle appeared,¡± says Maughan.23 Buffett laid the problems on WallStreet. ¡°Huge markets attract people who measure themselves by money,¡± he said. ¡°If someone goes through life and measures themselves solely by how much they have, or how much money they earned last year, sooner or later they¡¯re going to end up in trouble.¡± Salomon, he said, was goingto have different priorities from now on. 
¡°Lose money for the firm, and I will be understanding. Lose a shred of reputation for the firm, and I will be ruthless.¡± 
Those words have since been parsed and dissected in classrooms and case studies as the model of corporate nobility. Buffett¡¯s unflinchingdisplay of principle summed up much about the man. In this statement, many of his personal proclivities¡ªrectitude, the urge to preach, his love of crisp, simple rules of behavior¡ªhad merged. Openness, integrity, extreme honesty, all the things that he meant to stand for: Buffett meant for Salomon to stand for themtoo. If Berkshire Hathaway was his editorial page, Salomon would be the church of finance. 
Buffett headed back to 7 World Trade Center and put out a one-page letter to employees, insistingthey report all legal violations and moralfailures to him. He exempted petty moral failures like minor expense-account abuses, but, ¡°when in doubt, call me,¡± he told them. He put his home phone number on the letter. 
We are goingto do ¡°first-class business in a first-class way,¡± he wrote.24 
He wanted to run things by what he called the ¡°front-page test.¡± Don¡¯t just obey the rules, he said. 
I want employees to ask themselves whether they are willingto have any contemplated act appear the next day on the front page of their local paper, to be read by their spouses, children, and friends, with the reportingdone by an informed and criticalreporter.25 
Employees at the time were frantically tryingto keep from losingthe firm. They called customers and begged them not to desert Salomon and ditched assets as fast as they could sell thembecause the debt that financed them was disappearing. John Macfarlane and the repo desk, which sold and bought batches of bonds, managed an intricate runoff of assets while negotiatingtensely with numerous lenders, some of whomwere 
refusingto advance money to the firm.26 
The balance sheet dwindled at the rate of about a billion dollars a day. Macfarlane and the traders met with lenders several times to make sure they were informed, and concentrated on stabilizingSalomon¡¯s balance sheet and customer relationships, gradually raisingthe firm¡¯s interest allocation charge and lettingeconomics do the rest.27 They paid off all the firm¡¯s commercialpaper and restructured the debt toward medium-term notes and longer-termcapital. Usingfutures markets and swaps (derivative trades), the firm¡¯s traders tiptoed through the market to disguise the giant fire sale they were puttingon. If other brokers recognized the pattern 
of their sales, it could set off a raid.28 
Under threat of indictment, it was far from certain that Salomon would survive. The employees understood the message of Buffett¡¯s letter. Absolutely nothingelse could go wrongin this atmosphere, with regulators and Congress in fullcry. ¡°I want every employee to be his or her own compliance officer,¡± Buffett said. This meant that to save the firm, they had to spy on each other. Meanwhile, everyone knew that MTO was crawlingthrough the government desk like a minesweeper, lookingfor anythingthat could be wrong. As the customers fled, the trades shrank, and the fear spread, the firm¡¯s long-standingculture of swashbuckling risk-takingbegan to fade. 
Within days, Buffett was called back, this time to testify before the Senate. Corrigan, Breeden, and the federalprosecutors remained disgusted with Salomon. As he waited to be called, seated a couple of rows behind Corrigan in the Senate chamber, Buffett heard Senator Chris Dodd question Corrigan about whether 
the FederalReserve had been asleep at the switch.29 Corrigan said no, and that the Sternlight letter delivered on August 13 had been designed to produce a change in management but had been ignored¡ªwhich, Buffett saw, he interpreted as Salomon spittingin his face. 
Buffett sat figuratively scratchinghis head. He knew there was some kind of major problemhere, but he didn¡¯t know what Corrigan was talkingabout.30 
When it came time for himto testify, he said, ¡°The nation has a right to expect its rules and laws to be obeyed, and Salomon did not live up to this obligation.¡± Congressmen complained about Salomon¡¯s excessive pay. How could one bond-arbitrage trader make $23 million? they asked. ¡°That disturbed me plenty,¡± Buffett replied. They wanted to know what bond arbitrage was, and whether it benefited the economy. Buffett explained, then said, ¡°If you asked me whether that compares to a good teacher in a public school, I would not want you to press me on it.¡± 
Why hadn¡¯t a board filled with smart people been more aware and alert?a Congressman demanded. Without 
betrayingthe fact that he was steaminginside about the Sternlight letter¡ªwhatever that might be¡ªBuffett said that management had withheld information.31 He acknowledged that Munger had been the only one smart enough to ask the right questions when the first phone call came. 
He was not about to defend Salomon as what it was: a great company with a wonderfulculture that had a single employee who did a terrible thing, overseen by a management who mishandled the situation disastrously. Defendingthe firmof Liar¡¯s Poker was not likely to win friends. No, Salomon was a financial Gomorrah that must be investigated and purged of its ticket-forging, bonus-pimping, pizza-tossingways. 
This bold, arrestingstance stopped a brewingwitch hunt in its tracks. The pitchforks went back into the barns. The employees went alongaccordingly. ¡°It was a brilliant strategy,¡± said Eric Rosenfeld. ¡°That was our marchingorder, and we marched.¡± 
When Buffett got back to Salomon, he went after the details of the Sternlight letter; ¡°he was livid,¡± according to board member Gedale Horowitz. ¡°It compounded the felony. He was so angry because he hadn¡¯t been told and the letter hadn¡¯t been responded to.¡± Other than the Glauber meeting, the Sternlight letter was the most serious act of ¡°information rationing.¡± Withholdingit from the board had put themin the position of makinga number of decisions in a state of ignorance about Corrigan¡¯s expectations. Buffett¡¯s and Munger¡¯s attitudes toward prior management hardened. Now the real import of Munger¡¯s term ¡°thumb-sucking¡± became absolutely clear. ¡°Thumb-sucking¡± meant ignoringthe obvious untilyour diaper was full. Over a couple of weeks, said Munger, ¡°We paid attention to our sovereign¡±¡ªmeaningthe Treasury and the Federal Reserve¡ª¡°and our views changed as our cognition improved.¡± As far as Gutfreund was concerned, ¡°we had 
no option of forgiveness,¡±32 Buffett said. 
Through these revelations, Buffett led Salomon with apparent equanimity and poise, while Maughan and a few employees dressed in hazmat suits made up the cleanup crew. But beneath his eggshell-smooth demeanor, he was roilingin turmoil. To keep himself from thinkingabout Salomon, he played an electronic game called Monty for hours at a time. He hated beingaway from Omaha. Gladys Kaiser noticed the lift in his step when he returned and the dragin his feet when he had to leave. She wanted to retire but stayed on 
temporarily because her boss was havingsuch a terrible year. 33 New York did not suit him any more than it had when he was youngand workingat Graham-Newman. He remained aloof, never appeared on the trading floor, and, as one senior manager noted, even a glimpse of him in the hallways at Salomon was ¡°a rare sighting.¡± Susie came out to visit fromSan Francisco. Kay Graham arrived to play bridge and keep him company. Before long, he had set up a regular game with CarolLoomis, George Gillespie, and Ace Greenberg, the CEO of Bear Stearns. Bridge helped him relax because, when he played bridge, he couldn¡¯t think about anythingelse. A couple of miles uptown, in his enormous Park Avenue apartment filled with a painstakingly assembled collection of art, his old friend Dan Cowin lay dyingof cancer. 
Buffett wasn¡¯t sleeping. When in New York, he would call home at twelve-thirty a.m., since he had the 
special dealto get the Wall Street Journal early in Omaha, and have tomorrow¡¯s news read to him over the phone.34 He listened on tenterhooks, fearingthat somethinghorrible would be published about Salomon. Often there was, but at least he knew it before the rest of the employees, some of whom were seeingeven less of their own homes than he was of Omaha. They were workingfourteen or more hours a day to hold the firm together in the face of repeated obstacles and humiliations. Salomon¡¯s stock and bond salesmen called clients knowingtheir main task was to convince them that the firmwas not goingunder. Investment-banking clients were cancelingpreviously committed deals as fast as they could run out the door. British Telecom threw Salomon out of the landmark dealthat Gutfreund had gone to London to save, a trip that had caused him to miss the phone call with Buffett in Reno that revealed the emergingscandal. Bankers tryingto sell other business faced an almost impossible task, as competitors used the firm¡¯s precarious status against it 
when Salomon vied against themin banking ¡°bake-offs.¡±35 
Other employees got field promotions of dauntingmagnitude. Maughan elevated one of the arbs, Eric Rosenfeld, to head trader, alongside BillMcIntosh, the head of sales. Rosenfeld, a former college professor who had never worked with a teamof more than five people, suddenly found himself managingsix hundred. Then the investigators threatened to fire some of his traders. And alongwith managingthe six hundred, 
Rosenfeld personally reviewed thousands of trades for the lawyers to reconstruct what had happened.36 
He did not want this promotion; he and the other arbs wanted J.M. back. Meriwether¡¯s office remained exactly as he had left it. The golf clubs, his ceremonial instruments of power, leaned in the corner. The cleaningcrew kept the shrine well-dusted. The arbs gathered to consult the oracles of trading. They prayed for J.M.¡¯s return. Salomon¡¯s stock continued to slump toward the low $20s. 
As the investigation ticked alongand the employees rowed like galley slaves, Buffett¡¯s mind could not help but wander toward his main preoccupations:Berkshire Hathaway and investing. He had just bought a shoe company, H.H. Brown Shoes, and turned to his secretary at Salomon, Paula Orlowski, sendingher to the library to delve into computer files in search of SEC documents on Morse Shoe, another footwear maker that 
had recently filed for bankruptcy.37 
Nevertheless, Salomon demanded most of his attention. Piled on top of other, earlier scandals¡ªIvan Boesky, Michael Milken at Drexel BurnhamLambert¡ªthe Salomon affair had fueled the perception that Wall Street was utterly corrupt. In the wake of Buffett¡¯s performance before Congress, a raft of other brokerage firms 
rushed to the confessional and followed suit.38 By now, Salomon¡¯s investigators had discovered that Mozer had bid more than thirty-five percent on eight separate occasions, submittingfalse customer bids or jacking up customer bids and takingthe extra bonds into Salomon¡¯s own account without informingthe clients whose names had been used. On four occasions he had managed to acquire more than three-quarters of all the debt 
issued.39 As the witch-hunt atmosphere heightened, Buffett upped the ante. At the next board meeting, he led a discussion. Why should Salomon be payingthe attorneys of John Gutfreund to stonewallus? was the thrust of his questioning.40 The directors voted, almost unanimously, to make two surprisingmoves. No severance pay, they said. And the firmcut off payment of legalfees for the former executives.41 
The drama now revolved around two things:the Federal Reserve¡¯s deliberations over whether to keep Salomon as a primary dealer, and the criminal case. The Federal Reserve lacked the expedient option of temporarily suspendingthe firm: ¡°It¡¯s like executingsomebody technically and then resuscitatingthem,¡± said FederalReserve Chairman Alan Greenspan. In October, the Fed was seriously consideringlettingSalomon 
fail. Keepingit around was a decision that might be ¡°jumped on by politicians right and left.¡±42 
The U.S. Attorney¡¯s prosecutors thought they had enough evidence to indict. The criminal law makes it very difficult to defend corporations against the acts of their employees. Gary Naftalis, Salomon¡¯s criminal lawyer, advised the firmthat ¡°Salomon plainly could be convicted¡± if it was indicted. For obvious reasons, everyone at the firmwas desperate to get the criminalmatter resolved. As longas it was hangingover the firm¡¯s head, Salomon operated under a death threat, and customers knew as much. But Naftalis was in no hurry. He reasoned that a quick decision would probably mean indictment, whereas more time would let himlobby and persuade that Salomon did not deserve indictment; more time would let Salomon demonstrate its 
extraordinary willingness to cooperate; more time made it less likely that the prosecutors would indict.43 
After some three months of work dedicated to reformingthe firm, Denham led Buffett, Olson, Naftalis, and Frank Barron to a secret location, chosen at U.S. Attorney Otto Obermaier¡¯s insistence, half a mile from the prosecutor¡¯s office at St. Andrew¡¯s Plaza near City Hall. It was a last-ditch attempt to persuade Obermaier 
and his lawyers not to indict.44 
A Teutonic old-schoolprosecutor with a love of the law and a deep respect for the history and traditions of the U.S. Attorney¡¯s office, Obermaier had been tryingto figure out what to do with the fiasco that had landed in his lap. He recognized its unique nature. ¡°This is no assault case on the New York subways,¡± he said. Indeed, he had been callingJerry Corrigan ¡°alarmingly often¡± to learn the ins and outs of the Treasury bond market:the difference between two-year notes and thirty-year bonds, the frequency of auctions, and how 
they were conducted.45 
Sittingin a little conference roomfacingObermaier, Buffett did most of the talking. He worked very hard to 
convey what he had said so many times, that if the firm were indicted, it could not survive. Obermaier made comparisons, however, to a case involvingChrysler, which had survived prosecution.46 The difference between a firmthat sold hard assets and a firmthat bought and sold nothingmore than promises on pieces of paper was initially not clear. Buffett tried to get past the image of onion-burger-tossingslobs inspired by Liar¡¯s Poker and invoked the innocent rank-and-file who would lose their jobs if Salomon went down. He promised that he would not sellhis Salomon stock anytime soon and that his people would continue to run the place. He conveyed the sweepingnature of the culturalchanges takingplace inside the firm. This made 
an impression on Obermaier, but he kept a poker face. He had many other factors to consider.47 The Salomon teamwent back across town with no idea whether they had succeeded or failed. 
By midwinter, Salomon¡¯s status as a primary dealer remained unresolved. The firmstilllacked the right to trade for clients, and the Treasury Department could undo the whole deal at any moment. Under threat of corporate criminalindictment, Buffett and Maughan labored to prove the firmworthy of saving. Buffett had 
run a full-page ad in the Wall Street Journal explainingthe firm¡¯s new standards.48 
¡°I said that we would have people to match our principles, rather than the reverse. But I found out that wasn¡¯t so easy.¡± 
Day after day, Buffett bore down, shocked by the lavish lifestyle that was taken for granted on WallStreet. The executive diningroom¡¯s kitchen, as large as that of any restaurant in New York, was run by a head chef trained at the Culinary Institute of America and staffed by a pastry chef, a sous-chef, and a number of under-
chefs. Employees could order ¡°anythingon earth they wanted¡± for lunch.49 In his first days in New York, Buffett received a letter fromthe head of another bank, invitinghimto lunch so their chefs could do battle. Buffett¡¯s idea of testinghis chef¡¯s skills was orderinga hamburger for lunch every single day. 
The frustrated chef created batch after batch of handmade potato chips. He peeled the potatoes into cylinders sized to the millimeter, sliced themgossamer-thin, and whisked theminto fresh sizzlingoiluntil crisped just so. The perfect potato chips lay heaped in a pyramid alongside the daily hamburger on Buffett¡¯s plate. He ate them absentmindedly, daydreamingof McDonald¡¯s french fries. 
For Buffett, the diningroomsymbolized the culture of WallStreet, which he found abhorrent. He had been born in an age where money was scarce and life was lived at a walkingpace, and he¡¯d arranged his own life to keep things that way. On WallStreet, money was plentiful and life was lived at whatever speed bandwidth could currently supply. People left their homes at five a.m. daily and returned at nine or ten at night. Their employers showered themwith money for doingthat but in return wanted every wakingsecond of their time and supplied certain services to keep them workingat a treadmill pace. Buffett as a child had been impressed by the Stock Exchange employee who rolled custom-made cigars, but now found this astonishing. 
¡°They had a barbershop downstairs, and they didn¡¯t even tell me about it. They were afraid of what would happen when I found out. And they had a guy who came around and shined your shoes, and you didn¡¯t pay him.¡± 
The executives of Salomon had previously felt, as one underlingput it, that ¡°God forbid they should ever lift anythingbut a fork.¡± Behavior by their new billionaire chairman that would seem normal on Main Street shocked Salomon¡¯s employees. On the way to play bridge one night, Buffett asked his Salomon driver to stop the car. He climbed out and walked into a nearby store, then returned a few minutes later as the driver 
watched, mouth agape. The chairman was carryinghuge bags fullof hamsandwiches and Coca-Cola.50 This was the new Salomon. 
But it was the battle over pay that became the watershed. Early in the fall, Buffett had told the staff that he 
would be slashing$110 million fromthe year-end bonus pool. ¡°Employees producingmediocre returns for their owners should expect their pay to reflect this shortfall,¡± he wrote.51 That seemed simple and obvious to him. Businesses and people that were producingshould be paid. Those that weren¡¯t should not. Maughan agreed with Buffett that the culture of entitlement had to go. People were not entitled to millions just because 
they owned three houses and were supportingtwo ex-wives.52 But for once Buffett had miscalculated the limits of human nature. The formerly enriched employees, used to beingshowered with money on bonus day, now knew that they were about to be gouged. 
Buffett¡¯s reasoningthat employees should not take home all the spoils and the shareholders none was lost on them. Indeed, they believed the opposite, since they had been takinghome the spoils for years. A decrease from last year was outrageous. They felt that Buffett was tryingto transfer some of the guilt fromMozer¡¯s misdeeds to themby makingan issue out of the bonuses. They had not caused Salomon¡¯s woes. Rather, they had stayed out of loyalty and were enduringhumiliation and misery in its aftermath. They were sweepingup behind the elephant. They felt that they deserved combat pay. It wasn¡¯t their fault that their businesses weren¡¯t performing. How could they sell an investment-bankingdeal while the firmwas under threat of indictment?Didn¡¯t Buffett understand that? They were up against the fact that everybody on WallStreet knew that Buffett thought investment bankers were nothingbut useless stuffed shirts with fancy cuff links. Meanwhile, despite its problems, Salomon was actually havinga decent year financially. They resented being called greedy once again by an avaricious billionaire. 
The deprived traders, sales force, and bankers had to hangaround until year-end, the traditionaltime for quitting, after individual bonuses were paid and the smaller but nevertheless multimillion-dollar deferred bonus pool was scheduled to cash out. 
When the bonus pool was divvied up around the holidays, the battle over pay reached epic scale. The top thirteen executives saw their bonuses slashed by half. As soon as the numbers were announced, Salomon¡¯s hallways and tradingfloor erupted in open revolt. With budgets and bonuses gutted, traders and bankers fled. Half the equity department¡ªhome of the investment bankers¡ªran out the door. The rest of the tradingfloor went on a temporary strike. 
One day, Buffett walked a couple of blocks over to American Express to have lunch with its CEO, Jim Robinson. ¡°Jim,¡± he said, ¡°I didn¡¯t think it was possible, but I just paid out nine hundred million dollars in bonuses.¡± Yet he felt that everybody, other than Maughan and one or two people he had brought in to fix the 
place, was mad at him.53 
¡°They took the money and ran. Everybody just peeled off. 
54 
¡°It was just so apparent that the whole thing was being run for the employees. The investment bankers didn¡¯t make any money, but they felt they were the aristocracy. And they hated the traders, partly because the traders made the money and therefore had more muscle.¡± 
He had just saved Salomon and had thought that that would matter to the employees. But no, ¡°We were gratefulfor about five minutes,¡± was the verdict of one ex-employee. The fact that they wouldn¡¯t have a job without Buffett was forgotten in the grimshadow of the Bad Bonus Day. ¡°Warren didn¡¯t understand how to run a people business¡± became the refrain amongex-employees. Salomon wasn¡¯t the kind of place where you could just raise prices, cut overhead, and pull cash out of the business up to the parent company (although Buffett did as much of that as he could). You had to keep very smart people motivated when they had other options instead, duringa time when ¡°you were dyingby a thousand cuts a day,¡± as Olson put it. Buffett viewed the new pay dealas a culturallitmus test: Those who left were mercenaries whomthe firmcould do without, and those who stayed had signed on to the kind of firm he wanted. 
WallStreet beinga mercenary kind of place, little by little many of the top employees continued to drift away, carryingbooks of business to competitors as they departed. Buffett couldn¡¯t sleep. ¡°I couldn¡¯t turn off my mind,¡± he says. He had spent his whole life avoidingcommitments to anythingwhere there was no escape hatch and he didn¡¯t have total control. ¡°I¡¯ve always been leery of getting sucked into things. At Salomon I found myself defending things I didn¡¯t want to defend; and then I found myself being critical of my own organization.¡± 
Months had passed and Obermaier was still ponderingwhether Salomon¡¯s conduct was bad enough to indict. 
He knew ¡°it would have been the death knell of the company.¡±55 In consideringthe phony bids, he thought it important that Mozer¡¯s actions were motivated more by rebellion against the Treasury rules than simply to enrich Salomon. Likewise, no serious financiallosses had occurred fromthe phony bids.56 He also weighed 
Buffett¡¯s promises and the new culture. 
Together with Breeden at the SEC, he began to work on settlement talks with Salomon that would allow the firm to escape indictment. Frank Barron, the lawyer from Cravath, went down to the SEC to negotiate its share of the settlement in a meetingwith Bill McLucas, Breeden¡¯s deputy, who informed Barron the fine from the Department of Justice and the Treasury Department would be $190 million plus a $100 million restitution fund. Barron was shocked¡ªthe fine was huge for the transgressions of a single trader who had violated Treasury rules without causingserious harm to customers or the market. Why?he asked. ¡°Well, Frank,¡± said McLucas, ¡°you have to understand that it¡¯s goingto be $190 million because that¡¯s what 
Richard Breeden says it¡¯s goingto be.¡±57 
The moment when John Meriwether had rushed into the conference roomthat Sunday morning, white and shaken, quotingDick Breeden, who had called Salomon ¡°rotten to the core, rotten to the core,¡± came to mind. There would be no appealingthis decision. Salomon agreed to pay the extraordinary fine. 
Buffett was tryingto undo the ¡°rotten to the core¡± image as fast as he could. Dubbed ¡°Jimmy Stewart¡± by the staff, he nixed dealafter dealthat he thought was too close to the line, despite the resultinginternal backlash. Then another crisis erupted that almost derailed the settlement. 
Mozer made a proffer to the government to plea-bargain his case. He revealed some tax-motivated trades done by him with other traders that involved makingsecret side deals with other firms to guarantee the other firms against losses. The tax trades would give the prosecutors an even stronger reason to press criminal charges against the firm. 
Besides the obvious motivation of tryingto save his own neck, Mozer had ample reason to harbor bitter feelings toward Salomon. Had the firm¡¯s former leaders handled the situation properly, he stillwould have been fired, and he might have still been charged with fraud and be goingto prison¡ªbut his name would not be splashed all over the newspapers as the man who had nearly caused the largest financial failure in history. 
Duringan emergency board meeting, Obermaier called Olson about the tax trades to settle things down. He said that he had decided not to scuttle the settlement over Mozer¡¯s new revelations. Whatever this new issue was, Salomon would take that up with the IRS. The rest of the firm¡¯s misconduct, he thought, was serious, 
and should ¡°bringthe corporate entity to its knees, at least for a slight genuflection,¡±58 but not require the death penalty. 
On May 20, Obermaier¡¯s office called Olson to say that the government was not goingto indict and had dropped allcharges. The U.S. Attorney and the SEC announced a settlement with Salomon over fraud and record-keepingcharges; includingthe $100 million restitution fund, it was in total the second largest fine in history. The settlement found no evidence of wrongdoingother than Mozer¡¯s illegal bidding, which had been discovered by Salomon itself. Mozer was goingto prison for four months, and would pay a $1.1 million fine. 
He was barred from the industry for life.59 Gutfreund, Meriwether, and Strauss were reprimanded for failing to supervise him, given smallfines, and suspended for a few months from workingin the industry.60 
Some thought Salomon got off easy compared to Drexel Burnham Lambert, which had paid $650 million and imploded after settlingfelony charges of stock parkingand stock manipulation. But most observers were dumbstruck at the size of the fine for what amounted to technicalviolations by one employee. In fact, by acknowledgingits guilt to the government so freely, some thought Salomon had given up its negotiating leverage. But what the large fine really reflected was that the firmhad bungled its reportingresponsibilities so badly, and had made the regulators look asleep at the switch in front of Congress. In other words, thumb-suckingand obfuscation had nearly bankrupted Salomon. Thus it was, as the well-exercised sayinggoes, the cover-up, not the crime. 
Three days after the announcement, Dan Cowin died of cancer. Buffett wrote out a heartfelt eulogy, meaning to deliver it himself, and asked his secretary, Paula Orlowski, to stop by his hotelroomand pick it up to have it typed. But when she arrived, he met her at the door and said, with an agonized look, that he could not bring 
himself to speak at Cowin¡¯s service. Instead, Susie was goingto read it for him.61 Buffett went to the service. ¡°I sat through it shaking all over the whole time,¡± he says. 
Then he went back to work. Salomon estimated that the $4 million profit Mozer had made fromhis trades had cost the firm$800 million in lost business, fines, penalties, and legalfees. The firm¡¯s status as a primary dealer remained unresolved, although it now seemed a foregone conclusion that this would be resolved in 
Salomon¡¯s favor.62 Employee defections had slowed to a trickle, and the ratingagencies were startingto upgrade Salomon¡¯s debt. Customers started comingback. As Salomon stock crept above $33, Buffett, who could not wait to return permanently to Omaha, announced that he was steppingdown. Deryck Maughan took over as permanent CEO, and Buffett appointed MTO lawyer Bob Denhamas chairman. When it was over, says Gladys Kaiser, ¡°I could almost see a bigsigh of relief. It was as if, almost overnight, we got Warren back.¡± 
In that mournfulspringof 1992, as Salomon staggered to its feet, the question of how to deal with those who had nearly brought it down remained unresolved. Second only to Mozer in the public¡¯s assessment of culpability was John Gutfreund. In the end it was he who was responsible, despite allthe legaladvice that reportingwas not required. 
When the time came for Gutfreund to discuss what money he would receive fromthe firm, he asked for the ¡°fair treatment¡± he had been promised as longas Buffett and Munger were alive. Now, however, it turned out that the parties¡¯ opinions of what was fair differed dramatically. 
Gutfreund¡¯s lawyer thought that he had made a deal with Charlie Munger on that fateful weekend in August of the previous year, and that Munger had accepted a resignation letter conditioned on the lengthy list of severance terms. Gutfreund felt that he had fallen on his sword to save the firm and thought he was owed $35 million in back pay, stock, and severance. Salomon, however, took the position that Charlie Munger had made no deal at all. The board agreed to interpret Gutfreund¡¯s employee-benefit plans strictly and also took back the stock options he had earned, even though the stock-option plan contained no provisions allowingfor forfeiture under this or any circumstances. It countered with $8.6 million. 
Insulted and outraged, Gutfreund turned it down. ¡°It seemed wrong,¡± he said. ¡°As a matter of principle, I fought.¡±63 His lawyers interpreted the offer not as meant to inspire negotiation but as so insultingly low that it must be dismissed. In 1993, Gutfreund took Salomon to arbitration. 
Arbitration is a process in which a panelof neutralparties listens to both sides and reaches a bindingdecision to resolve a dispute. Arbitration is also a throw of the dice, for its very nature cuts off negotiation forever once a decision is reached. 
John Gutfreund had been reduced to sittingin a small three-roomoffice, where he answered his own phone when his part-time secretary was away. He brooded over the fact that Susan, now dubbed ¡°Marie Antoinette¡± by the press, had told him not to resign¡ªas if he had had an option¡ªsayingit would make him unemployable. They had been cast out of the New York social set. The press had turned on himsavagely, in 
a way he had never imagined could happen, comparinghim to felons like Boesky and Milken.64 Many of his former friends had abandoned him. Unassisted by Salomon, he was runningup huge bills to defend himself in civil lawsuits. 
Gutfreund wanted vindication through the arbitration. But a public rakingand diggingover the whole Salomon mess, which might have salved his wounded pride, was guaranteed to alienate Buffett and make him less likely to compromise. After Buffett had staked much of his image on Salomon, Gutfreund had let him down, and to retell this story in an arbitration, covered at full yelp by a dogged press, could not possibly inspire Buffett to reinterpret Gutfreund¡¯s behavior more generously. Now that he and Gutfreund were no longer partners, in Buffett¡¯s specialsense of the word, transgressions he might once have eventually forgiven became larger with hindsight. They were many, and even without benefit of hindsight they were large: 
. 
The stock-option repricingin 1987, which had cost Buffett so much money. 

. 
The Sternlight ¡°cocked gun¡± letter fromthe Fed, which Buffett had not learned about until it was too late. 

. 
The meetingwith Bob Glauber at the Treasury, when Gutfreund had kept silent, which had also been kept from Buffett and the other board members. 

. 
An equity plan that allowed an employee to keep his stock if fired for cause, which Gutfreund had put before the board and shareholders late in that fatefulspringof 1991. 


Buffett felt the whole thingwas a tragedy that should never have happened and that Gutfreund¡¯s behavior had been some sort of weird aberration. Although he normally avoided conflict, if forced into battle, his proxies fought for himlike cornered hyenas. Charlie Munger, who was inclined to say things such as that 
Gutfreund made Napoleon look like a shrinkingviolet, was the appointed bad guy in the arbitration.65 His testimony would be crucial, because he was the one who had negotiated with Gutfreund¡¯s lawyer, Philip Howard. 
It was the youngpresident of the New York Stock Exchange, Dick Grasso, who chose the three graying arbitrators who would decide Gutfreund¡¯s fate in a dingy conference roomat the Exchange.66 A team of lawyers from Cravath¡ªbacked by testimony fromSalomon board members, employees, ex-employees, Buffett, and Munger¡ªbegan to pulverize Gutfreund in a process that took more than sixty sessions and severalmonths before the arbitrators. 
Over and over, the arbitrators heard about the meetingbetween Munger and Philip Howard in which Howard reviewed the list of compensations Gutfreund wanted and Munger listened in some fashion or another. All agreed that Howard left without a signature on Gutfreund¡¯s severance papers, but there was no agreement about how to interpret the rest of the events of that evening. Howard was certain that Munger had made a deal with him. 
Gutfreund¡¯s lawyers called Charlie Munger as a witness. Frank Barron of Cravath, Swaine & Moore had attempted to prepare Munger, who was utterly impatient with the process. Although Barron had prepared Munger by himself, Munger, a lawyer who disliked payinglegalbills, extemporized to the arbitrators that, in preparinghimfor testimony, Cravath had employed an excessive number of expensive paralegals and 
¡°aspirin-carriers.¡±67 When he began to testify, every word that came out of his mouth ¡°had nothingto do with what we had gone over,¡± says Barron. ¡°PuttingCharlie Munger on the witness stand was the most nerve-racking, hair-raisingexperience I ever had as a lawyer.¡±68 
Munger¡¯s confidence as a witness was unmatched. A number of times the lead abitrator, growingirritated, admonished him: ¡°Mr. Munger, would you please listen to the questions before you answer them.¡± 
Munger insisted that on the night when he had met with Philip Howard, he was ¡°deliberately not listening¡­beingpolite, but I wasn¡¯t payingmuch attention¡­I sort of turned off my mind¡­. I was just sitting there politely with my head turned off.¡± 
Gutfreund¡¯s lawyers asked himwhether he had made a conscious decision not to talk as well as not to listen. 
¡°No,¡± said Munger, ¡°when the time came to talk, I talked. One of my faults¡ªI amfairly outspoken. I may well have discussed some individual things that got through my band of indifference. This is one of my most irritatingconversational habits. It followed me through the course of my life. 
¡°So every time somethingwould get through and I would see a counterargument,¡± he said, he would give it. Howard had asked for an indemnification for Gutfreund against lawsuits. Beinga legal matter, this had gotten through Munger¡¯s band of indifference. 
¡°I think I said to him, You don¡¯t even know what you are goingto need. God knows there will be litigation, there willbe a bigmess, who knows how things are goingto work out. You are misrepresentingyour own client if you think it makes sense to get into any of those issues at this time.¡± 
Was that also a conversation in which you were tuningout?asked Gutfreund¡¯s lawyer. 
¡°No, I tend to tune in when I amspeakingmyself,¡± said Munger, under oath. ¡°I tend to remember what I say.¡± 
Was this also a conversation in which you were deliberately not listeningat various times? 
¡°What did you say?¡± said Munger. ¡°I just tuned out again, and I wasn¡¯t doingit on purpose.¡± 
Was this also a conversation in which at various times you were deliberately not listening? 
¡°I am ashamed to say I have done it again. Will you please do it one more time? This time I willuse an effort.¡± 
Gutfreund¡¯s lawyer repeated the question for the third time. 
¡°You bet,¡± said Munger. ¡°I was goingthrough the motions.¡± 
In what mental state the arbitrators, the lawyers, and Gutfreund heard these words can only be imagined. Regrettably, much of the misunderstandingseems to have lain in Philip Howard¡¯s unfamiliarity with the outward signs of the workings of Charlie Munger¡¯s mind. He had labored that night under the illusion that he and Munger were havinga conversation. He did not recognize Munger¡¯s occasional replies as intermittent thought-bursts ignited by some randommite that had pierced Munger¡¯s band of indifference. Whenever Munger objected, Howard assumed they were negotiating, not that he was simply beinglectured. When Munger said nothingor emitted a grunt to move the conversation along, Howard inferred that Munger agreed, or at least that he had no objection to whatever had just been said. Nobody had explained to him that Munger¡¯s head was turned off. 
Gutfreund¡¯s lawyer reminded Munger of Buffett¡¯s testimony, in which he had acknowledged sayingto Gutfreund that he had the power to make allthis happen. Did Mr. Munger recall Mr. Buffett sayingthat? 
¡°I don¡¯t remember Mr. Buffett¡¯s words as well as I remember my own,¡± said Munger. ¡°But certainly the gist of the thingwas that you can count on us to be fair.¡±69 
The issue was what was meant by fair. Salomon never disputed that the money was Gutfreund¡¯s and that he had already earned it. The argument boiled down to whether Gutfreund would have been terminated had all the facts been known. Thus, the case became an exercise in provingthat Gutfreund should have been terminated. Even Donald Feuerstein agreed that in concealingwhat he knew fromGlauber, Gutfreund had been dishonest with the government. Although everyone thought this bizarre and out-of-character behavior, nonetheless, it had happened. 
In fairness to Salomon, Gutfreund understood why the firm was expendingso much effort to prove he should have been fired. He knew it was in everybody¡¯s interest to vilify him, but the lack of proportion bothered him. At some point it should have ended, he thought. 
Nonetheless, everyone, Buffett included, felt that Gutfreund was entitled to some of the money. Buffett had 
Sam Butler, a fellow GEICO board member and friend of Gutfreund¡¯s, call him twice and offer $14 million. Butler whispered, ¡°I can probably get you a little more.¡± Buffett would have gone to $18 million.70 But Gutfreund had been humiliated by the process. He considered Charlie Munger mean-spirited and self-righteous. He turned the offer down indignantly. The arbitrators would decide. 
After months of testimony, lastinguntil spring1994, the arbitrators were showingtheir impatience at the endless, circular, and conflictingarguments, one side professingcomplete innocence and the other portraying Gutfreund as an archfiend. Then, at the closingstatements, Gutfreund¡¯s lawyers showed up with a chart, raisingthe demand to $56.3 million by addinginterest, penalties, stock appreciation, and other items. 
The lawyers and people involved at Salomon had set up a bettingpoolas the arbitration crawled at an agonizingly slow pace toward its conclusion. How much money would the arbitrators give Gutfreund? The lowest bet was $12 million. The highest was $22 million.71 
No one willever know what factors the arbitrators weighed in their decision. When the decision was announced, they awarded Gutfreund nothing, not a dime. 
50 
TheLottery 
Halfway Around the World . 1991¨C1995 
Buffett¡¯s testimony in Congress as the reformer and savior of Salomon had turned himfroma rich investor into a hero. Salomon was more than a simple white hats/black hats story. The success of his unorthodox 
approach to scandal¡ªembracingregulators and law enforcers instead of hunkeringdown¡ªtouched the yearningfor nobility in many people¡¯s hearts: the dream that honesty is rewarded; that the besmirched can be redeemed through honor. Even as the furor fromthe crisis died, Buffett¡¯s star rose. Berkshire stock took off on a meteoric streak, burstingpast $10,000 a share. Buffett was now worth $4.4 billion. Susie¡¯s stock alone was worth $500 million. His original partners would now have $3.5 million for every $1,000 they had laid out in 1957. 
When Buffett walked into a room, the electricity was palpable. In his presence people felt brushed by greatness. They wanted to touch him. They became dumbstruck before him, or babbled inane remarks. No matter what he said, people listened uncritically. 
¡°I was at my best at giving financial advice when I was twenty-one years old and people weren¡¯t listening to me. I could have gotten up there and said the most brilliant things and not very much attention would have been paid to me. And now I can say the dumbest things in the world and a fair number of people will think there¡¯s some great hidden meaning to it or something.¡± 
He went about surrounded by a little haze of fame. Reporters called all the time now. He was followed and asked for his autograph, and photographers started to shadow him. Zsa Zsa Gabor wrote and asked for a signed photo. As writers began workingon books about Buffett, people who saw himevery day¡ªhis protectors¡ªfound the frenzy incomprehensible. A woman showed up at Berkshire¡¯s office and began bowing and scrapingto him. Gladys Kaiser was overcome with annoyance. ¡°Don¡¯t bow to him!¡± she said. 
Many Salomon employees and ex-employees, of course, were less impressed with Buffett than was the rest of the world. He had reined in their freewheelingculture, ruined their bonus day; he disdained their business and they knew it. Plenty of employees had unhappy stories to tell. Soon enough, the contrast between Buffett¡¯s aw-shucks image and his coldly rational side hit the radar screen of the nationalpress. How to explain the dichotomy between Buffett figuratively sittingon a front porch with a glass of lemonade, telling folksy stories and teachingthrough homilies, and his longhistory of sophisticated business feats? What was he doingas interim chairman of an investment bank while talkingand writingabout Wall Street as a gangof con men, sharpies, and cheats? 
What he was doingwas tryingto align the way people were paid at Salomon with the interests of shareholders, but his concern about compensation was just one aspect of his fundamentalobjection to a business in which almost every department had some sort of inherent conflict of interest with its customers. And without decimatingSalomon by jettisoningeverythingbut proprietary trading, he could not do much 
about that. But even by 1991, the Wall Street Journal and the New Republic1 took note of his straddlingof two worlds, and both ran stories pointingout the disparities between them. The mismatch between Buffett¡¯s representation of himself as a middle-class Midwesterner who had woken up in Oz and the elephant-bumping in which he routinely engaged with his collection of jumbo-dumbo celebrity friends only heightened the press¡¯s eagerness to do some debunking. The Wall Street Journal story ran a sidebar to its article, ¡°Buffett¡¯s 
Circle Includes the Moneyed and Powerful,¡± namedroppingpeople like Walter Annenberg.2 Severalof those mentioned in the story later said they were misquoted. Amongthemwere TomMurphy and a new friend, Bill Gates, CEO of Microsoft Corporation, who had gotten into a casualdiscussion with Murphy about how he was being¡°ripped off,¡± as Charlie Munger put it, by the cost of producingtelevision commercials. This conversation, which took place at a Buffett Group meeting, was portrayed by the Journal as musingover where the price of advertisingwas headed and what advertisingrates should be, which might fall into a ¡°gray 
area of antitrust.¡±3 Buffett and his friends sparred with the Journal¡¯s editors with little effect. Meanwhile, Gates¡ªwho might have gotten annoyed at findinghimself tangled in this public-relations mess involving antitrust issues less than a year after the Federal Trade Commission had launched a probe into possible collusion between Microsoft and IBM in the PC software marketplace¡ªinstead wrote Buffett an earnest 
letter apologizingfor havingembarrassed him.4 At the time, Gates had known Buffett for less than five months. 
The two had met that summer over the Fourth of July holiday, when Kay Grahamand her Washington Post editorial-page editor and friend MegGreenfield had dragged Buffett to Greenfield¡¯s house on Bainbridge 
Island for a longholiday weekend. To Buffett, a weekend on an island a half-hour ferry ride fromSeattle that could be escaped only by boat, seaplane, or hitchinga ride over the bridge by car was an ¡°anythingfor Kay¡± event. Greenfield had also recruited him for an all-day visit at the nearby four-house compound on the Hood Canal that Bill Gates had built for his family. Gates, twenty-five years Buffett¡¯s junior, was appealingto Buffett mainly because he was known to be brilliant and because the two of them were neck-and-neck in the Forbes race. But computers looked like Brussels sprouts to Buffett; no, he did not want to try themthis once. Greenfield, however, had assured himthat he would like Gates¡¯s parents, Bill Sr. and Mary, and that other interestingpeople would be there. With some reluctance, Buffett had agreed to go. 
Kay and Warren drove down the dirt-and-gravelroad to Meg¡¯s glass-walled contemporary house, where silky pink and purple sweet peas waved like pocket squares next to the front door. The weekend opened inauspiciously when Buffett learned that Graham and journalist Rollie Evans and his wife would be stayingin the two guest rooms of Greenfield¡¯s house, which faced out toward Puget Sound. He, however, would be stayingin a little guest house some distance away. When he got there, he saw that the owners had put a temporary bed in a sittingroomdownstairs for him, since the other rooms were fully occupied. 
Buffett, who didn¡¯t really care about his surroundings, was a good sport about this sort of thing. Greenfield had stocked his roomwith Cherry Coke, See¡¯s Candies, and honey-roasted peanuts to make himmore comfortable. The bathroom he was supposed to use, however, had a sign in it that said, ¡°No TP.¡± Baffled, he enlisted Grahamand Greenfield, who had accompanied him to the bed-and-breakfast, as interpreters, since no one was around to explain. Neither of themcould figure out what ¡°No TP¡± meant either. They decided that there was probably somethingwrongwith the plumbing. The facilities at Greenfield¡¯s house were too far away for Buffett to use except when he was visitingduringthe day. Greenfield pointed out a bathroomat the gas station nearby and suggested this alternative. 
Buffett sat in his roomthat evening, eatinghis honey-roasted peanuts and drinkinghis Cherry Coke. 
Memories differ as to whether he visited the gas-station facilities in the smallhours, only to find that the door was locked.5 Either way, the next morning, at Greenfield¡¯s house, all of them puzzled again over what ¡°No TP¡± meant. 
After breakfast, Greenfield shepherded her guests into town to stand at the roadside amonga small crowd of people sprawled in lawn chairs for the Fourth of July parade. Uncle Samin a blue tailcoat and Stars and Stripes top hat oversaw a little brass band; fire trucks, an ambulance, and antique cars idled by; dogs trotted past in homemade costumes, led by their couturiers; high-kickinghigh school cheerleaders preceded a troupe of dozens who struggled to control a giant U.S. flaghoisted overhead. Another antique car or two rolled by, then a group of people dressed as strawberries, followed by the Kiwanis Citizen of the Year. Afterward, Greenfield held her annualgarden party, at which guests in summery dresses and sport coats and ties played a vicious croquet match before the vivid backdrop of flowers risingfrom the lawn to her house. 
The followingmorning, Buffett pulled on a cardigan and arranged his wayward hair into a neat gray comb-over. Greenfield crammed allfive of theminto her little car for the ninety-minute drive to the Gates compound. ¡°While we¡¯re driving down there, I said, ¡®What the hell are we going to spend all day doing with these people? How long do we have to stay to be polite?¡¯¡± 
Gates had similar feelings. ¡°I had a constant dialogue with my mom,¡± he says, ¡°which was, Why don¡¯t you come to the family dinner?No, Mom, I¡¯mtoo busy, I¡¯m working. So she told me Katharine Grahamwas coming, and Warren Buffett.¡± He was interested in meetingGraham, now a seventy-four-year-old legend who had softened into an older but still patrician¡ªand imperious¡ªfigure, like a witty version of Queen Elizabeth, but, ¡°I told my mom, ¡®I don¡¯t know about a guy who just invests money and picks stocks. I don¡¯t have many good questions for him; that¡¯s not my thing, Mom.¡¯ But she insisted.¡± Gates flew in on a helicopter so he could make a quick getaway. When a tiny car pulled into the driveway, he was surprised to 
see a group of famous people¡ªGreenfield and her guests¡ªpop out like a gangof circus clowns.6 
Graham was taken over to meet Gates, who looked like a recent college graduate, in a red sweatshirt over a golf shirt, his collar turned up in a little saucer around his neck. While Gates was arrangingfor Graham to 
take a seaplane ride, Buffett was introduced to BillGates Sr. and his wife, Mary.7 Then BillIII, known as Trey, was brought round to meet Buffett. 
Observers kept a weather eye on this introduction. Gates was well-known for unleashinghis impatience on things that didn¡¯t interest him. Buffett no longer walked off to read a book when he was bored but had a way of disentanglinghimself very quickly fromconversations he wanted to exit. 
Buffett skipped the small talk; he immediately asked Gates whether IBM was goingto do wellin the future and whether it was a competitor of Microsoft. Computer companies seemed to come and go, and why was that? Gates started explaining. He told Buffett to buy two stocks, Inteland Microsoft. Then he asked Buffett about the economics of newspapers, and Buffett told him that they had gotten worse, because of other media. Within minutes the two were deeply immersed in conversation. 
¡°We talked and talked and talked and talked and paid no attention to anybody else. I started asking him a whole bunch of questions about his business, not expecting to understand any of it. He¡¯s a great teacher, and we couldn¡¯t stop talking.¡± 
The day started to go by. The croquet games began. But still Gates and Buffett talked on, even as many of Seattle¡¯s best-known people circulated around them:Speaker of the House TomFoley; chairman and CEO of Burlington Northern Jerry Grinstein; former EPA administrator Bill Ruckelshaus; Arthur Langlie, son of a former three-termgovernor, his wife, Jane, and their son Art; and Joe Greengard, a close friend of 
Greenfield¡¯s, plus a localdoctor, judge, newspaper owner, and art collector.8 Gates and Buffett took a walk on the pebbly beach. They were startingto attract attention. ¡°We were sort of ignoring all these important people, and Bill¡¯s father finally said, gently, that he¡¯d prefer that we join in with the rest of the people a little more. 
¡°Bill started trying to convince me to get a computer. I said, I don¡¯t know what it¡¯s going to do for me. I don¡¯t care how my stock portfolio is doing every five minutes. And I can do my income taxes in my head. Gates said he would pick out the best-looking gal at Microsoft and send her to teach me how to use the computer. He would make it totally painless and pleasant. I told him, ¡®You¡¯ve made me an offer I almost can¡¯t refuse, but I will refuse it.¡¯¡± 
As the sun descended toward the water duringthe cocktail hour, Buffett and Gates kept talking. At sunset the helicopter had to leave. Gates did not go with it.9 
¡°Then at dinner, Bill Gates Sr. posed the question to the table: What factor did people feel was the most important in getting to where they¡¯d gotten in life? And I said, ¡®Focus.¡¯ And Bill said the same thing.¡± 
It is unclear how many people at the table understood ¡°focus¡± as Buffett lived that word. This kind of innate focus couldn¡¯t be emulated. It meant the intensity that is the price of excellence. It meant the discipline and passionate perfectionismthat made Thomas Edison the quintessential American inventor, Walt Disney the kingof family entertainment, and James Brown the Godfather of Soul. It meant the depth of commitment and mental independence that led Jeannette Rankin to stand alone as the only representative in Congress to vote against U.S. entry into both World Wars in the face of widespread ridicule. It meant single-minded obsession with an ideal. ¡°Focus¡± meant the kind of person who could earn billions by allocatingcapital, yet be baffled by a sign that said ¡°No TP.¡± 
Sometime duringthe weekend, a guest who was less focused had figured out that ¡°No TP¡± stood for touchy plumbingthat couldn¡¯t handle toilet paper. At last, the mysteries of the indoor facilities had been revealed and Buffett was liberated fromthe gas station. However, some traitorous member of the party¡ªGraham, Greenfield, or one of the Evanses¡ªhad found the story so hilarious that even Buffett¡¯s introduction to the Gates family had included a recountingof the story of ¡°No TP.¡± 
A day later, Buffett escaped the island and returned to the normalplumbingof Omaha. He could see that Gates was brilliant and that he understood business very well. But since the days when he told Katie Buffett 
not to invest in Control Data and passed on the chance to invest in the start-up of Intel, Buffett had never trusted technology companies as investments. Technology companies came and went, their products often made obsolete. Now, his interest piqued, he bought a hundred shares of Microsoft, which, to him, was like eatinga single Cheerio. He couldn¡¯t bringhimself to buy any Intel, even though he sometimes bought a hundred shares just to keep track of a company. GrinnellCollege had made a lot of money fromits Intel 
stock but had already sold it.10 Buffett himself would never buy stock like Intel that depended so much on future growth and that he didn¡¯t fully understand. But he did invite Gates to the next Buffett Group meeting. Soon thereafter he had gotten the phone callfromDon Feuerstein and TomStrauss and for the next two months had thought of nothingbut the miseries of Salomon. 
In October, released fromthe conference rooms of 7 World Trade Center and the browbeatings of Congressmen and regulators for a few days, he went to Vancouver, British Columbia, for the latest meeting of the Buffett Group. FMC Chairman Bob Malott and his wife, Ibby, who were the planners, appreciated Native American culture and had arranged a ¡°potlatch dinner¡± and Native American dance one evening. The person who introduced the dancers explained that the ceremony had been condensed fromits usual length of three days. For the next severalhours, the Buffett Group twitched and yawned on hard wooden benches with no refreshments and no escape. Roxanne Brandt leaned over to Buffett at one point: ¡°Which is worse, this or 
Salomon?¡± she whispered. ¡°This is worse,¡± Buffett replied.11 
Bill Gates avoided the eveningof the dancers; he was comingto the meetingfor only the one particular session that interested him. The Buffett Group was goingto review the ten most valuable companies in 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990¡ªand how the list had changed. What gave a business a durable competitive advantage? What gave companies an edge, and why didn¡¯t they keep it?¡ªbecause most didn¡¯t. 
Arrivinglate because his new seaplane had been delayed by fog, Bill and his girlfriend, Melinda French, 
slipped into the roomunobtrusively fromthe rear. Melinda had thought that they were goingto leave fairly early. However, after about the fourth slide, she realized that maybe they were goingto stay.12 Tom Murphy and Dan Burke, who both served on IBM¡¯s board, started talkingabout why IBM, the leader in hardware, hadn¡¯t gone on to become the leader in software. Buffett said, ¡°I think we¡¯ve got somebody here who can 
add a little somethingto this discussion.¡± Everybody turned around and saw Bill Gates.13 The conversation continued. If you were Sears in 1960, why couldn¡¯t you keep gettingthe smartest employees and sellingat the best prices? What was it you couldn¡¯t see that prevented you fromremainingthe leader? Most of the proposed answers, regardless of the company, revolved around arrogance, complacency, and what Buffett called the ¡°Institutional Imperative¡±¡ªthe tendency for companies to engage in activity for its own sake and to copy their peers instead of tryingto stay ahead of them. Some companies didn¡¯t bringin youngpeople with fresh ideas. Sometimes managements weren¡¯t attuned to tectonic shifts in their industry. Nobody suggested these problems were easy to cure. After a while Buffett asked everyone to pick their favorite stock. 
What about Kodak? asked Bill Ruane. He looked back at Gates to see what he would say. 
¡°Kodak is toast,¡± said Gates.14 
Nobody else in the Buffett Group knew that the Internet and digitaltechnology would make film cameras 15 
toast. In 1991, even Kodak didn¡¯t know that it was toast. 
¡°Billprobably thinks all the television networks are goingto get killed,¡± said Larry Tisch, whose company, Loews Corp., owned a stake in the CBSnetwork. 
¡°No, it¡¯s not that simple,¡± said Gates. ¡°The way networks create and expose shows is different than camera film, and nothingis goingto come in and fundamentally change that. You¡¯ll see some falloff as people move toward variety, but the networks own the content and they can repurpose it. The networks face an interesting challenge as we move the transport of TVonto the Internet. But it¡¯s not like photography, where you get rid 
of film so knowinghow to make filmbecomes absolutely irrelevant.¡±16 
Now everybody wanted to talk to Gates, who could explain the new digital world and what it meant to them. ¡°The next thingwe knew, we were goingon the boat that afternoon,¡± says Gates. ¡°And Kay was makingsure that I didn¡¯t just talk to Warren.¡± That was fortunate, because Buffett¡ªwho liked to glue himself to certain people¡ªwould have liked to become BillGates¡¯s Siamese twin. They headed out on Walter and Suzanne Scott¡¯s enormous boat, the Ice Bear. Graham introduced Gates to Tisch and Murphy and Keough and the 
rest.17 In half a day, he and Melinda had become de facto members of the Buffett Group. A bunch of people dropped in and out of a come-and-go discussion of many things, duringwhich Gates grumbled to Murphy about the high cost of his television advertising. A month later the Wall Street Journal story had appeared, portrayingBuffett as a hypocrite rather than the complex personality he was, and makingall of them regret¡ªnot the conversation about ad prices, but havingresponded after the meetingto questions from a reporter who didn¡¯t have a workingtape recorder in his hand. 
*** 
By 1993, thanks partly to the salvation of Salomon, Berkshire stock had nearly doubled. By the time Warren was startingto Buffett his way through the arbitration with John Gutfreund, it burst through $18,000 a share. Buffett was now worth $8.5 billion, and Susie¡¯s stock was worth $700 million. The original partners now had $6 million for every $1,000 they¡¯d invested in 1957. Buffett was now the richest man in the United States. 
Over the holidays, he and Carol Loomis turned to the annual ritual of writingand editinghis chairman¡¯s letter, this time with the awareness of a much larger national¡ªeven international¡ªaudience. In May 1994, the same month that Gutfreund¡¯s arbitrators awarded him zero, Buffett held his annual shareholder meeting; more than 2,700 people arrived at the OrpheumTheater. Buffett told See¡¯s, the shoe companies, and World Book encyclopedia, which the company also owned, to set up booths in the lobby. See¡¯s sold eight hundred 
pounds of candy, and more than five hundred pairs of shoes walked out the door.18 World Book sold well, too, although Buffett did not know that it, like Kodak, would soon be toasted by the Internet. Delighted with his shareholders¡¯ purchases, Buffett drove over to Borsheim¡¯s and made an appearance, then showed up at the Furniture Mart. ¡°He goes out to where we have the mattresses displayed,¡± said Louie Blumkin, ¡°and he¡¯s 
selling, man.¡±19 Buffett started to think harder about the idea of hawkingproducts at the shareholder meetings. He vowed to move the meetingto the Holiday Inn, which had more space for sales booths. And next year, he decided, he would also sell Ginsu knives.20 
His risingfame swept most of the family alongwith it. Now that Buffett was worth more than $8 billion, his charitable foundation would be one of the five largest in the world, and his and Susie¡¯s decision to leave almost allof their money to it meant that it would be Berkshire¡¯s largest shareholder after he died. Reflecting that, he had recently added Susie, who was president of the Buffett Foundation but knew nothingabout business, to the Berkshire Hathaway board. The foundation had been givingaway about $3.5 million a year, which had doubled by 1994¡ªstill smallby the standards of families of similar wealth. Its future riches, however, were well-known. The Buffett Foundation and its president were suddenly in the public eye. 
When Susie had moved to San Francisco and made the decision to stay married to Warren while goingher own way, she envisioned beingable to keep the two halves of her life separate, quiet, and in balance. Never a thinker, she was caught by surprise when her husband became an icon of the business world, carryingher alongwith him. On the one hand, she wanted her privacy and freedom. On the other hand, she wanted to please Warren, enjoyed runningthe foundation, and also gravitated toward the elephant-bumpingaspects of public life. Yet her role as president of the Buffett Foundation and now as a member of the Berkshire board made her a public figure. Susie was trapped. To fend off attention, she downplayed her role and explained that she was not important, just an accessory to Warren¡¯s fame. Thus, nobody should be interested in her, nobody needed to write about her or her life. To maintain her privacy, she had to juggle deftly, keepinga low profile in San Francisco and decliningopportunities that went with her husband¡¯s risingstature. Susie expressed resentment of Warren fromtime to time to various people, as if it were his fault that her life was now so fraught. 
Her routine with Warren now included the celebrity Sun Valley scene every July, the biannualBuffett Group meetings, which were held in different places every other year, family Christmas and New Year¡¯s in Laguna Beach, and two weeks every May in New York with the whole family. In between these trips, Susie counseled a longlist of ¡°clients,¡± traveled to see her grandchildren and hosted them in Emerald Bay, and accompanied son-in-law Allen Greenbergon Buffett Foundation business, which took themto places as far away as Vietnam. She also entertained, went to parties, concerts, museums, spas, got pedicures, shopped, continued the never-endingrenovation of the Laguna house, maintained her other relationship, wrote hundreds of cards and sent hundreds of gifts, and traveled frequently with friends. And she willingly dropped everythingto be at the bedside of anyone who was dyingor ill. 
But her pace had been slowed by painful bouts of adhesions in 1987 and more adhesions and a hysterectomy in 1993. Kathleen Cole found herself shuttlingher friend and boss to the emergency roomdistressingly often. She tried to coax Susie into exercisingand to wean her off her steady diet of Tootsie Rolls, cookies, and milk by stockingthe kitchen with low-fat SnackWells. But the Pilates equipment gathered dust downstairs, in a second apartment that Susie had convinced Warren to buy for her, and some friends noted that Susie 
routinely overextended herself with commitments to care for others.21 The family seemed strangely 
unperturbed each time Cole called Nebraska to say that Susie had been hospitalized, as if they had adopted her serene attitude.22 ¡°Thank God I have my health,¡± she often remarked, and continued to view herself as the well person who ministered to the ill, rather than the other way around. 
By now she was runninga hospice in her apartment. Her first patient was an artist friend who was dyingof AIDS, whom she invited to move in and spend his finalweeks there. Cole found herself administeringIV drips to a terminalpatient while Susie¡¯s other employees strolled in and out of the room, questioningher about foundation matters or the renovations and redecoration of the Laguna Beach house, still 
metamorphosingafter a decade.23 After that, whenever one of Susie¡¯s gay friends who was dyingof AIDS neared the end, she invited himto come live with her. She and Cole took some of her dyingfriends on dream trips, one to Japan, another to Dharamsala, where she had arranged for himto have a personalaudience with the Dalai Lama¡ªwhat must have been an almost unimaginable spiritualexperience for a man who was weeks from death. At one friend¡¯s request, she threw a La Cage aux Folles¨Clike masquerade party instead of a memorial service after he died. She kept her friends¡¯ ashes on her mantelto make sure that someone would remember them. Peter took to callinghis mother the Dalai Mama. 
Howie, who had always absorbed so much of his mother¡¯s energy, now stepped out from under her wingat the same time that his father¡¯s growingfame began to have an impact on his life. During1989, he had become chairman of the Nebraska Ethanol Authority & Development Board. Through this role, he became friendly with Marty Andreas, an executive at Archer Daniels Midland, a large Illinois-based agricultural company that was heavily involved in ethanol. Marty Andreas was nephew of ADM¡¯s CEO, Dwayne Andreas, who served on the Salomon board with Warren. Two years later, thirty-six-year-old Howie was asked to become the youngest member of the ADM board. 
Dwayne Andreas had been charged, but acquitted, of makingillegalpoliticalcampaign contributions during Watergate; he also made huge and sometimes controversialdonations to politicians of both parties while Congress was repeatedly passingthe tax subsidies for ethanolthat benefited ADM. Buffett¡¯s view that rich people and powerfulbusiness interests were far too able to buy access and influence with politicians conflicted sharply with the way that ADM did business in politics. 
Six months after Howie joined the board, Andreas hired him for a job in public affairs. Howie had no public-relations or financialexperience, although he did have a basic compass when it came to money and business that made himthe most Buffettesque of his siblings. At a schoolbake sale for the local junior high kids, he worked the checkout line; when people handed himfive bucks for a fifty-cent brownie, he looked themin the eye and said, ¡°We don¡¯t have change.¡± He told the principal, ¡°This is how you raise money.¡± All afternoon, 
people donated whatever was in their pocket because Howie refused to give themchange.24 Likewise, he was shrewd when it came to callinghis father to talk about the job at ADM. He knew better than to take anythingfor granted. What happens to the donations I can make through the Sherwood Foundation if I accept this job? he asked. Buffett said he would not take that away. Okay, said Howie, perhaps 
understandably worried about the impact of a desk job on his waistline, what about the rent dealon the farm? Buffett swapped him fixed for floatingby lettingHowie start payinga straight seven percent rent on what the farm had cost.25 After nailingdown another point or two, Howie agreed to move to Decatur, Illinois, where ADM was headquartered. The company put himin charge of workingwith analysts.26 
On the surface, Howie¡¯s role at ADM had nothingto do with his surname or his father¡¯s recently burnished reputation as a paragon of corporate ethics. He would not have taken the job if he thought it did; and his expertise in ethanol made it plausible. His father had instilled in himdisdain toward special privilege. However, while Howie had many years of experience with people tryingto use himfor his father¡¯s wealth, he was naive about large corporations, and he saw nothingremarkable in a major company hiringa member of its board of directors to work as a public-affairs spokesperson. 
Buffett, who would never invest in a company like ADM or hire a person who mixed business and politics the way Andreas did, said nothingto dissuade his son from servingon a board and workingfor a company so dependent on largesse from the government. This uncharacteristic reticence speaks volumes about his longing for his son to gain some business experience and follow, at least to a degree, in his footsteps. 
Andreas was tough and demanding, accordingto Howie, and gave himassignments like buyingflour mills in Mexico and workingon the North American Free Trade Agreement. But Howie remained the same person as before¡ªdriven by adrenaline, energetic, almost painfully honest, and vulnerable. At family trips and 
gatherings, he stillsurprised his relatives by jumpingout of closets in his gorilla costume.27 He wrote his mother letters brimmingwith tearstained emotion. His office looked like a teenager¡¯s bedroom, crammed with company tchotchkes: toy trucks with ADM and Coca-Cola logos and Coca-Cola bottles that played the 
company theme song. 28 Nevertheless, Howie felt that he was gettingyears of business education compressed into a short time. 
In 1992, Buffett had invited Howie to join the board of Berkshire Hathaway, sayingthat his son would become nonexecutive chairman after he died. Howie¡¯s business experience was still light, he had never finished college, and he was more interested in agriculture than investing. He now had the beginnings of a credible r¨¦sum¨¦, however. Since Buffett was the largest shareholder of what amounted to a family corporation, he was within his rights to do this. His reasoningwas that Howie would steward the culture after he was gone. He knew that his son was beginningto mature and was a principled individual. 
Buffett now had to do some mentalbackflips, however, to reconcile all the statements he had made over the years¡ªdenunciations of the evils of the ¡°divine right of the womb,¡± dynastic wealth, and advantages based on parentage rather than merit¡ªwith his decision to make his relatively untested son the chairman of Berkshire Hathaway after he was gone. And it was not clear how Howie¡¯s role would complement that of the next CEO of Berkshire. That may have been the point. Every sign now indicated that Buffett would see to it that power would not be concentrated in any one individualafter his death. This might inhibit Berkshire¡¯s potential or it might not, but it would fend off the grisly menace of the InstitutionalImperative, which he viewed as the greatest danger that Berkshire faced. Buffett wanted a degree of control frombeyond the grave, and this was his first step in gettingit. 
In a second step, he had put Susie Jr., then Peter, on the board of the Buffett Foundation, with the understandingthat Susie Jr. would run the foundation after her mother died. This, by the assumption of all concerned, would not occur untilafter Warren himself was gone. Buffett¡¯s view of the foundation, as of so many other things, was that ¡°BigSusie will take care of it.¡± Susie Jr.¡¯s shoulderingof foundation responsibilities was presumably many years in the future; in the meantime he was comingto rely on her in other areas. A philanthropist in training, she played an active role in her father¡¯s civic and sociallife in Omaha. She had searched far and wide that year to find a hail-damaged car cheap enough to suit her father. She was helpinghimorganize volunteers for the first Omaha Classic, a charity golf tournament he had started 
that would be attended mostly by his fellow CEOs but also by some celebrities.29 As her father¡¯s fame increased, Susie Jr. was becominghis most frequent elephant-bumpingescort, now that Kay Graham, in her seventies, was not gettingout as much. Astrid, who only occasionally attended events with him, did volunteer work at the zoo and had no interest in servingon committees or chairingevents. Her life was less changed than almost anyone¡¯s by Buffett¡¯s newfound fame, interrupted only by the occasional gawker in the driveway. 
Peter, too, kept his feet on the ground as his father¡¯s celebrity soared over himlike a speedinghawk. He had moved to Milwaukee, headquarters of his record label, where he and Mary had bought a showy house, partly to use as a recordingstudio. The mansion that belonged to Warren Buffett¡¯s son made the papers, so now Peter was the family member who had transgressed and embarrassed his father by appearingostentatious. After a stressfulmarriage, he had separated from Mary in May 1991, just before the Salomon affair started, and ever since had been goingthrough a messy divorce. His father, longexperienced as an observer of difficult divorces amonghis friends and family, was understandingof this. After the divorce, Peter formally adopted his twin stepdaughters, Erica and Nicole. While BigSusie had always embraced themas her granddaughters, Warren was more reserved. Later¡ªwith hindsight¡ªit would become clear that he viewed the adoption as a new postmaritallink forged between Peter and his ex-wife¡ªa link that Warren did not feel bound by himself. 
Introspective by nature, Peter found the end of his marriage catalytic and revelatory; he was doinginner work to create a solid identity after so many years of beingovershadowed and submerged by others. Even duringthis traumatic period in his personal life, his career had progressed. He had already released several solo New Age albums. After reading Son of the Morning Star, a bestsellingbook about the Battle of Little Bighorn, his music had begun to reflect Native American elements, which resonated strongly with him. That had led to a job scoringthe Fire Dance scene in Dances with Wolves and a live performance at the movie¡¯s premiere. He was now workingon a movie score for The Scarlet Letter and a CBSminiseries, as well as beginningto create a multimedia show on the Native American theme of identity lost and reclaimed. 
Peter was respected but not famous, a workingmusician but not a star. In the music world, the Buffett name meant nothing. His father was proud of his son¡¯s movie scoringand other work. But artistry divorced from fame or commercialsuccess flew past Warren just the way his investingand business passion flew past Peter; their worlds did not connect. Yet, oddly, Warren and Peter were the most alike; both shared a passionate devotion to a vocation for which they had been destined from early childhood; both got wrapped up so obsessively in their work that they expected their wives to become their conduit to the outside world. 
*** 
Buffett also now had, in effect, a third son¡ªBillGates. 
At first it was what Gates calls ¡°a tiny bit of ¡®Warren¡¯s the adult and I¡¯m the child.¡¯¡± Gradually this evolved into ¡°Hey, we¡¯re both in this learningat the same time.¡±30 Munger often attributed much of Buffett¡¯s success to the fact that he was a ¡°learningmachine.¡± Although he was not goingto learn to code software, and Gates wasn¡¯t goingto learn to cite the statistics of every business for the last seventy years, their shared intellect, interests, and way of thinkinggave them considerable common ground. They shared the same intensity. Buffett taught Gates about investingand acted as the soundingboard for Gates¡¯s ruminations about his business. It was the way Buffett had learned to think in models that impressed Gates most. Buffett was as eager to share his thoughts about what makes a great business with Gates as Gates was eager to hear them. 
If Buffett could have found more great businesses, he would have bought themall. He never stopped looking for them. The town where the Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville lived was gettingcrowded, however. Wall Street as a whole had been overrun; there were fewer and fewer odd pockets of overlooked opportunity. Buffett had carved out more time and created more balance in his life; he no longer wandered off to read American Banker duringdinner parties, and he genuinely enjoyed socializing. While his focus on business never lessened, as the nineties progressed, the deals became larger¡ªbut more sporadic. Meanwhile, a new interest took hold. It would not reduce his zealfor Berkshire, but it would alter his social priorities, his travel itineraries, and even his friendships. 
What Buffett now wanted to do in his spare time was to play bridge. He had been playinga casualsocial 
game for nearly fifty years, and while in New York to handle Salomon, he had started playinga more serious and competitive game. One day in 1993, he was playingin a simultaneous internationalbridge tournament with George Gillespie and met Sharon Osberg, who was partnered with Carol Loomis. 
Osberghad grown up with a deck of cards in her hand. She was a former computer programmer who had started playingbridge in college. By the time she was runningWells Fargo¡¯s start-up Internet business, she had won two world teamchampionships. It didn¡¯t hurt that she was a petite, sweet-faced brunette in her mid-forties. 
¡°The next time she¡¯s goingcross-country,¡± Buffett told Loomis, ¡°have her stop in Omaha. Have her callme.¡± 
¡°Where¡¯s Omaha?¡± Osbergsaid. It took her three days to build up the courage to pick up the phone, ¡°scared to death. I¡¯d never talked to a livinglegend before.¡±31 
Osberg, who lived in San Francisco, was on her way to Omaha a week or so later. ¡°I¡¯ve never been so scared, breathingin and out,¡± she says. At Buffett¡¯s office, his new secretary, Debbie Bosanek, showed her into the inner sanctum. He greeted her by reachinginto a box and handingher three dice. These were covered with an odd set of numbers, like seventeen and twenty-one and six and zero. ¡°Now you can look at these as longas you want,¡± Buffett said. ¡°Then you pick any of themand then I¡¯llpick, and we¡¯llrolland see who wins.¡± Osbergstared at the dice. She was so petrified that the numbers faded into a blur. After a few minutes with no response, Buffett said, ¡°Well, let¡¯s just throw ¡¯em.¡± Three minutes later, he had Osbergcrawlingon her hands and knees rollingdice on his office floor. That broke the ice. 
The secret of Buffett¡¯s ¡°nontransitive dice¡± was that each die could be beaten by another; it was like the 
game ¡°rock, paper, scissors,¡± except that the players went one at a time.32 Whoever chose first automatically lost¡ªbecause the other player could simply choose whichever die would beat the one chosen first. Bill Gates figured it out, as had the philosopher SaulKripke, but nobody else ever had.33 
Afterward, Buffett took Osbergto dinner at his now-favorite steak house, Gorat¡¯s. He drove her through a residential neighborhood and pulled up next to a pharmacy and AutoZone store in the parkinglot of what looked like a 1950s ranch house with metal steer heads next to the front door. A bigblue globe traced with black continents highlighted the sign, ¡°Gorat¡¯s finest steaks in the world.¡± Seated in a roomfull of families eatingat Formica tables, Osbergdecided to play it safe and declared, ¡°I¡¯mgoingto have whatever you¡¯re having.¡± A few minutes later she found herself lookingat ¡°a piece of raw meat the size of a baseballmitt.¡± Afraid of offendinga livinglegend, she ate it. Then they went to the local bridge club to play, after which, at ten o¡¯clock, Buffett took her on a drivingtour of Omaha so he could show off his collection. She saw the Nebraska Furniture Mart parkinglot, she saw his house, she saw the house he grew up in, she saw Borsheim¡¯s, all froma movingcar in the dark. Then he dropped her off at her hotel. Both were leavingearly the followingday. 
The next morning, when Osbergwas checkingout, the front desk clerk told her, ¡°Someone came in and left a 
package for you.¡± Buffett had come to the hotelat four-thirty in the morningand left her a compilation of his annual reports to shareholders, which he had had privately printed and bound into a book.34 She had just become one of Buffett¡¯s people. 
Not longafter, Buffett sent Osbergto meet Kay Graham when she was in Washington on a business trip. She filled in as a fourth at bridge with Grahamand her friends Tish Alsop, widow of her friend Stewart Alsop; Cynthia Helms, wife of former CIA director Richard Helms; and Teeny Zimmerman, wife of Warren Zimmerman, who had recently been recalled as ambassador from the suddenly former Yugoslavia. Soon, Osbergwas stayingat Graham¡¯s house and playingbridge in Washington on a regular basis with people like Sandra Day O¡¯Connor. She called Buffett fromthe guest bedroom. ¡°Oh, my God!¡± she said. ¡°There¡¯s a real Picasso in the bathroom!¡± 
¡°I never noticed it and I¡¯ve stayed there for thirty years,¡± Buffett later said of the Picasso sketch. ¡°All I 35 
know is she leaves shampoo out.¡± 
Buffett began to time his trips to coincide with Osberg¡¯s business trips to New York. They played bridge at Graham¡¯s apartment with Carol Loomis and George Gillespie. ¡°We liked each other,¡± says Buffett, ¡°although¡ªshe wouldn¡¯t say this, but¡ªshe was appalled at how badly we all played.¡± Osbergwas so gentle that she could correct himwithout hittingthe hair-trigger button in him that reacted to criticism¡ªBuffett always avoided or limited his time with anyone he feared might criticize him. After a few hands, she would ask Buffett why he had played a particular card. ¡°Now, we have a learningopportunity,¡± she would say, and explain what he should have done. 
Before long, the two had become fast friends. Osbergthought it was a shame that the only time Buffett got to play was when he was in a roomwith other bridge players. He needed a computer. They went round and round about this for several months. ¡°You know, I think you might.¡± ¡°Nah! I really don¡¯t.¡± ¡°You know, you could play bridge.¡± ¡°Eh, not really.¡± Finally Osbergsaid, ¡°Warren, you really should just try it.¡± ¡°Okay, okay,¡± he said. ¡°You come to Omaha and set up the computer, you stay at the house.¡± 
Bridge and Osbergaccomplished what even BillGates had not. Buffett had the Blumkins send someone over from the Furniture Mart to hook up a computer. He stopped the Indefensible in some Midwestern city where Osbergwas playingin a tournament and ferried her to Omaha. They arrived at the house, she got acquainted with Astrid, then taught Buffett how to navigate the Internet and use a mouse. ¡°And he was fearless, just fearless,¡± Osbergsays. ¡°He wanted to play bridge.¡± And only bridge. ¡°Just write down the things I need to know to get in to play bridge,¡± he told her. ¡°I don¡¯t want to know anythingabout anythingelse. Don¡¯t try to 
explain to me what this thingis doing.¡±36 Buffett adopted the moniker ¡°tbone¡± and began playingon the Internet four or five nights a week with Osberg(¡°sharono¡±) and other partners. Astrid would fix himan early dinner before he logged on to his bridge game. 
Before long, Buffett was so engrossed in Internet bridge that nothingcould disturb him. When a bat got into the house and flapped around the TVroom, banginginto the walls and entanglingitself in the curtains, Astrid shrieked, ¡°Warren, there¡¯s a bat in here!¡± Sittingacross the room in his frayed terry-cloth bathrobe, staringat 
his bridge hand, he never moved his eyes fromthe screen as he said, ¡°It¡¯s not botheringme any.¡±37 Astrid called the pest-controlpeople and they removed the bat, allwithout disturbinghis bridge game. 
Buffett felt his skills had improved so much under Osberg¡¯s tutelage that he wanted to play in a serious tournament. ¡°Why not start at the top?¡± she said. They signed up for the mixed pairs at the World Bridge Championships. The Albuquerque convention center was filled with hundreds of people sittingaround bridge tables and kibitzers wanderingaround watchingthe players. Murmurs and stares flew through the room when the richest man in the United States and two-time world champion Sharon Osbergstrolled into the World Bridge Championships together. By now, enough people recognized Buffett¡¯s lanky frame and thatch of gray hair that he caused a stir. For an unranked amateur to show up at the world championships as his first tournament was an unusual thing. For Warren Buffett to do it was shocking. 
Osbergexpected that they would lose in short order, so the point was to have fun and get some experience. Instead, Buffett sat down at the table and seemed to shut out everything. It was as if there was nobody else in the room. His bridge skills were not close to the levelof most other players, but he was able to focus as calmly as if he were playingin his livingroom. ¡°My defense is better with Sharon,¡± he says. ¡°It¡¯s almost like I can feel what she¡¯s doing. And you can trust that everything she¡¯s doing has meaning.¡± Somehow his intensity overcame the weakness of his game. Osbergwas amazed when they qualified for the finals. ¡°We were just good enough,¡± she says. 
But after a day and a half of playingto get to this point, Buffett was exhausted and wrungout. The only breaks had been an hour here and there to slip out for a hamburger. He looked like he had run a marathon. In the break before the finals he told Osberg, ¡°I can¡¯t do it.¡± 
¡°What?!¡± she said. 
¡°I can¡¯t do it. Tellthemwe¡¯re not goingto play in the finals. Tell them I had a business emergency,¡± he said. Now Osberghad the job of explainingthis to the World Bridge Federation. 
Nobody who qualified for the finals had ever decided not to play. The representatives of the World Bridge Federation were outraged that Warren Buffett would come to their tournament, endorse it by his famous and important presence, qualify for the finals, then try to leave. ¡°You can¡¯t do that!¡± they said. When Osberg insisted, they threatened to strip her of her rankingand credentials. ¡°I¡¯mnot the one who won¡¯t play!¡± she insisted, repeatingthat he had a business emergency. Finally, they accepted that she was only Buffett¡¯s proxy, relented, and allowed the two of themto leave without punishingher. 
Naturally, Buffett had encouraged Bill Gates, who had fooled around with the game a bit, to become a more serious bridge player. He also sent Osbergto Seattle to set up BillGates Sr. on the computer to play bridge, thus beginningto inject her into the Gates family. 
Up until this point, he and Bill mainly saw each other attendingfootball games, on the golf course, and at Microsoft events. But their relationship was gradually becomingmuch closer. On Easter weekend 1993, Bill and Melinda got engaged. On the way back fromSan Diego, Bill had the pilot give fake weather reports from Seattle to foolMelinda into thinkingthey were flyinghome. She was shocked when the aircraft door opened after they landed and Warren and Astrid were waitingon the red carpet at the bottom of the stairs. Warren drove themto Borsheim¡¯s, where CEO Susan Jacques helped thempick out an engagement ring. 
Nine months later, Buffett flew to Hawaiifor their New Year¡¯s Day wedding, which would take place on the twelfth tee of the Four Seasons Manele Bay golf course on the island of Lanai. Even though his sister Bertie owned a house on the BigIsland of Hawaii, Buffett had never been to Hawaii before. He was as excited about the Gates weddingas if one of his own children were gettingmarried, although it could have been held in Dubuque, Iowa, for all he cared. He felt that Bill Gates was makingone of the smartest decisions of his life by marryingMelinda French. However, Billand Melinda¡¯s weddingconflicted with Charlie Munger¡¯s seventieth birthday party, which was takingplace the same weekend. The famously loyalBuffett never dropped his old friends but sometimes had to play Twister to manage his relationships. If a conflict arose, he tended to resolve it by appeasingwhoever he thought was most likely to get upset at him¡ªwhich generally meant that he slighted the most loyal and trustworthy of his friends, the ones he could count on not to criticize or get angry at him. This left the rejected person the paradoxical consolation that he was the one Buffett most trusted and felt closest to. People who loved him understood this, so they put up with it. 
Munger, the long-standingfriend, would tolerate almost anythingof Buffett, even missinghis seventieth birthday party. Gates was the newer friend; in fact, when it came to beingin love with Gates, Buffett ran a close second to Melinda. So he opted for the weddingand brought Kay Graham with him. Graham, now seventy-six, traveled less often these days, but she stillattended occasions of state like this. Moreover, Gates had just surpassed Buffett, who was now number two, to become number one in the U.S. money race. Together they made the tiny island of Lanaithat New Year¡¯s Day the wealthiest resort on earth. Warren, 
meanwhile, had sent Susie to Los Angeles for Munger¡¯s party, where she sang. 38 
Susie, longthe queen on Warren¡¯s chessboard, was used to this sort of thing. She had her own definition of what he needed fromthe women in his life, and pigeonholed each of theminto a utilitarian category. One night when she was at dinner at Gorat¡¯s with Warren, Astrid, and Sharon Osberg, whom she had recently met, she looked around the table and surveyed the company. Only Kay and Carol Loomis were missingfrom the harem. She laughed and shook her head. ¡°Someone for everything,¡± she said. She had plugged Osberg into the ¡°bridge¡± category. But Susie always downplayed the others¡¯ roles; and like all of Warren¡¯s women friends, each had the loyalty of Daisy Mae. 
Before long, Buffett was talkingto Osbergseveraltimes a day on the phone, takingher alongas a traveling companion on his trips, and makingher one of the closest confidantes amonghis friends. Much like Astrid, however, she stayed in the background rather than upset the perceived order of all his other relationships, which Buffett had always tended to separate. By the mid-1990s, the public perception of how he spent his time and the way he actually spent it had longdiverged. Buffett stillplayed Twister to try to avoid hurting anyone, but as always, conflicts were resolved to appease whomever might erupt on him. The shrieking wheel got the grease. 
Sharon, like Astrid, was not a shrieker. She was quietly invited to Susie Jr.¡¯s Thanksgivingdinners and included in bridge games with Bill Gates. A year after Bill and Melinda¡¯s wedding, the Gateses were celebratingtheir first anniversary on January 1, 1995, at their house in San Diego. Buffett invited Bill, Charlie Munger, and Sharon to come over for a New Year¡¯s Day bridge game. While Susie, longaccustomed to Warren¡¯s choosinghis own pursuits even in the midst of a family gathering, spent the day with family and friends, Gates, Osberg, and Buffett sat down at the bridge table to wait for Munger. Buffett, who always ran precisely on schedule, noted that it was time to begin but otherwise ignored Munger¡¯s tardiness since nobody else seemed bothered by it. 
Gates was in a pleasant mood, but as they chatted, Buffett began growingirritated that they were beingkept waiting. When Munger did not appear after a few minutes, Osbergsuggested a game of three-handed bridge to keep the others entertained, partneringwith both Buffett and Gates while keepingup her end of the conversation. 
After forty-five minutes of three-handed bridge, Buffett, who was playingthe polite host, crackingjokes and makingconversation, tryingto make everythingokay, had become noticeably jumpy and restless. Suddenly, he flew out of his chair. ¡°I know where he is,¡± he said. He snatched up the phone and called the Los Angeles Country Club. 
Whoever answered the phone went off to search. Within a few minutes he had located Munger in the golf grill, sittingwith his cronies, as he habitually did every day when not at the office. He was about to take a bite of a sandwich. 
¡°What are you doing, Charlie?¡± Buffett asked. ¡°You¡¯re supposed to be playingbridge with us.¡± 
¡°I¡¯ll be there in a few minutes,¡± Munger replied. 
Without a word of apology, he hungup the phone, put down his sandwich, and headed out to the car. 
Half an hour or so later, Munger strolled into the Buffetts¡¯ house at Emerald Bay, sat down at the table exactly as if nothinghad happened, as if he hadn¡¯t noticed that he¡¯d kept Bill Gates waitingfor an hour and a half on his first anniversary, and said: 
¡°Happy New Year. Let¡¯s play.¡± 
Stupefied, the other three sat in silence for a moment. 
Then Gates said, ¡°Okay. Let¡¯s play.¡± 
They played. 
*** 
Another group of Buffett¡¯s loyal friends joined him for their biennial ritualwhen the Buffett Group held their meetingat the Kildare Club in Dublin in September 1995. Because Bill Gates was present (for Gates straddled all of Buffett¡¯s worlds, since Buffett would have liked to become his Siamese twin), the government of Ireland treated them like emperors. They were met at the airport by official government limousines and 
watched over by security agents in helicopters. They dined with the chairman of Guinness, the Taoiseach*30 and his wife, and the U.S. ambassador, walked the cobblestones of Trinity College to the Book of Kells, and clapped their hands in awe at the sleek hunt stallions of the Irish National Stud in County Kildare. Never¡ªeven under Kay Graham¡¯s auspices in Williamsburg¡ªhad they experienced such luxury. Filled with incredible artwork and antiques, the K Club raised all of its own food on site and prepared it with a European staff and chefs. 
The gloss and glamour of the surroundings belied the fact that the Buffett Group members, many of them fabulously wealthy by now, were largely unchanged. Warren saw some of these people only once a year or so; yet he remained utterly devoted to them. BillRuane was still gregarious and told long, funny stories. Walter Schloss still lived in a tiny apartment and picked stocks the same way he¡¯d always done. The Stanbacks, amongthe richer members of the group, still would not dreamof flyingany class but coach. Sandy Gottesman still questioned everythingskeptically and wanted an override on every deal. TomKnapp had finished buyingup huge chunks of the Maine coastline and started in on Hawaii. Jack Byrne was as pumped fullof energy as ever. Roy Tolles stillkept his thoughts to himself, except for shootingoff a one-liner every now and then. Ed Anderson and Joan Parsons pumped money into human-sexuality research, but Ed still picked up pennies in the street, unless they were really dirty. MarshallWeinbergwas stillan irresistible flirt. Lou Simpson was still such a good stock picker that he had become one of the Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville. Carol Loomis had made enough money from Berkshire stock to fly in a private jet but still couldn¡¯t buy a jar of pickles without reflectingon the luxury of pickles duringher Depression-era 
childhood.39 Retired frombuildinggigantic dams and bridges, Walter Scott now built gigantic houses instead. After goingto the theater, Joyce Cowin stillwalked up Broadway and across the park to the Upper East Side in a snowstorm rather than take a cab. Ajit Jain, now a Buffett Group member, spent most of his time in his room duringthe meetings, doingdeals at a furious pace to please Buffett. Ron Olson, who had once been liked by most people that Buffett knew¡ªexcept Judge Brieant¡ªwas now liked by most of the people in greater Los Angeles. Then there were BillScott, Mike Goldberg, and Chuck Rickershauser, all in various states of retirement fromworkingfor years close to the nice, warmsun, also allin various stages of 
recuperation fromthe effects of Rickershauser¡¯s Law of Thermodynamics.40 BillGates, unlike the rest in so many ways, shared the group¡¯s intellectual interests and complete lack of pretense. As for Kay Graham, she remained their one real connection to echelons of society that titillated themeven while failingto seduce them. ¡°Oh, Princess Diana,¡± she would say. ¡°Such a good friend. Much more there than is obvious.¡± 
Amid the K Club¡¯s luxury, Buffett handed out copies of a booklet, The Gospel of Wealth by turn-of-the-century industrialist and philanthropist Andrew Carnegie. As he celebrated his sixty-fifth birthday, and took stock of his life to date, he had been rereadingCarnegie. Now he led the group in a debate of Carnegie¡¯s premise that ¡°He who dies rich dies disgraced.¡± Carnegie had honored that philosophy, spendingnearly his whole fortune, one of the greatest in history at the time, to establish libraries in towns and cities allover the 
United States.41 Buffett had always planned to die rich and disgraced, as Carnegie would put it, so that there would be more to give away after he was gone. He insisted that the best use of his talents was to keep making more money until he died, and he had no interest in beingpersonally involved in the foundation¡¯s work. That would be Susie¡¯s project. But he wanted to hear what other people thought and obviously was givingsome consideration to this question. 
They went around the table. Bill Ruane, who had never cared much about money and was poor compared with the rest, was about to undertake a project to transform the worst of New York¡¯s public schools. He would later go on to work with Columbia University to screen thousands of New York City schoolchildren 
for mood disorders and suicide risk.42 Fred and Alice Stanback were amongthe most important donors to environmental causes in the United States. TomMurphy was chairman of Save the Children. Jane Olson, Ron¡¯s wife, chaired the international board of Human Rights Watch. Before Dan¡¯s death, the Cowins had donated an important collection of art to the American Folk Art Museum. Charlie Munger gave to Good Samaritan Hospital and education. Walter and Suzanne Scott had donated huge amounts of money in Omaha. Ruth Gottesman served on the Albert Einstein College of Medicine Board of Overseers. Marshall Weinberg was gradually givingaway nearly all of his money for scholarships, world health, Middle East issues, and educationalresearch. The others had their own causes. 
When his turn in the conversation came, Bill Gates said, Shouldn¡¯t the measure of accomplishment be how many lives you can save with a given amount of money? He agreed with Buffett that you had to make the money first in order to have the money to give away. But as soon as he had made a certain amount, Gates 
said, he was goingto use it to save more lives in the present, by givingmost of it away. 43 
The Buffett Foundation was spendingvery little money in proportion to Buffett¡¯s wealth. Buffett had chosen two main philanthropic issues, overpopulation and nuclear proliferation, problems that are almost 
unimaginably hard to solve. Nuclear proliferation didn¡¯t lend itself well to financialsolutions, although Buffett would have given as much money as he could to his highest priority, any plausible way of reducing the probability of nuclear war. His analysis of the problem was, characteristically, statistical. 
¡°A nuclear attack is inevitable. It¡¯s the ultimate problem of mankind. If there¡¯s a ten percent probability that something will happen in a year, there¡¯s a 99.5 percent probability that it will happen in fifty years. But if you can get that probability down to three percent, that reduces the probability to only seventy-eight percent in fifty years. And if you can get it down to one percent, there is only a forty percent probability in fifty years. That¡¯s a truly worthwhile goal¡ªit could literally make all the difference in the world.¡± 
The other great problem, in Buffett¡¯s view, was the strain placed on the over-burdened planet by too many people. Lackinga way to solve the nuclear problem, population control was where the Buffett Foundation had spent most of its money since the mid-1980s. This, too, he approached froma mathematicalperspective. In 1950, the world¡¯s population had been about 2.5 billion. A mere two decades later, shortly after Paul 
Ehrlich¡¯s The Population Bomb was published, the world population was close to 3.7 billion.44 Ehrlich had predicted that the 1970s and 1980s would be times of massive, worldwide starvation, with hundreds of millions of people dying. By 1990 the world¡¯s population had passed the five-billion mark, mass starvation had not occurred, and Ehrlich¡¯s ideas were no longer taken seriously by many experts¡ªeven though the population had grown dramatically. The debate essentially centered over whether technology could outpace population growth, species extinction, and global warming. Buffett looked at the problemof expanding population and diminishingresources in terms of a ¡°margin of safety.¡± 
¡°There is a carrying capacity to the earth. It¡¯s far, far, far, far, far greater than [Thomas] Malthus ever dreamed. On the other hand, there is some carrying capacity, and the one thing about carrying capacity is that you want to err on the low side. If you were provisioning a huge rocket ship to the moon and had enough for two hundred people and didn¡¯t know how long the journey would take, you probably wouldn¡¯t put more than a hundred fifty people on the ship. And we have a spaceship of sorts, and we don¡¯t know how much the provisions are good for. It¡¯s very hard to argue that the earth would be better off in terms of 
45 
average happiness or livelihood with twelve billion people instead of six. There is a limit, and if you don¡¯t know what that limit is, you¡¯re better off erring on the safe side. It¡¯s a margin of safety approach for the survival of the earth.¡± 
Since the 1970s, Buffett had focused on givingwomen access to contraception and abortion¡ªissues that 
were close to Susie¡¯s heart¡ªas the answer to out-of-control population growth. This was a standard point of view amonghumanist organizations at the time.46 Munger, Tolles had gotten Buffett involved in supporting an important court case in California, People v. Belous, which was a major step on the road to the landmark 
abortion rulingin Roe v. Wade.47 Charlie Munger took up this case with a passion; the firm had chosen it out of concern over the way youngwomen were beingmaimed and killed through illegal abortions. Buffett and Munger sponsored a ¡°church¡± called the EcumenicalFellowship, which became part of the country¡¯s 
abortion underground railroad.48 
Buffett had been especially moved by the logic of Garrett Hardin, whose 1968 article ¡°The Tragedy of the 
Commons¡± laid out the way that people who have no ownership stake in common goods¡ªthe air, the seas¡ªoveruse and destroy them.49 While Buffett adopted many principles conceived by Hardin, a leader of the ¡°population control¡± movement, he rejected solutions favored by Hardin, who espoused authoritarian ideas and took a eugenicist approach. Hardin had written that the meek not only would inherit, but already had inherited the earth. He considered this ¡°genetic suicide¡±: ¡°Look around you. How many heroes do you number amongyour neighbors?Or your colleagues?¡­Where are the heroes of yesteryear? Where is Sparta 
now?¡±50 
Buffett thought that the idea of bringingback Sparta had already been tried. The man who had tried it was Adolf Hitler. The Spartans had groomed themselves genetically by abandoningweak or ¡°undesirable¡± babies on a mountain-side. Modern eugenics was a socialphilosophy formulated by Sir Francis Galton, who drew on the work of his cousin Charles Darwin and theorized that selective breedingof the human race could improve 
the quality of the population. This notion had received extremely widespread support in the early twentieth century, until discredited by the experiments of NaziGermany.51 There was no safe way to think alonglines like those Hardin was pursuing, which led to a deadly division of humanity into competinggroups.52 Buffett 
had renounced this view in favor of a civil-rights-based approach to the problems of spaceship Earth. 
Accordingly, by 1994, Buffett¡¯s emphasis had shifted from ¡°population control¡± to reproductive rights.53 
This change corresponded with a worldwide evolution in thinkingamongthe population control movement. Women ¡°were no longer to be treated as a convenient means toward the ¡®end¡¯ of population control.¡±54 Buffett had always felt that any means of solvingthe population problemthat involved coercion was out of 
the question.55 Now he went a step further. ¡°I wouldn¡¯t in any way limit a woman¡¯s right to bear children even if the world were extremely overpopulated, and I wouldn¡¯t ban the right to choose even if there were only two people on the planet and fertility was critical. I think the world should be limited to wanted people first. I don¡¯t think that the numbers should determine how many people are wanted. Even if everybody had seven children, I wouldn¡¯t do as Garrett Hardin said and link the right to the numbers.¡± So the Buffett Foundation supported reproductive rights. 
Increasingly, the complexities and nuances of reproductive rights, civil rights, and population controlhad all gotten lost in the controversy over abortion. Buffett¡¯s givingultimately was based on what he called the Ovarian Lottery.56 He had passed the idea alongto a group called Responsible Wealth. The idea had great resonance for Buffett.57 
¡°I¡¯ve had it so good in this world, you know. The odds were fifty-to-one against me being born in the United States in 1930. I won the lottery the day I emerged from the womb by being in the United States instead of in some other country where my chances would have been way different. 
¡°Imagine there are two identical twins in the womb, both equally bright and energetic. And the genie says to them, ¡®One of you is going to be born in the United States, and one of you is going to be born in Bangladesh. And if you wind up in Bangladesh, you will pay no taxes. What percentage of your income would you bid to be the one that is born in the United States?¡¯ It says something about the fact that society has something to do with your fate and not just your innate qualities. The people who say, ¡®I did it all myself,¡¯ and think of themselves as Horatio Alger¡ªbelieve me, they¡¯d bid more to be in the United States than in Bangladesh. That¡¯s the Ovarian Lottery.¡± 
The Ovarian Lottery had come to shape all of his opinions about politics and philanthropy; Buffett¡¯s ideal was a world in which winners were free to strive, but narrowed the gap by helpingthe losers. In his lifetime he had seen the extremes of inequality; had grown up with the lynchings and beatings of the civil-rights years; and had heard over and over of the Court House Riot, authority shoved onto a scaffold with a noose around its neck, at a time and in a place when one group of people felt themselves more deservingthan another. Perhaps without beingaware of it, Buffett had many years ago abandoned the libertarian leanings of 
his father58 and spiritually circled back toward the democratic idealismof Nebraska¡¯s William Jennings Bryan, who had written of ¡°the class that the rest rested upon.¡± 
Buffett, one of the least peripatetic people imaginable in both philosophy and geography, could make the occasional tectonic shift if enough conviction piled up. Now, after he and Susie returned fromIreland, they met in Vancouver to embark on a seventeen-day trip to China, ¡°Across Cathay.¡± Buffett¡¯s motivation for this round-the-world jaunt was the Gateses. Bill and Melinda had gone to considerable trouble to make the trip enjoyable for him. Ahead of time, they sent himand the other guests a questionnaire askingwhat they liked to eat. Buffett was not takingany chances on an experience like the one he¡¯d had at the Moritas¡¯. ¡°I don¡¯t eat any Chinese food,¡± he responded. ¡°If necessary, serve me rice and I¡¯lljust move it around on my plate, and I¡¯llgo back to my roomafterward and eat peanuts. Please get me a Journal every day; it¡¯s really hard if I 
don¡¯t have my Journal.¡±59 
And so Buffett went to China. 
After checkingin to Beijing¡¯s grand old Palace Hotelon Goldfish Lane, the tour group met Dr. Robert Oxnam, president of the Asia Society, who was to be their lecturer for the trip.60 Followinga talk on modern China, they ate a magnificent Sichuanese dinner in the hotel¡¯s Emerald Room. Waiters placed course after course on the rotatingplatters: tea-smoked duck, twice-cooked pork with chili sauce, spicy chicken, and Sichuan hot pot. But the Gateses had arranged for the tour company, Abercrombie & Kent, to send people ahead to teach the chefs to make hamburgers and french fries for Buffett. To his delight he was served course after course of his french fries¡ªeven for dessert. 
The followingmorning, the group set off to tour the Forbidden City, BeijingUniversity, and the National Palace Museum. At Fangshan restaurant, for lunch, and again that eveningat the DiaoyutaiState Guesthouse, an imperial family fishingground and retreat, Buffett was served hamburgers and french fries while the rest of the group feasted on Chinese cuisine. 
In Beijing, the group met the Premier of China, and Gates arranged a Ping-Pongmatch between Buffett and a twelve-year-old champion. On the third day, Dr. Oxnam lectured on the history and folklore of the Great Wall. When they climbed to the top, the group found champagne awaitingthem¡ªand Cherry Coke for Buffett. Lookingdown at the world¡¯s largest structure, which represented eleven centuries of innovative engineering, human labor, and Chinese history, everyone waited for Buffett to say somethingprofound. Surely he would be moved by the sight. 
¡°Boy, I sure would have liked to have been the company that got the brick contract for this thing,¡± he quipped. 
The followingmorning, he skipped the martial-arts lesson in favor of a tour of the localCoca-Cola plant. The next day, the group boarded a Chinese military transport plane to fly to ¨¹r¨¹mqi, a town in far northwestern China near Mongolia that was once an important stop on China¡¯s Silk Road. There, they would board a train¡ªno ordinary train, for the Gateses had arranged for the group to be the first Westerners to rent Chairman Mao¡¯s personal train¡ªfor a journey across northwest China. The train followed the Old Silk Road route, makingstops alongthe way so that the group could ride camels in the desert, visit ancient cities and caves, see the giant pandas in Xi¡¯an, and tour the archaeological digof the imperialTerra Cotta Warriors and Horses, believed to be the largest funerary site on earth. The trip allowed for hours and hours of conversation, duringwhich Buffett and Gates continued their discussions of why some banks are better than 
other banks, why retailingis such a tough business, the value of Microsoft stock, and the like.61 
On the tenth day they visited the site of the Three Gorges Dam project, then boarded the M.S. East Queen, a huge, five-deck cruise ship, with a ballroom, a barbershop, a masseuse, and a musician on the deck in formal clothes who played ¡°Turkey in the Straw.¡± 
The boat passed into the first of the three gorges, the ShennongXi, where many of those onboard donned orange life vests and climbed into longboats that were poled and pulled by river trackers alongan upstream tributary of the river. A group of ten men usingropes dragged each boat against the current, while young, supposedly virginal girls sangto encourage the men at their gruelingwork. 
Buffett cracked jokes about the virgins. But that night duringthe Cantonese dinner, his mind obviously flashingto the implications of the Ovarian Lottery, he said, ¡°There could have been another BillGates amongthose men pullingour boat. They were born here, and they were destined to spend their lives tugging those boats the way they did ours. They didn¡¯t have a chance. It was pure luck that we had a shot at the brass ring.¡± 
From ShennongXi, the boat steamed on to OutangGorge, passingvillages where schoolchildren came out to bow at the strange Americans. Past a silk-reelingmill, between sheer, mist-shrouded peaks, alongside a traditional cobblestone village, the boat slowly wound its way down the Yangtze. Finally, they arrived in Guilin for a private Li River barge cruise through one of the most scenically beautifulspots on earth, a pristine river lined with thousands of limestone pinnacles covered in a mantle of green, ¡°like jade hairpins,¡± accordingto the Tangpoet Han Yu. Many of the Gates party bicycled alongthe riverbank to experience the longwaterside parade of two-and three-hundred-foot-high untouched prehistoric stone shafts. Warren, Bill Sr., and BillJr. had obtained permission fromtheir wives to have an hours-longbridge orgy on the boat as the barge floated through the magnificent pine-forested landscape. 
When they finally arrived in HongKongat the end of the trip, Buffett towed the Gateses straight to McDonald¡¯s to buy hamburgers in the middle of the night. ¡°And all the way back from Hong Kong to San Francisco and then on to Omaha, I just read newspapers.¡± 
But longafter that journey through China, for years afterward in fact, Buffett¡¯s mind kept returningover and over to one of its moments. It was not the scenery, which he had barely noticed, or the camel ride, memorialized in a photograph. It was not the endless meals of french fries duringthe Chinese banquets that everyone else had enjoyed. He was thinkingabout the Three Gorges Dam project and the longboats on the ShennongXi. But it was not the singingvirgins that had beguiled him. It was the fate of the men who spent their lives ceaselessly draggingthe longboats upstream that stayed with him, hauntinghis thoughts about individualdestiny and fate. 
51 
ToHellwiththeBear 
Omaha and Greenwich, Connecticut . 1994¨C1998 
Through the bridge, through the golf, through Ireland, through China, as late as 1994, Buffett devoured the Wall Street Journal every day lookingfor stock to buy for Berkshire Hathaway. But it was growingsteadily more difficult to find a wonderfulbusiness at a fair price. He was still puttingmoney into Coca-Cola, until he had spent a totalof $1.3 billion on 100 million shares. He bought another shoe company, Dexter. Here he was a little outside his ¡°circle of competence,¡± makinga bet that demand for imported shoes would wane. 1 A jeweler named Barnett HelzbergJr., who knew about Borsheim¡¯s, saw Buffett in New York in a conversation on Fifth Avenue, and sold himHelzbergDiamonds almost on the spot. Buffett was also buyingAmerican Express stock again. 
He wanted the rest of GEICO. 
Since October 1993, GEICO had been run by co-CEOs: its chief investment officer, Lou Simpson, and Tony Nicely, a soft-spoken, silver-haired teddy bear of a man who had worked there since he was eighteen years old and now ran the insurance operations. Nicely had put the pedal to the floor, and GEICO, after a period of dormancy, started addinghalf a million new customers a year. In August 1994, Buffett talked to Nicely, Simpson, and Sam Butler, the chairman of the board¡¯s executive committee and the man who, many years before, had found Jack Byrne to rescue the company. Nicely, who did not enjoy dealingwith WallStreet, had 
thought ever since he became co-CEO that GEICO should be privately owned.2 He would much rather work for Buffett than a bunch of analysts and money managers. 
Butler led the negotiation. He wanted stock and a price in the $70s. Buffett regarded that as outrageous. He wanted to pay cash and a price in the high $50s.3 For a year, they bargained. Buffett pulled out the Circular Saw. This was his technique to cut the floor out from under GEICO by tryingto make Butler feel the company was weak and vulnerable. The market was gettingout of hand, Buffett said. This high-tech Internet stuff is goingcrazy and it¡¯s goingto hurt the whole industry, includingGEICO. You guys have a significant advantage sellingover the telephone, but the Internet is goingto narrow that quite a bit. It was apparent that by 1994, before the average person even had an e-mailaddress, Buffett, who supposedly knew nothingabout computers, had already grasped how the Internet was goingto affect the auto-insurance industry in the comingdecades¡ªbetter than the auto-insurance industry itself had. 
But Butler was a tough and experienced lawyer, and couldn¡¯t be Buffetted. Berkshire¡¯s stock price had doubled in two years. That April, with BRK tradingat $22,000 a share, Money magazine cited the Overpriced Stock Service newsletter, which said the price of BRK ¡°makes sense only if the company is run by God.¡± Butler refused to lower his number. He wanted as many Berkshire shares as he could get. The two reached an impasse. Finally, Buffett resorted to the ultimate weapon and brought in Charlie Munger as the Appointed Bad Guy. At Salomon, this had been predictably successful, but Sam Butler proved so tough that he couldn¡¯t even be Mungered. 
After a year, it became clear that if Buffett wanted GEICO, he was goingto have to meet Butler¡¯s price. Buffett wanted GEICO so badly that he capitulated. In August 1995 he paid $2.3 billion dollars for fifty-two percent of GEICO, after havingspent $46 million for the first forty-eight percent. And he paid with Berkshire stock, not cash. Despite havingfought so hard, Buffett actually regarded the price as reasonable looked at as a whole, given the bargain he¡¯d gotten on the first half of the stock. 
The GEICO deal marked a turningpoint. The stock market had been on a tear, with new offerings of hot stocks unexpectedly popular in 1994, comingon the heels of a big1993.4 In February 1995, the Dow hit 4,000 for the first time. Microsoft brought out Windows 95 and sold $700 million worth the first day. Suddenly everyone who worked in an office had a computer on their desk. People bought computers for their kids to do homework after school. Mothers of kindergarteners got e-mailaddresses to keep up with carpool news. Web-site designers couldn¡¯t meet the demand from businesses. Computer hackers made front-page news. 
In August 1995, an Internet service provider named Netscape went public to raise money for its expansion. Many people were familiar with Netscape¡¯s product, but the company had never earned a dime. So many calls to buy the stock came into banker Morgan Stanley that the company set up a toll-free number to handle them. Orders for 100 million shares poured in for a company that had originally wanted to sell3.5 million 
shares.5 
Despite Buffett¡¯s use of a computer to play bridge and the insights about the Internet that he had displayed in bargainingfor GEICO, his knowledge of technology was spotty. He remained personally indifferent to computers, while the rest of the world couldn¡¯t buy them fast enough. BillGates took this as a challenge. He brought Buffett and Munger to a gatheringat Microsoft to talk about technology. The eveningbefore, he and Melinda held a dinner at their house at which she seated Munger with Nathan Myhrvold, chief technology officer of Microsoft. The two soon fell into a lengthy conversation about naked mole rats. A naked mole rat looks like a boudin blanc¡ªa French milk sausage¡ªwith teeth; it feels no pain when cut, scraped, or 
burned.*31 Munger, a science buff, had some tangential knowledge on this topic. Sandy Gottesman had once invested in laboratory mice, tryingto make a quick buck on risingdemand for experimentalanimals. But Gottesman¡¯s investment hadn¡¯t worked out, and he got stuck with a buildingfull of mice under some bridge in New York City. The naked mole rat was a superior beast, not only insensitive to pain but parthenogenic: The queen of the colony fertilizes and gives birth without assistance fromthe males. Munger and Myhrvold 
held an animated conversation about the sex life of mole rats while the others sat listeningin numb disbelief.6 
The next morning, Gates took Buffett and Munger over to Microsoft so that his number two, Steve Ballmer, and half a dozen engineers could interview them, almost as anthropologists, so strange did it seemto them that these two incredibly brilliant men were such latecomers to the world of computers. They were like a couple of cavemen savants discovered in the bush who had seen an airplane but wouldn¡¯t take a ride. Despite his sense of the Internet¡¯s importance, for example, it had not yet occurred to Buffett to tellGEICO to hurry up and exploit the Internet to sellinsurance. To Buffett, computers were just tunnels that enabled him to reach other people who could play bridge. 
¡°That was quite interesting to Bill, because he saw how some guy who had no interest in the computer, per se, could be drawn in by an application. The computer itself was interesting to all the people around him¡ªbut to me, only the application was interesting. You sell the computer first to people who are interested in computers, and then you sell it to people like me who don¡¯t give a damn about computers.¡± 
Buffett, who deemed computers outside his ¡°circle of competence,¡± might stillhave been the richest man in America instead of Gates, had he bought stock in Microsoft and Intel. Instead, he was now number two. But he did not care. Or rather, he did care¡ªhe cared a lot; he would rather be number one, much rather¡ªbut he cared far more about avoidingexcess risk. He didn¡¯t know which company would turn into the next Microsoft or Intel and which would crash and burn. He would never give up his margin of safety. He knew that the life cycle of many technology businesses was as short as a naked mole rat¡¯s. 
Even had he been of the temperament to do so, Buffett didn¡¯t need to make risky bets. Decisions made years ago were still compoundingfor him. The hiringof Ajit Jain had meant that when Hurricane Andrew blew South Florida off the map in 1992, Buffett was able to start a new business, ¡°catastrophe reinsurance,¡± which charged a premiumprice to stand by as insurer of the unthinkable. Then the Northridge earthquake hit. Almost no one else had the capital to put up billions on a risk like that. But Berkshire Hathaway did. 
Buffett¡¯s relationship with the Blumkins brought him the chance to buy R. C. Willey, a Salt Lake City¨Cbased furniture chain. The old days of scouringthe Moody¡¯s Manuals for teensy companies were longgone; instead he played white knight once again to save FlightSafety from a corporate raider. This was a unique and profitable company that trained pilots and made the enormous flight simulators used for that training. He would go on to buy Star Furniture and International Dairy Queen. However, most of the ideas that were brought to himwere what he called ¡°cocker spaniels,¡± when he had asked for ¡°collies.¡± In reply to these proposals, ¡°If the phone don¡¯t ringyou¡¯ll know it¡¯s me,¡± he quipped in Berkshire¡¯s annual report. 
Some may have thought, If he¡¯ll buy Dexter Shoe, Buffett will buy anything. He was startingto regret that deal. Dexter was gettingkilled by foreign competition; people had not lost their interest in buyingimported shoes. But the mistakes were few and the home runs many:Cap Cities/ABC negotiated a dealto sellitself to Disney for $19 billion, and Berkshire made $2 billion, almost four times its originalinvestment. TomMurphy went on the board of Disney, and Buffett became linked to MichaelEisner, the CEO of Disney, through Murphy. At Sun Valley, the Buffetts now mingled easily with a crowd that ranged fromCoca-Cola executives to movie stars. He also went back on the board of the Washington Post, which was now beingrun by Don Graham, one of his favorite people, enablinghim to rejoin his favorite company in his favorite milieu ¡ªnewspapers. 
In early 1996, Berkshire stock suddenly rocketed to $34,000 a share, valuingBerkshire as a company at $41 billion. An original partner who invested $1,000 in 1957 and left it untouched would now have $12 million stashed away¡ªdouble the amount of just a couple of years before. Buffett himself was worth $16 billion. 
Susie now had $1.5 billion worth of Berkshire stock¡ªwhich she had promised not to touch.7 Both she and Charlie Munger were now on the Forbes 400 list¡ªas billionaires. Once invisible, Berkshire was noticed by people who had never heard of it before. That year, five thousand people fromall fifty states came to the shareholder meeting¨Ccum¨Cdiscount mall. 
Buffett took pride in havingnever ¡°split¡± the stock and swore he never would. ¡°My ego is wrapped up in Berkshire¡­.¡± he said. ¡°I can gear my whole life by the price of Berkshire.¡±8 But now it cost so much to buy a share of BRK that copycats set up investment trusts. Their idea was to mimic Berkshire Hathaway¡¯s stock portfolio and let people buy in smaller units, as if it were a mutualfund. But Berkshire was not a mutual fund; it was a perpetual-motion vacuum cleaner that sucked up businesses and stocks and spit out cash to buy more businesses and stocks. That couldn¡¯t be replicated by buyingthe stocks it owned. Amongother things, you didn¡¯t get Buffett. 
Moreover, the copycat funds were buyingthe stocks that Berkshire owned at prices far higher than Berkshire had paid, and chargingfat fees to do it. They were cheatinginvestors. Now the cop in Buffett came out. 
¡°I don¡¯t want anybody buying Berkshire thinking that they can make a lot of money fast. They¡¯re not going to do it, in the first place. And some of them will blame themselves, and some of them will blame me. They¡¯ll all be disappointed. I don¡¯t want disappointed people. The idea of giving people crazy expectations has terrified me from the moment I first started selling stocks.¡± 
To foil the putative copycats, he decided to issue a new class of shares. Each B share¡ªor ¡°Baby B¡±¡ªwas equalto 3.33 percent, or 1/30, of a pricy A share. 
He had great fun with the B shares, writing: ¡°Neither Mr. Buffett nor Mr. Munger would currently buy Berkshire shares at that price, nor would they recommend that their families or friends do so.¡± He added that ¡°current shareholders will not suffer any diminution in per-share intrinsic value, no matter how many 
9
Class B shares the Company decides it is necessary to sell.¡± 
By sellingan unlimited amount of stock, they ensured that the price would not rise because of more demand than supply. ¡°You don¡¯t want people who think of it as something that can double, you know. And you can create your own market action for a while. I could have been a hero for a year as all the money poured into a fixed supply of stock. Instead, we said we would sell as much of this stuff as the world wants, and that way there is no way it can be a hot stock.¡± 
At the same time, the inverted logic of sellingstock that you wouldn¡¯t buy yourself, and explicitly sayingso, pleased Buffett enormously. Moreover, issuingthe B shares fulfilled a duty to his shareholder ¡°partners.¡± All that cash pouringin from the B shares would be a pretty good deal for them. 
No CEO had ever done such a thingbefore. A small forest of trees was felled in media coverage of Buffett¡¯s honesty. Yet investors gobbled up the B shares anyway. Buffett thought themfoolish and said so privately and often. Yet there was no denyingit was enormously flatteringthat they did, for they were clearly buying only because of him. He would have been secretly disappointed had the B share offeringbeen a flop. The B shares were a Buffett no-risk deal: His shareholders won, and Buffett won, no matter how the offeringturned out. 
The Baby Bs forever changed the character of Buffett¡¯s ¡°club.¡± After May 1996, forty thousand new owners could callthemselves shareholders. The next year he moved the meetingto the grimy old Ak-Sar-Ben Coliseum, and 7,500 people showed up. They spent $5 million at the Nebraska Furniture Mart. The meeting turned into Woodstock for Capitalists, or BRKfest. At the 1998 shareholder meeting, ten thousand people came. Yet as the money and the people and the fame came rollingin, an underlyingshift took place in the world in which Buffett worked that would have profound effects on himand everybody else. 
There really was no such thingas ¡°WallStreet¡± anymore. Now financialmarkets were a stringof blinking terminals connected by computers hooked up to the Internet that reached every corner of the world. A guy named Mike Bloomberg, whomSalomon had been dumb enough to fire back in the eighties, had created a special computer that captured every piece of financialinformation that anyone could possibly want. It made graphs, it made tables, it did calculations, it gave news, it gave quotes; it could do historic comparisons and set up competitions between companies and bonds and currencies and commodities and industries for whoever was lucky enough to have a Bloombergterminal on his or her desk. 
By the early 1990s, the Bloombergterminalwas becomingubiquitous. The Bloombergsaleswoman had called Berkshire Hathaway for three years in a row. ¡°Nope¡± was the answer every time. Buffett felt that followingthe market minute to minute and manipulatingcomputers was not the way to invest. Finally it became obvious even to computer-averse Buffett that to trade bonds you had to have a Bloombergterminal. But the Bloombergsat some distance from Buffett¡¯s office and he never looked at it; that was the job of 
Mark Millard, the bond trader.10 
*** 
The advent of the Bloombergterminal, symbolof the new computerized trading, mirrored the ongoing struggle over Salomon¡¯s identity, which continued within the firm. Its laggard businesses had never gotten back on their feet. In 1994, Maughan had tried to realign pay at Salomon on the theory that employees should shoulder the same risk as shareholders. When times were good, they would get bonuses, but when times were 
bad, they would suffer as well. There were people inside the firmwho agreed with him.11 But that was not the standard anywhere else on WallStreet, so thirty-five senior people walked out the door. Buffett was disgusted with the employees¡¯ unwillingness to share the risk. 
Deprived of Meriwether to bonus-pimp for them, the arbs fought for their share. Buffett was willingto pay them for results¡ªthe firmstill made most of its money from arbitrage¡ªbut increasingcompetition made it harder for themto produce. 
Arbitrageurs make a bet that a temporary gap of prices between similar or related assets will eventually tighten. For example, the bet may be whether two nearly identicalbonds willtrade at a closer price.12 With so much new competition, the easy trades had become scarcer. The arbs took larger positions with more risk. When they were losing, they doubled down and increased the size of their trades. In both cases, they did so because margins on trades were falling, and doingbigger trades, often usingdebt, helped offset that. 
The rules of the racetrack said not to do so, because you don¡¯t have to make it back the way you lost it. The reason is the math of losingmoney, which works like this: If someone has a dollar and she loses fifty cents, she has to double her money to make back what she¡¯s lost. That¡¯s difficult to do. It is temptingto borrow another fifty cents for the next bet. That way you only have to make fifty percent (plus the interest you owe on the loan) to get back whole¡ªmuch easier to do. But borrowingthe money doubles your risk. If you lose fifty percent again, you¡¯re history. The loss has wiped out all your capital. Hence Buffett¡¯s sayings: Rule number one, don¡¯t lose money. Rule number two, don¡¯t forget rule number one. Rule number three, don¡¯t go into debt. 
The arbs¡¯ strategy, however, assumed that their estimate of value was right. Therefore, when the market moved against them, they only had to wait to make the money back. But ¡°risk¡± defined this way¡ªin terms of volatility¡ªpresumes the investor can be patient and wait. Of course, anyone who borrows to invest may not have that luxury of time. Moreover, to actually enlarge a losingtrade required extra capital stashed somewhere that could be forked over on a moment¡¯s notice if the need arose. And capitalhas an opportunity cost. 
Larry Hilibrand lost $400 million¡ªan enormous sum¡ªarbitragingthe difference in interest rates on mortgage-backed bonds. He was convinced that he could make back the loss on the mortgage arbitrage if the firm would double his bet. Buffett agreed with Hilibrand in this instance and gave him the money for the trade¡ªwhich in fact reversed to become profitable. 
The arbs had an almost supernatural belief in their own abilities, and as their corner of the market became crowded, they wanted to expand into even more types of arbitrage that involved more variables and less certainty. They relied heavily on computer models driven by complex mathematics, but always said these were only guideposts. Buffett and Munger felt that usingmodels to make investment decisions was like drivinga car on cruise control. The driver might think he was fully alert and attentive, but would find out differently when the road turned winding, rain-slicked, and full of traffic. 
What the arbs really wanted, however, even more than capital to invest, was J.M. DuringSalomon¡¯s recovery, Meriwether waited on the sidelines at first while the arbs begged to bringhimback. But while Deryck Maughan made polite noises, everybody knew he did not want Meriwether back. Nevertheless, Buffett and Munger had given a thumbs-up, with some conditions. Meriwether had to have supervision. He could return to his old position but would have to report to Maughan, with less freedomto run his operation. Unwillingto work under a shorter leash, Meriwether had broken off negotiations and in 1994 went off to found his own hedge fund, Long-TermCapitalManagement. It would operate the same way as the bond arbitrage unit at Salomon, except that Meriwether and his partners got to keep the profits. 
One by one, Meriwether¡¯s key lieutenants left Salomon to join himat the new harbor-front offices of Long-TermCapital Management in Greenwich, Connecticut. Deprived of his biggest moneymakers, Deryck Maughan saw the ¡°for sale¡± sign headingfor Buffett¡¯s block of stock and began planningfor the day when 
Buffett would wash his hands of Salomon.13 
In his 1996 shareholder letter, Buffett said that ¡°virtually all stocks¡± were overvalued. Whenever the market ran hot it was because Wall Street was in vogue. That year, Maughan thought it timely to pitch the restaurant in front of Salomon¡¯s casino to Sandy Weill, CEO of Travelers Insurance, as the anchor tenant in a global financial shoppingmall that could compete with Merrill Lynch. Weill supposedly stillresented Buffett for the sweet deal Berkshire got after Weill¡¯s squeeze-out in the Fireman¡¯s Fund sale more than a decade earlier. He distrusted the arbitrage casino, but he saw an opportunity for the restaurant chain on a global scale. When he bought Salomon for Travelers, some observers felt that since Solly hadn¡¯t done well under Buffett, Weillsaw it as a chance to beat Buffett at his own game. Buffett hailed Weill for the decision as a genius at building 
shareholder value.14 And Travelers paid $9 billion for Salomon, bailingBuffett out of his problem-child investment.15 
Meriwether, who knew that Buffett liked owningcasinos, had gone to Omaha with one of his partners to try to raise money for Long-TermCapitalfor its February 1994 launch. They ate the now-obligatory dinner at Gorat¡¯s, where J.M. pulled out a schedule over his steak to show Buffett different probabilities of results and how much money Long-Termcould make or lose. The strategy involved earningtiny profits on many thousands of trades, leveraged by at least twenty-five times the firm¡¯s capital. The highest loss that Long-Termcontemplated was twenty percent of its assets, the odds of which it estimated at no more than one 
in a hundred.16 Nobody estimated the odds of losses bigger than that. (If they did, no one would invest; the numbers wouldn¡¯t make sense. The projections in virtually allthese types of models in every financial business always assumed the maximum ¡°earthquake¡±-type loss could never happen¡ªbecause the expected returns were never high enough to compensate investors for takingthat risk.) 
The name Long-Termcame fromthe fact that investors were locked in. Meriwether knew that if he started losingmoney, he needed the investors to stay untilthe losses turned around. But so much leverage, combined with no way to cap the risk completely, made Buffett and Munger uncomfortable. 
¡°We thought they were very smart people,¡± says Munger. ¡°But we were a little leery of the complexity and leverage. We were very leery of beingused as a sales lead. We knew others would follow if we got in.¡± Munger thought Long-Termwanted Berkshire as a ¡°Judas goat.¡± ¡°The Judas goat led the animals to slaughter in the stockyards,¡± he says, recallingOmaha. ¡°The goat would live for fifteen years, and of course the animals that followed it would die every day as it betrayed them. Not that we didn¡¯t admire the intellect of 
the people at Long-Term.¡±17 
Long-Termcharged its clients two cents off every dollar under management every year that they invested, plus a quarter of any profits it earned. Clients signed up for the prestige, but the ¡°invest with a genius¡± approach put off other funds and firms on Wall Street. Nevertheless, it raised $1.25 billion, the largest hedge-fund start-up in history. The old arb teamat Salomon now worked together in secrecy, with no outside interference and no more sharingof the profits with other parasitic Salomon departments. Indeed, the fund smoked in its first three years, quadruplingits investors¡¯ money. By the end of 1997, Long-Term had amassed $7 billion of capital. Then competition from start-up hedge funds depressed returns. Meriwether sent $2.3 billion of money back to investors; the rest was allthe market could digest. The hedge fund in Greenwich was now runningmore than $129 billion in assets¡ªand a like amount of debt¡ªon only $4.7 billion of capital. In a near-instant replication of Buffett¡¯s steady accumulation of wealth, through the magic 
of fees earned on borrowed money, nearly half of the capital belonged to the partners themselves.18 Despite the fifty-year-old Meriwether¡¯s difficulty makingeye contact, he and his firmhad a swagger to match their brilliant reputations, and the partners took fulladvantage of the fund¡¯s position to dictate terms to its clients, to the fifty-somethingbanks fromwhich it borrowed, and to its brokers (in many cases these parties were one and the same). 
BeatingBuffett¡¯s record was now the goalof most money managers in worldwide finance. Some thought Meriwether had at least an unconscious grudge against Buffett for failingto protect himat Salomon, then subsequently not hiringhimback.19 Unbeknownst to anyone, Long-TermCapitalwas shortingBerkshire 
Hathaway, on the theory that BRK was overpriced relative to the value of the stocks that it owned.20 Not only that, Long-Termset up a Bermuda reinsurance company, Osprey Re, named after the copper osprey that sank its talons into helpless prey in the fountain outside Long-Term¡¯s building. Osprey Re was goingto insure earthquakes, hurricanes, and similar naturaldisasters¡ªit was, in other words, enteringAjit Jain catastrophe reinsurance territory. The ditches on the roadside of the insurance highway were filled with wreckage. Buffett, the soulof prudence, had barely escaped himself once or twice in his younger days. Whenever a novice came along, better find the keys to the tow truck. 
Gradually, as Long-Term¡¯s coffers swelled and imitators followed for the next several years, through early summer of 1998, lenders collectively began to realize that, as periodically happens, they had gotten too euphoric about the prospects that all these people to whom they had lent money would pay them back. Long-Term¡¯s competitors started dumpingtheir dodgier positions as interest rates rose. That pushed down prices and set off a cycle of selling. But Long-Term had bet the opposite way, sellingthe safest assets and buyingthe riskiest, which were relatively cheaper. Its intricate models basically said that over time the financial markets were becomingmore efficient, so the prices of risky assets would converge toward the prices of safer assets. Its biggest trades were a formulaic guess that the market would become less volatile, meaningthat as the market bounced around, it would oscillate in smaller arcs. And historically that had been so. But as history had also shown, generally did not mean always. Long-Termknew that. It had made investors lock in their capitallongenough to be safe¡ªor so it thought. 
On August 17, 1998, Russia suddenly defaulted on its ruble debt, meaningit would not pay its bills. When a major government stiffs its lenders, worldwide financial markets shudder. Investors began dumping everythingin sight. A money manager had warned Long-Term, early on, that its strategy of ekingout teensy 
profits on a zillion trades was like ¡°pickingup nickels in front of a bulldozer.¡±21 Now¡ªsurprise¡ªthe bulldozer turned out to have a Ferrariengine, and it was racingtoward themat eighty miles an hour. 
On Sunday, August 23, ¡°I was playing bridge on the computer. I picked up the phone, and it was Eric Rosenfeld at Long-Term.¡± The boyish Rosenfeld, forty-five years old and one of Meriwether¡¯s key lieutenants, was the person who had had the brain-numbingjob of goingthrough thousands of Mozer¡¯s trades at Salomon and reconstructingwhat went wrong. Buffett liked Rosenfeld. Now he had been deputized by Meriwether to cut back the portfolio¡¯s size by sellingthe firm¡¯s merger arbitrage positions. ¡°I hadn¡¯t heard from him for years. With fear in his voice, Eric started to talk about me taking out their whole big stock 
22 
arbitrage position, six billion dollars¡¯ worth. They thought stock arbitrage was mathematical.¡± Respondingreflexively, Warren Buffetted Rosenfeld. ¡°I just said to Eric, I would take certain ones but not all of them.¡± 
By a few days later, the market¡¯s gyrations had cost Long-Termhalf its capital. The partners had spent a week talkingto everybody in their well-connected database, tryingto raise money before they had to report this dire news to their investors on August 31. No dice. Now they agreed that Larry Hilibrand¡ªthe superrationalist whose sobriquet on Wall Street was still ¡°the $23 million man,¡± for the outsize bonus that had set Mozer off on his tear¡ªwould make a pilgrimage to Omaha and reveal what Long-Termowned. 
The next day the Dow dropped four percent in what the Wall Street Journal referred to as a ¡°globalmargin call,¡± with investors panickingand selling. Buffett picked up Hilibrand at the airport and drove himback to Kiewit Plaza. The modesty of Buffett¡¯s smaller office, staffed by a handfulof people and piled with Coca-Cola memorabilia, contrasted markedly with Long-Term¡¯s enormous digs in Greenwich, which featured two pool tables and a three-thousand-square-foot gym staffed by a full-time trainer. 
Hilibrand had gone deep into debt to pump up his personal investment in the firm, leveragingthe leverage 
with which Long-Term had already leveraged itself. He spent the day goingover every position the firm owned and stressingthe incredible opportunity he was offeringto Buffett.23 ¡°He wanted me to put in capital. He described the seven or eight big fundamental positions. I knew what was happening with relationships and on prices in these areas. I was getting more interested as time went along, because they were crazy relationships and spreads. But he was proposing a deal to me that didn¡¯t make any sense. They thought they had time to play the hand out. But I said no, so that was that.¡± Buffett told him, ¡°I am not an investor in 
other people¡¯s funds.¡±24 He was only interested as an owner. 
Long-Termdidn¡¯t want an owner, only an investor. It came close to findingsomebody else, but then he 
backed out.25 By month-end, when it had to report to its investors, the fund had lost $1.9 billion¡ªalmost half of its capital¡ªthrough a historically unusualcombination of stock-market declines and almost hysterical aversion to risk in the bond markets.26 Since the modelhad contemplated losses of twenty percent as beinga 
one-in-one-hundred-year event¡ªlike a moderate West Coast earthquake¡ªthis was somewhat like a Category 4 hurricane hittingNew York City. Meriwether wrote his investors a letter sayinglosses of half the fund¡¯s money were a ¡°shock,¡± but ¡°the opportunity set in these trades at this time is believed to be among the best that LTCM has ever seen¡­. The Fund is offeringyou the opportunity to invest in the Fund on 
special terms related to LTCM fees.¡±27 Long-Term was behavingas though it could raise capitalto wait out the crisis and profit fromits turnaround. But with the kind of leverage it had taken on, it didn¡¯t have that option. This was the fallacy of definingrisk as anythingother than losingmoney. Long-Termhad not prepared for that. The firm¡¯s insular culture and years of gettingits way had blinded the partners to the reality that no investor would put in money to save it without also takingcontrol. 
The day he read this, Buffett wrote a letter to a colleague and forwarded Meriwether¡¯s entreaty, saying: 
Attached is an extraordinary example of what happens when you get 1) a dozen people with an average IQ of 160; 2) workingin a field in which they collectively have 250 years of experience; 3) operatingwith a huge percentage of their net worth in the business; 4) employinga ton of leverage.28 
Anythingtimes zero is zero, Buffett said. A totalloss is a ¡°zero.¡± No matter how small the likelihood of a total loss on any given day, if you kept bettingand betting, the risk kept stackingup and multiplying. If you kept bettinglongenough, sooner or later, as longas a zero was not impossible, someday a zero was one 
hundred percent certain to show up. 29 Long-Term, however, had not even tried to estimate the risk of a loss greater than twenty percent¡ªmuch less a zero. 
In September the earthquake kept rumbling. Long-Term searched desperately for money, havingnow lost sixty percent of its capital. Other traders had started puttingthe squeeze on the fund, shortingpositions they knew Long-Termowned because they knew Long-Termneeded to sell, which would force prices lower. Investors were fleeinganythingrisky in favor of anythingsafe, to a point that Long-Term¡¯s models had never considered possible because it made no economic sense to them. Long-Termhired Goldman Sachs, which came in as a partner to buy half the firm. It needed $4 billion, an almost unimaginable sumfor a hedge fund in distress to raise. 
Goldman Sachs got in touch with Buffett to see if he was interested in a bailout. He wasn¡¯t. However, he would consider teamingwith Goldman to buy the entire portfolio of assets and debt. Together they would be strongenough to wait the crisis out and trade the positions deftly for a profit. But Buffett had a condition: no Meriwether. 
Long-Termowed money to a subsidiary of Berkshire. It owed money to people who owed money to Berkshire. It owed money to people who owed money to people who owed money to Berkshire. ¡°Derivatives are like sex,¡± Buffett said. ¡°It¡¯s not who we¡¯re sleepingwith, it¡¯s who they¡¯re sleepingwith that¡¯s the problem.¡± As Buffett headed to Seattle that Friday to meet the Gateses and embark on a thirteen-day ¡°Gold Rush¡± trip from Alaska to California, he called a manager and told him, ¡°Accept no excuses fromanyone 
who doesn¡¯t post collateralor make a margin call. Accept no excuses.¡±30 He meant that if the Howie-equivalents out there paid the rent one day late, then seize their farms. 
The next morninghe, Susie, the Gateses, and three other couples flew to Juneau to helicopter over the ice fields. They cruised up the fjords to view huge blue icebergs and waterfalls cascadingover three-thousand-foot cliffs. But as Buffett sat politely through a slide presentation on glaciology on board the ship that evening, his mind wandered to whether Goldman Sachs would be able to put together a bid for Long-Term. Predatory sellers had pushed prices so far down that Long-Termwas a cigar butt. An 
opportunity to buy such a large bundle of distressed assets had never arisen so quickly in his career. 
The next day, the Gates party went ashore at low tide to view the hundreds of brown grizzly bears that frequented Pack Creek. Jon Corzine, the head of Goldman Sachs, called Buffett on his satellite phone but kept beingcut off. ¡°The phone didn¡¯t work because of these half-mile-high rock walls on either side of the boat. The captain would point out, Look, there¡¯s a bear. I was saying, To hell with the bear. Let¡¯s get back where I can hear the satellite phone.¡± 
Two or three hours went by with Buffett held incommunicado as the party spent the afternoon crossing Frederick Sound so they could view the humpback whales. Corzine stewed in New York before he regained brief¡ªand final¡ªcontact with Buffett. By the time Buffett resignedly trudged off to view a slide show on Alaskan marine wildlife that evening, Corzine had gathered that he could make a bid, as longas the investment had nothingto do with, and was not managed by, John Meriwether. 
On Monday, Buffett remained out of touch and Corzine grew pessimistic about workingout a bid. He had begun to talk with Peter Fisher, who ran tradingactivities at the FederalReserve, and was drawingtogether Long-Term¡¯s creditors to negotiate a joint bailout. The Federal Reserve had held a conference callat which its chairman, Alan Greenspan, spoke of an ¡°internationalfinancial maelstrom¡± that must be causing 
¡°considerable breakage to crockery somewhere.¡±31 Hope began to stir that the Fed would cut interest rates. 
Meanwhile, Long-Termlost another half billion dollars; the banks pickingover its books were usingwhat they learned against it.32 The fund now had less than a billion dollars of capitalleft. The irony was the $2.3 billion it had paid out to its own investors a year before in order to increase the share of the fund owned by its partners. If it had that money now, Long-Termmight have been in a position to survive on its own. Instead, it had a hundred dollars of debt for every dollar of capital¡ªa ratio no sane lender would ever entertain. 
Buffett was en route to Bozeman, Montana, with the Gates party, but Corzine had reached himearlier that morningand gained permission to enlist a large insurer, AIG, which owned a derivatives business, to join the bid. Its chairman, Hank Greenberg, was on friendly terms with Buffett. AIG had the experience and the team to replace Meriwether as manager, and Greenberg¡¯s powerfulpresence would balance out Buffett¡¯s¡ªand it might make Buffett¡¯s bid more palatable to Meriwether. 
The next morning, forty-five bankers arrived at the Fed, as summoned, to discuss a bailout of the customer that had bullied themso relentlessly for the past four years. Long-Termhad themover a figurative barrel once again, for if it went down, other hedge funds would go down with it. As one domino fell after another, a global financial meltdown was a real possibility¡ªa repeat of Salomon. This was the warningthat Buffett and Munger had been repeatingat their shareholder meetings since 1993. Some of the banks now feared for their survival unless they helped save the fund. They were reluctantly contemplatingputtingmore money into Long-Term¡ªmoney that would only go to pay Long-Term¡¯s debts¡ªon top of money they had already invested in the fund and lost. When Corzine told them Buffett was also bidding, the idea that he was goingto come in and buy it to make a killingwent down poorly, even though he would be bailingeverybody out. Somehow, Buffett always won. People found it irksome. New York Federal Reserve Bank President William McDonough called Buffett to find out if he was serious. About to board a bus for Yellowstone National Park, Buffett told McDonough that, yes, indeed, he was ready to make a bid and could do so on short notice. He couldn¡¯t see why the FederalReserve would be orchestratinga bailout when Berkshire, AIG, and Goldman Sachs, a group of private buyers, stood ready to solve the whole problem without government assistance. He called Long-Termaround eleven o¡¯clock New York time on a crackly satellite phone and said, ¡°I want you to know, I¡¯m goingto bid for the entire portfolio. You¡¯ll hear frommy representatives, but I want you to know it¡¯s comingfromme, and I hope you¡¯ll take it seriously.¡± 
¡°I didn¡¯t want to hold the bus up, so I went along. It was killing me. And Charlie was in Hawaii. I still knew the basic positions that were involved, and I knew these spreads were really getting more and more extreme. On that Wednesday morning, it was changing by the hour.¡± 
An hour later, Goldman faxed a single page to Meriwether offeringto buy the fund for $250 million. As part 
of the deal, Meriwether and his partners would be fired. If Meriwether accepted, AIG, Berkshire, and Goldman would put another $3.75 billion into Long-Term, with Berkshire fundingmost of that. To minimize the chance of Long-Termshoppingthe bid to gin up a higher offer, Buffett had given themonly an hour to decide. 
By then, Long-Termhad just over $500 million left, and Buffett was biddingjust under half that. After payingoff debt and losses, Meriwether and his partners would be wiped out, their nearly $2 billion of capital gone. But the document had been drafted by Goldman with a mistake in it. It offered to buy LTCM, the management company, instead of its assets, which Meriwether knew was what Buffett wanted. Meriwether¡¯s lawyer said he needed his partners¡¯ consent to sellthe entire portfolio rather than the management 
company. 33 Long-Termasked for a temporary emergency investment pendingreceipt of the approvals. But they couldn¡¯t reach Buffett on his phone. If they¡¯d reached him, he said later, he would have taken that deal. While everybody else on the Gold Rush trip was lookingat hot springs, Buffett was dialingand redialingthe satellite phone in Yellowstone, tryingto callCorzine at Goldman and Hank Greenbergat AIG. The phone didn¡¯t work. He had no idea what was goingon back in New York. 
The people at Long-Termdid not know what was goingon in the room with the bankers, where McDonough was in a quandary. He had an offer from the Berkshire-Goldman-AIG consortium but no deal. It was hard to justify government involvement in orchestratinga bailout when there was a viable private bid on the table. Finally, he told the assembled bankers that the other bid had failed for ¡°structural reasons.¡± Buffett was not there to make a counterargument. The FederalReserve brokered a deal in which fourteen banks put up a total of $3.6 billion. Only one bank, Bear Stearns, refused to participate, earningthe long-lastingenmity of the rest. Meriwether¡¯s crew negotiated an arrangement for themselves that they considered slightly better 
than ¡°indentured servitude.¡±34 
That night at the Lake Hotel, Buffett found out what had happened. He felt that Meriwether didn¡¯t want to sellto him. If he had wanted to, he would have found a way. Perhaps it had weighed on Meriwether¡¯s mind that, as one of the fund¡¯s partners said, ¡°Buffett cares about one thing. His reputation. Because of the 
Salomon scandal he couldn¡¯t be seen to be in business with J.M.¡±35 Meriwether had certainly gotten a better deal fromthe bailout than he would have with Buffett. 
The next day, as they boarded the bus to visit Old Faithful geyser, Buffett was still turningover in his mind whether there was some way to undo it. Gates had a treat in store. When they arrived in Livingston, Montana, in early afternoon to board a nine-car private train fitted out with burnished wood and polished leather that Gates had rented, Sharon Osbergwas waitingalongwith Fred Gitelman, a low-key computer programmer and bridge player. Gates had flown them in. While everyone else was admiringthe cliffs and waterfalls of the Wind River Canyon, the foursome retired to an upstairs lounge with a transparent dome for a twelve-hour bridge marathon. Periodically, Buffett¡¯s phone rangand he talked with someone in New York about Long-Termas the spectacular scenery rolled past. It still might not be too late to unwind the impending 
bailout and resurrect a private deal. But it wasn¡¯t workingout.36 At least the bridge distracted him. 
The next morning, after a final round of bridge, the train rolled to a halt and dropped Osbergand Gitelman off in Denver, then continued through Devil¡¯s Hole Canyon and Dead Man¡¯s Gulch. Over the next few days, as the others went white-water raftingand mountain bikingand the train wound its leisurely way to the Napa Valley via the Grand Canyon, Buffett read about the rescue in the newspapers and gradually lost hope of participating. 
Only seven years after the regulators had contemplated lettingSalomon fail¡ªwith allthe consequences that that potentially entailed¡ªthe FederalReserve had now engineered the bailout of a private investment firm, an unprecedented intervention in the market to avoid a similar event. Afterward, the Fed slashed interest rates three times in seven weeks to help keep the financial stumble fromparalyzingthe economy. It was by no means certain that any such paralysis would occur, but the stock market took off like a screaming 
banshee.37 Long-Term¡¯s partners and most of the staff worked for a year for $250,000¡ªpauper¡¯s wages for people used to makingmillions a year¡ªto unwind the fund¡¯s positions and pay back most of the emergency creditors.38 Hilibrand, in debt for $24 million, signed the employment contract with tears streamingdown his 
cheeks.39 Still, nobody starved, even though Eric Rosenfeld had to auction off Long-Term¡¯s wine collection. Most of them got good jobs afterward. Meriwether made a comeback to start a smaller, less leveraged fund, takingsome of his team. People thought the partners had gotten off light, consideringthat they had nearly sent the whole financial world into a seizure. And Buffett considered it one of the great missed opportunities of his life. 
Eric Rosenfeld had an insight. Maybe models didn¡¯t work when the world went mad. For that you needed a lot of capital, the kind that Berkshire Hathaway offered. After all, if you were goingto bet by a hundred billion or more in favor of risk, you needed a partner, even a parent, one with so much capitalthat it 
essentially undid the leverage, somebody to provide a bigumbrella in a storm.40 By implication, maybe they would have been better off beingowned by somebody like Berkshire Hathaway. But that would have meant givingup their ownership¡­. You couldn¡¯t have it both ways. If you wanted Berkshire to take the risk and put up the money, to it went the gains. 
To think otherwise was unrealistic¡ªthat somehow risk could be laid off to someone else without also giving up the rewards. But that point of view was growingand beginningto dominate the financialmarkets of the late 1990s. It would have profound consequences over time. 
It is hard to overstate the significance of a central-bank-led rescue of a private money manager. If a hedge 
fund, however large, was too bigto fail, then what large financial institution would ever be allowed to collapse? The government risked becomingthe margin of safety.41 No serious consequences had come about in the end fromthe derivatives near-meltdown. The market afterward seemed to behave as if no serious consequences ever could. This threat, the so-called ¡°moral hazard,¡± was a chronic worry of regulators. But the world would always be fullof people who loved risk. When it came to business, Buffett¡¯s veins were filled with ice, but plenty of other people¡¯s pulsed with adrenaline much of the time. Some of themhad even been members of his own family. 
52 
Chickenfeed 
Decatur, Illinois, and Atlanta . 1995¨C1999 
Howie and Devon were on the lam. He had walked out of the office at ADM on a Friday knowinghe would never return. A pack of reporters had been camped out in their driveway ever since. He and Devon started packing. They sneaked out of Decatur at dawn on Sunday on a rented prop plane to fly to Chicago, where they met family friend Don Keough, who was givingthem a ride to Sun Valley on his private jet. Since reporters weren¡¯t allowed inside the Allen conference, Howie thought they would be safe. 
He had been pacingthe floor for ten days, ever since Mark Whitacre, an excitable manager he knew at ADM, suddenly confessed to him that he was actingas an FBI mole. Whitacre told himthat the FBI was goingto arrive at Howie¡¯s house at six o¡¯clock on Tuesday night for an interview. Now Howie knew why Whitacre kept showingup at work for several days in a row in the same greenish polyester suit: He had been wearinga wire. Ever since Whitacre made his confession, he¡¯d been callingevery day, blatheringhis anxieties at Howie, who tried to disentangle himself. Howie hadn¡¯t busted Whitacre, but he could tell from the panic in Whitacre¡¯s voice that he must be crackingunder the stress. 
That Tuesday night, Devon tried to fix dinner with shakinghands. When the doorbellrang, Howie wanted to throw up. In came a guy in a suit¡ªwho told himhe was not a target. Three hundred FBI agents were fanned out across the country, interviewingother people about price-fixingof an ADM product called lysine that 
was used in chicken feed. 
Howie was terrified but had made up his mind to be completely forthcomingwith the FBI. He said he didn¡¯t 
trust Dwayne Andreas, who had put him in charge of funnelingrequests for political contributions, a role, given Andreas¡¯s history, that might have made anybody¡¯s stomach churn.1 He told the agent that the previous fall Andreas had rebuked himwhen he raised ethicalquestions about providingentertainment to a Congressman. Howie didn¡¯t know anythingabout price-fixing, however. 
The second the FBI agents left, Howie called his father, flailing, saying, I don¡¯t know what to do, I don¡¯t have the facts, how do I know if these allegations are true? My name is on every press release. How can I be the spokesman for the company worldwide? What should I do, should I resign? 
Buffett refrained fromthe obvious response, which was that, of his three children, only Howie could have wound up with an FBI agent in his livingroomafter takinghis first job in the corporate world. He listened to the story nonjudgmentally and told Howie that it was his decision whether to stay at ADM. He gave only one piece of advice:Howie had to decide within the next twenty-four hours. If you stay in longer than that, he said, you¡¯ll become one of them. No matter what happens, it will be too late to get out. 
That clarified things. Howie now realized that waitingwas not a way to get more information to help him decide, it was makingthe decision to stay. He had to look at his options and understand as of right now what they meant. 
If he resigned and they were innocent, he would lose friends and look like a jerk. 
If he stayed and they were guilty, he would be viewed as consortingwith a gangof criminals. 
The next day Howie went in, resigned, and told the generalcounsel that he would take legalaction against the company if they put his name on any more press releases. Resigningfrom the board was a major event. For a director to resign was like sendingup a smoke signal that said the company was guilty, guilty, guilty. People at ADM did not make it easy for Howie. They pushed for reprieve, they asked how he could in effect convict themwithout a trial. Howie held firm, however, and got out. 
Two days later, when the announcement of his resignation became public, the reporters camped out on his doorstep. The name Buffett attached to a scandal was like red meat to rottweilers. The wisdomof moving fast was even more apparent now that he and Devon had to manage a getaway fromtheir own home. 
But Howie soon found that despite the absence of reporters, who were excluded from the event, even Sun Valley was not safe. One of the first people he saw in the lobby of the Sun Valley Lodge was another ADM board member. This man, who would be around allweekend, poked himin the chest and said, ¡°You¡¯ve just 
made the biggest mistake of your life.¡±2 
He couldn¡¯t have been more wrong. Howie had just saved himself frombeingassociated with a disaster in 
which three top executives, includingthe vice chairman Michael Andreas, would go to prison in the biggest price-fixingcase in American history.3 ADM paid an enormous fine to settle with the government, and its reputation took a hit that would shadow it for years. 
Now, however, the contretemps had left Howie out of a job. BigSusie, who was concerned about himand also about Susie Jr., who was gettingdivorced from Allen, swunginto action and convinced Warren to begin a tradition of givingeach of the kids a million dollars once every five years on their birthdays, startingthen. Buffett not only went alongbut bragged on himself for beginningthis tradition. He had begun to loosen up significantly when it came to money. Susie¡¯s allowance had expanded dramatically. At her behest, Buffett bought another house in Laguna next to the first, known as the ¡°dormitory,¡± to house all the children and 
grandchildren and visitors.4 Susie¡¯s Pacific Heights apartment, up a million stairs with no elevator but with an amazingview of the Golden Gate Bridge and Alcatraz, had been transformed to feature white lacquered walls and carpetingin her trademark sunny yellow. Almost every inch of space was covered with things she had purchased, collected fromher travels, or been given by friends. There were paintings and masks created by artist friends, a Chinese altar cloth, a Balinese tapestry, Tiffany glass, souvenirs and tchotchkes of all kinds, some expensive, many cheap and offbeat. They filled her walls, cabinets, closets, and drawers to overflowing. 
The effect struck observers, dependingon their perspective, as colorful, beautiful, and a wonderful reflection of Susie¡¯s personality, or a chaotic magpie¡¯s nest of things. Susie was always lobbyingfor more space; along with the second apartment she had convinced Warren to buy her on the ground floor of her building, unknown to him, she had also begun to rent storage rooms around San Francisco to house her ever-expanding collections. 
Susie¡¯s ministry to the sick and dyingseemed to compound as rapidly as her collections. She had carried on her work with AIDSsufferers through the 1990s. Then her sister Dottie began a battle with terminal cancer. Allthrough Dottie¡¯s earlier struggles¡ªwith alcoholism, with health and maritalproblems, with the death of her son Billy¡ªSusie had been by her side. Susie stayed in Omaha to nurse her sister through her last months and days. When Dottie finally died, another person Susie had not, in the end, been able to save, it was the greatest loss she had suffered since her nephew¡¯s terrible death by overdose. And Susie was now the last person alive fromher original family. 
In summer 1996, she had to help Warren deal with the death of his ninety-two-year-old mother. Even in her later years, Leila had never stopped beratingthe family. She could still work Doris over on the phone or duringa visit, barely stoppingfor breath for an hour or more, sendingDoris into tears and endingwith ¡°I¡¯m glad we had this little talk.¡± Warren himself continued to avoid Leila, havingrelegated most of the caretaking to Susie Jr. He spoke much more often and more fondly of Rose Blumkin than he ever did of his mother. When Astrid and Sharon Osbergtook himout to visit Leila, he was a ¡°wreck,¡± and the two women would talk to Warren¡¯s mother while he sat by anxiously, not participatingin the conversation. As Leila¡¯s memory 
faded, her story mostly wound down to the 381/2 wonderful years with Howard and one other topic that seemed to have lodged itself in her mind duringWarren¡¯s infancy: ¡°Isn¡¯t it a shame about the little Lindbergh baby?¡± she would ask. ¡°Isn¡¯t it a shame?¡± 
After Leila died¡ªon Warren¡¯s sixty-sixth birthday¡ªthe family assembled for a funeral, their grieving complicated by a cauldron of mixed emotions. She went to rest as the person she had been; any hopes of what she could have become had things been different went to the grave alongwith her. 
¡°I cried a lot when my mother died. It wasn¡¯t because I was sad and missed her. It was because of the waste. She had her good parts, but the bad parts kept me from having a relationship with her. My dad and I never talked about it. But I really regret the waste of what could have been.¡± 
With both his parents gone, Warren was the senior member of his family, the watchkeeper at that thin boundary between life and death. It was his sisters, however, whose lives were most affected by Leila¡¯s death. They were surprised to find themselves inheritinga sizable amount of Berkshire stock fromtheir mother, more than they had originally owned themselves, alongwith the first distribution fromtheir father¡¯s trust set up by their brother years before. Bertie had kept all her Berkshire stock from the beginning, and had her own philanthropic interests. She had always tended to contribute her energy and effort quietly, behind the scenes and did not want to play a leadingrole. And Doris now had real money again, for the first time since the ¡°naked puts¡± debacle had wiped her out in 1987. For Doris, her mother¡¯s death was a new beginning. She set up her own foundation, the Sunshine Lady Foundation, and started her givingwith the Edith Stahl Kraft OutstandingTeacher Award, named after their aunt Edie¡ªand modeled on the Omaha teacher awards named after their aunt Alice that her brother¡¯s foundation gave out. 
Warren¡¯s sisters were now rich. Two of his children also had a little money, thanks to Susie¡¯s persuasiveness about the million-dollar birthday gifts. Buffett had never demanded an accountingof the huge amounts it took to fund Susie¡¯s largesse, although he scratched his head and wondered what on earth she did with all the money. The tax complication of the large gifts to their children, however, required that she give Warren a history of her gift-giving. He had always been proud of her generosity, although not always pleased about those who benefited fromit. He was now particularly displeased by some of her larger gifts, which flew in the face of what he had understood about the nature of their marriage. His impression that she had ended her other relationship stood corrected. Despite the parallel between his own complicated personallife and Susie¡¯s, he was upset. 
A discussion of Susie¡¯s willensued. They had sharply differingopinions about who amongher friends should receive bequests. In the end, his decision ruled. Afterward, the Buffett bathtub memory went to work. Anythingnegative that had transpired between themsimply vanished, and Susie was restored as his ideal, because he needed her to be. 
Warren had stood firmon the question of Susie¡¯s bequests to her friends. But she had gentled himenough on issues of money when it came to their children that he was not only comfortable givingthem a million dollars every few years while he was alive, he was goingto leave thema reasonable amount of money after his 
death.5 It would not fund a zoo fullof bears like WilliamRandolph Hearst¡¯s, but they would be more than comfortable. 
Howie had used his first million-dollar birthday gift to buy a nine-hundred-acre farmin Decatur, Illinois, where he still lived. Now he had two farms, one of which he owned outright. After the ADM lawsuits settled down, Don Keough suggested that he become a professional director by goingon the board of another high-profile business, Coca-Cola Enterprises (CCE). Even though he had gained some business experience, Howie really preferred to sit on his combine workingthe fields. And while CCE was far more respectable than ADM, the CCE directorship nevertheless was a bit of a hop fromthe fire into the fryingpan. 
A giant cola bottler, CCE had been smashed together out of smaller bottlers that were Coca-Cola¡¯s customers. They bought the syrup concentrate that Coke made, mixed it with fizzy water, and sold it, acting as middlemen, so their relationship with Coke was critical. Neither could live without the other. 
Don Keough, Buffett¡¯s old Omaha friend, was now president of Coca-Cola. His boss, the CEO of Coca-Cola, the aristocratic Cuban-born Roberto Goizueta, was revered in the business world for creatingthe world¡¯s best-known brand through slogans like ¡°Coke Is It¡± and ¡°I¡¯d like to buy the world a Coke.¡± Buffett felt that Coca-Cola had by now become a self-sustainingenterprise¡ªand he admired Goizueta for havinggotten it to this stage. 
In 1997, Gates joined Buffett and Goizueta on a panel discussion at Sun Valley that was moderated by Keough. 
¡°I used to talk to Bill all the time, and I¡¯d always use this expression that a ham sandwich could run Coca-Cola. And Bill wasn¡¯t quite housebroken then. So we were sitting on this panel, up in front of the audience, and Bill said something to the effect that it¡¯s pretty easy to run Coke.¡± 
¡°I was tryingto make a point about how Coke is such a wonderful business,¡± says Gates, ¡°and I said somethingabout how I¡¯mgoingto step down fromMicrosoft before I¡¯m sixty because it¡¯s a tough business and a youngperson may need to be in there to handle turns in the road. But it came across that I thought of Microsoft as excitingand I must have said somethinglike, ¡®Unlike Coca-Cola¡­¡¯ 
¡°Goizueta thought I was an uppity, arrogant kid who was paintingsome kind of picture that I was engaged in some masterful act on a daily basis whereas anybody could leave at noon and go golfingif they ran Coca-Cola.¡±6 
¡°And Roberto hated Bill from that point forward.¡± 
Buffett avoided technology stocks partly because these fast-movingbusinesses could never be run by a ham sandwich. He thought it no shame to have a business that could be run by a hamsandwich; he wanted to get Berkshire Hathaway to the point that it could be run by a ham sandwich too¡ªthough not until after he was gone. 
But by 1997, Coca-Cola had started to set goals for itself that were so ambitious that it took¡ªnot a ham 
sandwich, not even Goizueta¡ªbut a lot of financial engineeringto achieve them. 
Coke owned forty percent of CCE and tended to act as though it owned a hundred percent. The creation of CCE by rollingup a group of bottlers had been part of a larger strategy of buyingand sellingbottlers in order to time the profits and boost Coca-Cola¡¯s earnings. This was neither illegalnor technically deceitful, but it was nonetheless an illusion, and Warren, who was on the board of Coke, was always aware of the potential for misrepresentation. 
¡°Roberto did a lot of things operationally that were terrific, and I loved the guy. But Roberto got tangled up in promising numbers that eventually couldn¡¯t be delivered. He talked about high-teens growth, eighteen percent. Big companies are not going to increase their earnings in the high teens over long periods of time. For a while you can do it, but it just isn¡¯t in the cards to keep it up forever. 
¡°I remember when he came in and talked to us about how he was going to add a third leg to earnings, which was profits made on buying and selling bottlers. He tried to sell the finance committee that this was the way of the future. 
¡°The prices they paid for bottling companies were just nuts. I asked the chief financial officer all these questions. But Roberto started the board meetings at ten o¡¯clock and finished at noon; the atmosphere was such that it didn¡¯t lend itself to questioning. You just had a feeling when it got to be noon that it would not be at all polite to keep raising subjects or talking about things that would cause the meeting to last until one o¡¯clock. He was just not a guy you questioned. Some people have that bearing about them, and when the bearing is backed up by a very good record, the combination of the two is pretty overpowering.¡± Buffett was more than simply nonconfrontational; he was of an age and froman era that viewed servingon boards as a quasisocial activity in which deference and politeness held sway. In 1998, that was the boardroomculture throughout America. This culture reflected the reality that the structure of corporate boards gave directors very little leeway with management. 
¡°As a director, you can¡¯t remotely tell management what to do. All this stuff you read in the press about the board setting strategy is baloney. As a board member, you can do practically nothing. If a CEO thinks a director is smart and on his side, he¡¯ll listen to some degree, but ninety-eight percent of the time, he¡¯ll do what he wants to anyway. Listen, that¡¯s the way I run Berkshire. I think Roberto liked me, but he was not looking for a lot of ideas from me.¡± 
Buffett never knew of anythingseriously enough awry at Coca-Cola to make him consider the drastic step of resigningfrom the board. Howie had a different problem:standingup to pressure fromCoca-Cola. 
¡°I was more independent than just about anybody else on that board, because I was on the Berkshire board, and no one at Coca-Cola could intimidate me,¡± says Howie. ¡°So I had no problemchallengingCoca-Cola on behalf of CCE.¡± But Howie eventually got off the CCE board. There was just too much potential for conflict between the two boards. In the sense that people learn more fromheavy seas than smooth sailing, if Keough had meant to send Howie to another crash course in business school, the CCE role was a success. Howie¡¯s radar for danger signs in business had sharpened considerably. Even though he continued to serve on boards, the experience taught himthat he wanted to fulfill his thirst for excitement outside the corporate world. 
By the mid-1990s, Goizueta and his finance chief, DougIvester, were dosingCoke with even larger amounts of bottler profits to maintain the illusion of the company¡¯s rapid earnings flow. Then in 1997, Goizueta died unexpectedly, only a few months after announcinghe had lungcancer. The board and the company and investors were shocked. He had been a statesmanlike CEO, credited with makingCoca-Cola an international giant, his persona so titanic that it was hard to imagine who could fill his shoes. The board had deferred to Goizueta so absolutely that nobody ever seemed to have thought of any alternative to his handpicked 
successor, the burly, table-poundingIvester.7 The finance chief had a bigreputation: He had engineered much of the company¡¯s recent success, carvingup the financialinterests of Coca-Cola and its bottlers to squeeze out every last advantage in Coca-Cola¡¯s favor. Goizueta was the aristocratic leader, Ivester the hands-on ¡°doer.¡± He loved technology, and hummed alongwith the Silicon Valley gestalt of the times. 
Buffett liked Ivester and wanted himto succeed. A textile-factory mechanic¡¯s son who had risen through sheer determination, Ivester was an analytical numbers guy. 8 And, of course, under Goizueta he had enriched Buffett enormously. He had that underdoggrit that Buffett liked. Moreover, Buffett laid responsibility for the accountinggimmickry at Goizueta¡¯s door, not Ivester¡¯s. 
Juicingthe earnings had certainly worked. Coca-Cola was tradingat $70 per share. BRK itself was rocking with the market. Priced at $48,000 in June 1997, it flew to $67,000 over the next nine months. The higher the market went, the tougher it got for Buffett to invest, and yet the higher BRK rose. It made no sense, except that the stocks that Berkshire owned were risingwith the market. As 1998 progressed, the Dow crossed 9,000 and was on its way to the magic 10,000. BRK blasted through $70,000 a share. At the shareholder meeting, 
Buffett told investors, ¡°Our idea of tough times is periods like now.¡±9 
With too much cash, too few wonderfulideas, and without callingthe Air-a-holic hotline, Buffett now bought a company for Berkshire called NetJets for $725 million.10 He sold the Indefensible and became one of NetJets¡¯ customers. This company sold time-shares in jets of various makes and sizes; its planes allhad tail 
numbers that started with QS, or Quebec Sierra. Susie had gotten Warren to buy her a quarter share in a ¡°fractional¡± jet fromNetJets in 1995, worth two hundred hours a year of flight time, which she referred to as The Richly Deserved.11 She joked that QSstood for Queen Susie. Buffett took to NetJets so much that he 
had appeared in an ad and endorsed it even before he bought it. Still, on the surface, it was an atypical decision for a man who would, one year later, tell the moguls at Sun Valley that somebody should ¡°have shot Orville down.¡± 
The reasoningbehind the purchase seemed sound, though. NetJets was dominant in its market; it was too late 
for any serious competitor to catch up. Buffett figured that it was not unlike the newspaper business, where there were no red ribbons. Eventually, the competitors would fall away. 12 And, indeed, NetJets was outgrowingthe competition. Buffett was intrigued with its CEO, Richard Santulli, an entrepreneurial mathematician who had formerly spent his days at Goldman Sachs figuringout tradingpatterns usingchaos-theory mathematics. Now he used those same skills to schedule plane flights on six hours¡¯ notice for a database full of celebrity clients whomhe entertained at private events. Buffett met a whole new set of famous people, includingArnold Schwarzenegger and Tiger Woods. 
Investors cheered Buffett¡¯s purchase of NetJets but were shocked when he almost simultaneously announced that Berkshire was buyingGeneral Re, a huge insurance wholesaler, or ¡°reinsurer,¡± which bought excess risk from other insurers. At $22 billion, this dealwas almost thirty times larger than NetJets. It dwarfed by 
multiples his largest dealever, GEICO.13 
When he met with the Gen Re management team, Buffett told them, ¡°I¡¯mstrictly hands-off. You guys run 
your own business. I won¡¯t interfere.¡± Then he suddenly started spoutingnumbers fromGEICO. ¡°Well, you know, their hit ratio has dropped a bit.*32 Last week their numbers were¡­¡± Holy cow! thought Tad Montross, GeneralRe¡¯s chief underwriter. This is hands-off? He knows more about GEICO than we know 
about GeneralRe.14 
Buffett did not know much about the inner workings of GeneralRe. He had made the decision to buy based on studyingthe company¡¯s results, and he liked its reputation. GeneralRe was sort of the Grace Kelly of the sometimes-shady insurance business. General Re wore white gloves and historically had acted more ladylike and respectable than the average company. Still¡­given the pattern of Buffett¡¯s purchases of insurers¡ªin almost every case they plunged straight into the ditch shortly after he bought them¡ªand given the size of this deal, the distant rumble of the tow truck¡¯s engine warmingup could be heard, barely audible, over the next hill. 
But it was the high price paid for General Re that attracted most of the attention, and the fact that Buffett had paid in stock, not cash¡ªin effect, swappingtwenty percent of Berkshire Hathaway for General Re in a deal announced on the day that Berkshire hit its then-all-time high of $80,900 per share. People wondered if Buffett¡¯s willingness to give away his stock when it was tradingat such an unheard-of price meant that he, too, thought BRK was overvalued.15 Buffett had spent his career tighteninghis stranglehold on Berkshire. Givingstock to General Re¡¯s shareholders diluted his own personal votinginterest in Berkshire from forty-three percent to less than thirty-eight percent. The last time he had paid stock for a major purchase, it was GEICO, and investors had believed then that Berkshire was overpriced. So they speculated about the message Buffett¡¯s new deal might be sending. 
The price of BRK swungup and down based partly on the prices of the stocks that Berkshire owned. It was especially high at that moment because Berkshire owned 200 million shares of Coca-Cola, which now traded at an astronomicalprice. So, if Buffett was subtly signalingthrough his purchase of GeneralRe that BRK was overvalued, did that mean that its underlyingstocks¡ªlike Coca-Cola¡ªwere overpriced? If so, this could have implications for the entire market. It might mean the whole market was overpriced. 
The kingof the soft-drink world, Coca-Cola ruled with an aggressive swagger, a fizzy-dizzy arrogance. 
Buffett¡¯s stake in KO had multiplied fourteenfold over a decade, to $13 billion, and he had gone so far as to declare the company an ¡°inevitable¡± to his shareholders, as if it were a stock he would never sell.16 He reasoned that Coca-Cola would send more swallows down more throats in each passingdecade ¡°for an investinglifetime,¡± which made it about as close to immortal, for a brand, as you could get. Berkshire now owned more than eight percent of the company. Coca-Cola stock was tradingas high as forty times its estimated 2000 earnings¡ªa multiple that said investors believed the stock would keep risingby at least twenty percent a year. But to do that, it would have to increase earnings twenty-five percent a year for five years¡ªimpossible. It would have to almost triple sales, to a number nearly as large as the entire soft-drink 
market in 1999¡ªagain impossible.17 No amount of bottler sales or accountingfinagles could produce results like that. Buffett knew it. Nevertheless, he did not sell his Coca-Cola stock. 
The reason was partly inertia. Buffett liked to say he made most of his money by ¡°sittingon his ass.¡± Like the investors who kept their GEICO stock when it fellto $2 a share, inertia had protected him frommany mistakes¡ªboth of commission and of omission. He also owned too much Coke to sell without creatinga major headache. The symbolismof Warren Buffett¡ªthe ¡°world¡¯s greatest investor¡± and a board member ¡ªdumpingCoca-Cola stock would be unmistakable. The price of Coca-Cola could plunge as a result. Besides, with its effervescent mix of profit, product, nostalgia, show business, and likable people, Coca-Cola was Buffett¡¯s favorite stock. ¡°The RealThing¡± wasn¡¯t a slogan to him, it was an incredible cash machine that could grind out money forever, like the mill in the old fairy tale that endlessly ground out rivers of porridge, mountains of gold, or an ocean¡¯s-worth of salt. 
Buffett carefully sidestepped these questions about the market and Coca-Cola when he used Berkshire stock 
to buy General Re, saying, ¡°It is not a market call whatsoever.¡±18 BRK, he said, was ¡°fairly valued¡± before the merger, and the combined companies would create ¡°synergy.¡± When Charlie Munger was asked, he stated that Buffett had consulted himabout this dealvery late in the game. In effect, he disowned the deal.19 
Not unexpectedly, investors began to reprice BRK as if either Berkshire and its holdings in stocks like Coca-Cola were overpriced or the deal¡¯s synergies would prove illusory.20 Or both. 
Buffett¡¯s explanation later that summer at Sun Valley was that ¡°we wanted to buy Gen Re, but coming with Gen Re was $22 billion dollars of investments.¡± Many were stocks; Buffett promptly sold them. Adding$22 billion of bonds ¡°changed the bond/stock ratio at Berkshire, which I was not unhappy with. It did have the effect of a portfolio allocation change.¡± 
So Buffett¡ªwho sat on the Coca-Cola board with Herbert Allen¡ªwas ¡°not unhappy with¡± swampingBRK¡¯s stocks, includingCoca-Cola, in an ocean of General Re¡¯s bonds. This statement in context made all kinds of sense. In his previous shareholder letter, Buffett had written that stocks were ¡°not overvalued¡±¡ªif interest rates stayed below average, and if businesses kept delivering ¡°extraordinary¡± returns on capital¡ªin other words, if the unlikely continued to occur. This statement was oblique enough to avoid lookinglike a forecast. Buffett thought those who were always out prophesyingsome turn in the market¡¯s direction usually wound up beingwrongten times out of two. So he rarely made statements about the market, and often played coy when he did. Still, it was unusually clever of himto work the words ¡°not overvalued¡± into a sentence that said that the market was overvalued. People could read this message any way they wanted, but if they were smart, they got it.21 
Likewise, Buffett was ¡°not unhappy with¡± dilutinghis stock portfolio in the same Sun Valley speech, where he faced an audience filled with Internet CEOs at a time when Internet stocks were parthenogizingfaster than naked mole rats. He accompanied his ¡°not unhappy with¡± remark with the same warnings as in his letter: that interest rates must stay well below average and the economy stay unusually hot for the market to meet investors¡¯ expectations. This was also the same Sun Valley speech where Buffett had used his place at the pulpit to explain that investingis layingout money today to get money back tomorrow, like Aesop¡¯s bird in the hand versus the birds in the bush; that interest rates are the price of waitingfor the birds in the bush; that for periods sometimes as longas seventeen years the market had gone exactly nowhere; and that at other times¡ªsuch as the present¡ªthe value of stocks grows much faster than the economy. And, of course, he had closed this speech by comparinginvestors to a bunch of oilprospectors who were goingto hell. 
Thus, if Buffett was reshufflinghis portfolio and focusingon bonds, perhaps it meant that he thought that it was now easier to make a livingin bonds than stocks, and it was goingto get easier still.22 
The followingOctober, he made another move that was just the opposite of what most people were doing¡ª strikingly conservative by the standards of the market. He bought MidAmerican Energy HoldingCompany, an Iowa-based utility company with some internationaloperations and a presence in alternative energy. He put in enough capital to buy just over seventy-five percent of MidAmerican for about $2 billion plus $7 billion of assumed debt, with the other twenty-five percent owned by his friend Walter Scott; MidAmerican¡¯s CEO, Scott¡¯s prot¨¦g¨¦ David Sokol; and Sokol¡¯s number two, GregAbel. 
Investors were mystified. Why would Buffett want to buy a regulated electric company? Admittedly, the business was growingmoderately, was well-managed, and had attractive embedded returns that were relatively certain and would be so for as longas could reasonably be imagined. 
Buffett saw this as a second cornerstone for Berkshire alongside the insurance business. He felt that he was workingwith excellent managers who could potentially put a lot of money to work in utilities and energy at predictable rates of return, which compensated for the limited growth. However, Buffett was already being ridiculed for his refusal to buy technology stocks. Now he had bought the light company. How dull! 
But this was not how he thought. When it came to investing, the kind of electricity he sought was not the thrill of trading, but rather, kilowatts. 
BuyingMidAmerican and General Re significantly diluted the impact of Coca-Cola on Berkshire¡¯s shareholders, but Berkshire stillowned 200 million shares of Coke. Buffett never stopped thinkingabout Coca-Cola, where matters continued to go awry. By late 1999, the value of his KO stock was down to $9.5 billion, draggingdown the price of BRK with it. A short-term wobble didn¡¯t worry him¡ªit never did¡ªbut thanks in large part to Coca-Cola, one share of BRK stock could no longer buy a top-of-the-line luxury sports car. Buffett kept turningover and over in his mind an incident back in June. Reports had trickled in that Coke products were poisoningchildren in Belgium and France. It was not hard to figure out what to do. The late Goizueta would have let ¡°Mr. Coca-Cola,¡± Don Keough, handle it: Fly over right away, visit the kids, shower the parents with free soft drinks, make compassionately clever remarks to the press. Instead, Ivester¡ªwho was actually in France at the time¡ªreturned to the U.S. without comment, leavingthe localbottlers to deal with the mess. 
Herbert Allen, never one to sit patiently on the sidelines, called Ivester and asked, Why on earth don¡¯t you get over there and show your face? And Ivester said, I¡¯ve sent a teamover, plus, those kids aren¡¯t really sick. Allen exploded in frustration. Look, he said, these aren¡¯t kids who marched around and said, ¡°I¡¯mgoingto ¡®get Coca-Cola¡¯ by sayingI¡¯msick.¡± They think they¡¯re sick. Whether they¡¯re sick or not, what harmwould 
it do to go over and sit down with their parents and give thema lifetime supply of Coke?23 
But it seemed to himthat Ivester didn¡¯t understand any of that. As he saw it, Coca-Cola was not at fault. And that was that. 
For weeks, the localbottlers kept tryingto reassure the public that Coca-Cola products were safe. But then it turned out that maybe they weren¡¯t. The company admitted it had found mold and chemicalcontaminants in the bottlingplants. But it insisted these were aberrations, surely not serious enough to sicken children. Buffett was horrified. The arrogant response played right into Coca-Cola¡¯s vainglorious image. Ivester had already had difficulty dealingwith the European Union. Coca-Cola¡¯s ¨¹ber-American style and the company¡¯s strategy of seekingexclusive marketingdeals had earned it a reputation for extraordinary hubris. Over and over, European government officials slapped around Coca-Cola representatives in a Punch and Judy show. 
Allover the world, headlines blared, and customers¡¯ trust in their beloved product dwindled.24 
Weeks later, Ivester showed up in Europe and apologized in finely crafted legalese that never actually said, ¡°We¡¯re sorry.¡± The headlines died, and the Coke machines were plugged back in all over the continent. But the incident cost more than a hundred million dollars and impossible-to-measure damage to Coke¡¯s reputation. Buffett stewed. 
Herbert Allen was stewingas well. Closer to the day-to-day management of the company, he questioned whether Coca-Cola was runningoff the rails. Despite the decliningsales, at least 3,500 new employees had marched into Coca-Cola Plaza in Atlanta in the last two years. Allen looked at the burgeoningpayroll and 
saw ¡°a cancerous growth on the company.¡±25 The company¡¯s strategy of addingon the periphery, growing by acquisition, and hiringthousands of new staff was not working. Quarter after quarter, Ivester promised to improve growth rates; quarter after quarter, Coca-Cola fellshort. One day in Ivester¡¯s office, Allen asked 
him, What are you goingto do?And Ivester said he didn¡¯t know; had no solution.26 ¡°It had just overwhelmed him. Everythingtogether had overwhelmed him. He did not know what to do,¡± Allen says. 
Floatingabove it all like the Goodyear blimp was Coca-Cola¡¯s millennially named Project Infinity. This ¡°was one of those projects where everybody¡¯s computer would be linked up to the men¡¯s roomso they¡¯d know how much soap they were takingout of the dispensers,¡± says Allen. Even the name, Project Infinity, seemed 
to refer to out-of-controlspendingin pursuit of ever-diminishingreturns.27 It drove Allen nuts. He wanted to know what Coca-Cola was gettingfor its billion dollars. How was Infinity goingto solve the company¡¯s basic problems? 
Buffett was displeased but resigned to beingdispleased. He had encountered this on some scale at almost every company where he sat on the board. Therefore, he sighed to himself, ¡°They all do it. The people who run information-technology departments always want the latest and greatest whiz-bang thing. No matter how smart you are, no matter how much you know, who can challenge them? 
¡°We probably aren¡¯t going to sell any more Coca-Cola because of some computer project, and we will add more people instead of cutting jobs. The vendors have it rigged to make us update the software and hardware every couple of years or the system will stop working. So it isn¡¯t even a onetime expense. 
¡°Controlling technology spending is one of the toughest problems in management. And it¡¯s particularly hard at Coca-Cola because a successful company is like a rich family. When you¡¯re prosperous it¡¯s very hard to instill discipline.¡± Buffett, of course, did not run his own company¡ªor his own rich family¡ªthat way. 
And there was more disturbingnews, via Don Keough, who remained the bottlers¡¯ best friend at Coca-Cola. He was now retired from the company and had become chairman of Allen & Co.¡ªbut Goizueta had kept him on as an adviser to the board. Keough was almost as much a part of Coca-Cola as he ever had been. Through Keough, Buffett heard that Ivester had been dictatingterms to the bottlers in an unheard-of way. This troubled him, because so much of the good results produced by Ivester had come fromreengineeringthe relationship between the bottlers and Coca-Cola. Now Ivester was pushingthat same lever so hard that the 
century-longpartnership between the company and the bottlers had broken down.28 Don Keough had become a sort of ¡°father confessor to the disaffected¡± amongthe bottlers.29 They were in open revolt. Meanwhile, Ivester had snatched away Keough¡¯s officialrole, a dumb move since Ivester needed Keough on his side. He might be KingArthur, but Keough was Coca-Cola¡¯s Merlin and must be paid due respect. 
This squeezingof the bottlers reiterated the question of whether Ivester really knew what to do about Coca-Cola¡¯s slowingsales growth. The philosophy at Coca-Cola had always been that it was allabout the relationship with the customer. Ivester favored a continuation of the accountingsolutions to business problems, trowelingmore makeup on Coke when the CEO¡¯s main job¡ªas Keough and Allen and Buffett perceived it¡ªwas to make the Coke brand more popular around the world. 
Since Goizueta had been engineeringthe company¡¯s earnings before he died, and Ivester was the engineer and reaped the rewards for doingso, why should he behave any differently now that he was CEO?As one board member put it, ¡°The finance committee was the center of everything,¡± which was odd for a marketing company like Coca-Cola. In the end, the mistake was not Ivester¡¯s. The board had deferred to Goizueta even after his death, when it followed his wishes and made the head of the financialengineeringdepartment the new CEO of Coke. 
Still, Buffett was pretty sure that the problemso obvious to him was not so obvious to the whole board. As he ticked off marks against Ivester, Buffett spent the whole fall in a wrung-out state of anxiety. By Thanksgiving, the paralyzinglimitations of his role as a board member, given the travails of Coca-Cola, had 
almost reached a breakingpoint.30 
Then Fortune magazine, which had labeled Ivester ¡°the 21st-century CEO¡± not two years earlier, published a highly criticalpiece blaminghimfor the company¡¯s problems.31 That was a bad sign. Fortune rarely smiled on CEOs whom Fortune smacked around this way, especially if the CEO had previously been featured in a flatteringprofile on the cover of the magazine. Beingknocked off one¡¯s pedestalin public this way signaled that the powerful people whom Fortune¡¯s reporters used as sources were displeased, and on the brink of tossingaway the teddy bear they had once embraced. 
Right after Thanksgiving, Herbert Allen put in a call to Buffett. ¡°I think we have a problemwith Ivester,¡± he said. ¡°We picked the wrongguy,¡± Buffett agreed.32 ¡°That¡¯s about it,¡± said Allen. They began to lay their plans. 
They both estimated that it would take more than a year for the board to come around to their point of view that Ivester had to go¡ªand that, says Allen, ¡°would have been devastatingto the company. So I think we decided, just as two individuals, to tell him the truth about how we felt.¡± 
Allen called Ivester and said he and Buffett wanted a meeting. They agreed to get together in Chicago, where Ivester would be stoppingfollowinga meetingwith McDonald¡¯s. 
On a cool, cloudy Wednesday, the first day of December 1999, Buffett and Allen flew into Chicago. Ivester¡¯s well-known obstreperousness kindled Buffett¡¯s dread of confrontation. He lashed down his anxiety, turtling into his shell. Later, it was reported that he appeared cold. The three men got down to business without 
preamble.33 Impersonally, Buffett and Allen told Ivester that they appreciated his efforts on behalf of Coca-Cola, but he no longer had their confidence. 
Still, Ivester was not actually fired. Buffett and Allen lacked the authority to fire Ivester. ¡°He might have won a board vote, and he knew that,¡± Buffett says. 
Ivester took the news stoically. He rushed back to Atlanta to call an emergency telephone board meetingfor four days later, leavingthe mystified board to wait in suspense. 
On Sunday, Ivester told the board members that he had concluded that he was not the right person to run the company. He would step down immediately. This was exactly as Buffett and Allen had hoped. But he also said there would be no transition; he was leavingas of that day. As the board listened in stunned silence, he described it as a voluntary decision, and that was true¡ªin the sense that it is voluntary to avoid the firing 
squad by walkingthe plank.34 
Board members began askingwhat had happened. Was he sick?Was somethingterribly wrongat Coca-Cola? Why didn¡¯t they have any warning?Must the transition be so sudden? Ivester never wavered fromhis 
script.35 
A while back the board had insisted, against some resistance, that Ivester put a name in an envelope that said who should succeed himif he were hit by a truck. The envelope was now opened to reveal the name of Doug Daft, head of Coca-Cola¡¯s Middle and Far Eastern divisions. Daft was halfway out the door to retirement, but the board, amongthem Buffett and Allen, instantly made himIvester¡¯s successor, with apparently no serious discussion of any alternative. 
The recriminations began as the market took a hatchet to the stock.36 Investors had figured out that Ivester was walkingthe plank. In private conversations with a few board members, he let on what had happened. The board now realized with varyingdegrees of outrage how much their role had been usurped. 
With the media howling, it became clear that the company had better become more forthcoming. Fortune wrote an exclusive piece revealingdetails of the secret Chicago meeting.37 Ivester had negotiated a staggering$115 million consolation package, which angered both his detractors and his supporters; it gave the impression that he was either paid off or wronged. And observers now realized that an inner circle ruled the Coke board. 
¡°It was carried out badly, except that there wasn¡¯t anything better that we could have carried out. It was almost a disaster the way we did it, but if we hadn¡¯t, it would have been a disaster for sure. I don¡¯t think we could have gotten the board to vote to make a change like that¡ªbingo! I think the only way to have made a change fast is the way we did it. And it took both of us to get it done; if either of us had done it individually, it wouldn¡¯t have happened.¡± 
But by year-end, Buffett¡¯s reputation was sufferingin an even more overt way, because the biggest, most profitable feat of stock selection that he had ever made, Coca-Cola, was down by one-third after Ivester¡¯s departure. That Buffett had felt forced to intervene in a particularly graceless way, which had backfired in public on both the company and himself, left the impression not that he had ridden to the rescue¡ªas with Salomon¡ªbut that what he and Herbert Allen had done was the meddlingof a couple of old men. 
That impression compounded the worries raised when the biggest acquisition he had ever made, GeneralRe, coughed up a nasty surprise within days after Berkshire closed the purchase. Ron Ferguson, the CEO, had called to say that the company had been duped out of $275 million in an enormous, elaborately designed fraud called Unicover. Investors had been surprised, to say the least, when the first report Buffett gave them about GeneralRe was an apology for this foolish thing, as well as an expression of confidence in Ferguson and the prediction that affairs would be righted. Since there had been concerns fromthe beginningabout whether Buffett had bought General Re only to dilute his large positions in stocks like Coca-Cola, decades of blissfulconfidence in his judgment about buyingbusinesses suddenly began to waver. 
Even some of his most devoted believers were questioninghis wisdom, as the stock market¡¯s repudiation of Buffett¡¯s Sun Valley manifesto grew even louder in the last few months of 1999. That December, he continued to look not just wrongabout technology stocks but dead wrongand, at last, stubbornly blind to the obvious. The Dow closed the year up twenty-five percent. The NASDAQ blasted through 4,000 points, up an incredible eighty-six percent. The market valued Berkshire, with its burgeoningcoffers of cash, at only $56,100 per share now, for a total market capitalization of $85 billion. That compared poorly to a little online media company called Yahoo!, which had quadrupled in the last year. Yahoo!, which captured the spirit of the times in its name, was now valued at $115 billion. 
As 1999 spun to a close, there was no doubt who was important and influentialat the turn of the millennium, and even less doubt who was not. Time magazine crowned Amazon.com¡¯s Jeff Bezos as its person of the year, comparinghimin importance to Queen Elizabeth, Charles Lindbergh, and Martin Luther KingJr. Buffett¡¯s personalrankinghad dropped on the annual taking-stock lists, which multiplied a thousandfold that year with the millennial summings-up and retrospectives. He had just fallen frombeingthe second-richest to the fourth-richest man in the world. Technophiles reveled in pointingout the great investor¡¯s feet of clay, 
sayingthat ¡°if Buffett headed a mutual fund, he¡¯d be lookingat a second career.¡±38 Barron¡¯s, a weekly must-read on WallStreet, put him on its cover with the accompanyingheadline ¡°Warren, What¡¯s Wrong?¡± and the comment that Berkshire stock had ¡°stumbled¡± badly.39 He might as wellhave had a bull¡¯s-eye 
painted on his brow. 
In public, Buffett repeated constantly¡ªin almost unvaryingterms¡ªthe ideas that had made him famous:the margin of safety, the circle of competence, Mr. Market¡¯s vagaries. He stillmaintained that a stock is a piece of a business, not a bunch of numbers on a screen. All through the market¡¯s dizzy rise, he refrained from arguingor disputingany of the madness, except for makinghis now-famous speech at Sun Valley. People thought, from the way he disciplined every syllable that exited his mouth, that he was above the criticism. ¡°Never,¡± he said, when asked if it bothered himwhen people called hima has-been. ¡°Nothing bothers me like that. You can¡¯t do well in investing unless you think independently. And the truth is, you are neither right nor wrong because people agree with you. You¡¯re right because your facts and reasoning are right. In 
40 
the end, that¡¯s what counts.¡± 
But these were separate issues. While he had no problem thinkingindependently, he was indeed miserable over beingcalled a has-been. Asked around then if beingin the public eye for decades helped keep the criticismin perspective, Buffett paused for a longwhile. ¡°No. It never gets easier,¡± he said soberly. ¡°It always hurts just as much as the first time.¡± But he could not do a thingabout it. 
Buffett had spent his whole career competingin a contest that was impossible to win. No matter how much money he made and no matter how longhe kept it up, sooner or later he would have a bad year or the momentumwould slow down. He knew that. Over and over he had warned investors that trees don¡¯t grow to the sky. But that had never stopped himfromclimbingas fast as he could. And he had loved the climb¡ªbut somewhat to his surprise, there was no blue ribbon waitingat the top. 
His life was fascinating, his business accomplishments important, the principles through which he had succeeded worthy of study. So far as could be determined, everyone who knew him personally liked the man. His kaleidoscope personality perpetually revealed new facets, yet remained faithfulat its core to his Inner Scorecard. The one thingthat he would always be the best at was beinghimself. 
*** 
As he did every year, Buffett spent the holidays with Susie and the family at their vacation home in Emerald Bay, the house garlanded with Christmas decorations from Susie¡¯s huge collection.41 His work life may have been particularly challengingthen, but Christmas of 1999 was a good one for his family. Warren was satisfied with the way his kids were maturing. Howie had settled down into life as a middle-aged farmer and successful businessman. BigSusie had gotten himinterested in photography. Now he lived on an airplane half the time, photographingdangerous wild animals, his love of livingon the edge channeled into gettingbitten by a cheetah and chased by a polar bear. 
A full-time mother of two children and unpaid part-time assistant to her father, Susie Jr. had followed in her mother¡¯s footsteps to become a major force in Omaha philanthropy, servingon the boards of the children¡¯s theater, the children¡¯s museum, and Girls Inc. Her ex-husband Allen ran the Buffett Foundation, and the two 
lived a few blocks apart and shared parenting.42 
After his divorce, Peter had married Jennifer Heil and was still livingin Milwaukee and writingmusic. In the early 1990s, he had gotten the opportunity to move to Hollywood and work in the entertainment industry. But ¡°I realized if I moved to L.A.,¡± he says, ¡°I¡¯d be one of thousands of me¡¯s out there tryingto get work. My father was always into the movie The Glenn Miller Story. Glenn Miller searched and searched to find his sound; my father used to always talk about ¡®findingyour sound.¡¯¡± Peter stayed in Milwaukee rather than goingto L.A., and felt that his father understood the resemblance to his choice to come back to Omaha to do things his way rather than stayingin New York. Soon after, Peter was hired to compose and produce the soundtrack for an important PBSdocumentary, the eight-part 500 Nations. He had also written and produced a multimedia show as a benefit performance for Susie Jr. that became a PBSspecial, and toured with it for 
eleven weeks.43 
Howie had been workingon BigSusie, convincingher that the kids were mature enough, saying, ¡°Give us a 
chance, the money is there, give us the chance to do somethingwith it.¡±44 That Christmas, Susie Jr., Howie, and Peter were shocked to receive five hundred shares of Berkshire stock in foundations that each could manage and give to any causes they chose. The kids were elated; Susie Jr. called it ¡°gigantic.¡±45 
The family settled in for New Year¡¯s Eve. You could follow the progress of the millennium¡¯s arrival on television, startingin the Kiribati Islands. From Sydney to Beijingto London, millions of people celebrated on streets and beaches as a chain of fireworks shot around the globe. The EiffelTower¡¯s millenniumclock broke down. But as the hours ticked by, nothingdisastrous happened anywhere, even at General Re and Coca-Cola. There was a mathematical neatness to the progression of time zones, locations, hours, that Buffett liked. After the stressful fall he had just spent, the change of millenniumwas not excitingto him¡ªit was relaxing, and he needed that. 
PARTSIX 
ClaimChecks 

53 TheGenie 
Omaha . 1998 
Buffett was always wary of fallinginto what Munger called the Shoe Button Complex, pontificatingon any and all subjects merely because he was an expert on business. But by the mid-1990s, both he and Munger were startingto receive¡ªand answer¡ªmore and more questions about the business of life. He often treated the athletes and college students to whomhe periodically spoke to the fable of the Genie. 
¡°When I was sixteen, I had just two things on my mind¡ªgirls and cars,¡± Buffett would say, takinga little poetic license here by leavingout the part about the money. ¡°I wasn¡¯t very good with girls. So I thought about cars. I thought about girls, too, but I had more luck with cars. 
¡°Let¡¯s say that when I turned sixteen, a genie had appeared to me. And that genie said, ¡®Warren, I¡¯m going to give you the car of your choice. It¡¯ll be here tomorrow morning with a big bow tied on it. Brand-new. And it¡¯s all yours.¡¯ 
¡°Having heard all the genie stories, I would say, ¡®What¡¯s the catch?¡¯ And the genie would answer, ¡®There¡¯s only one catch. This is the last car you¡¯re ever going to get in your life. So it¡¯s got to last a lifetime.¡¯ 
¡°If that had happened, I would have picked out that car. But, can you imagine, knowing it had to last a lifetime, what I would do with it? 
¡°I would read the manual about five times. I would always keep it garaged. If there was the least little dent or scratch, I¡¯d have it fixed right away because I wouldn¡¯t want it rusting. I would baby that car, because it would have to last a lifetime. 
¡°That¡¯s exactly the position you are in concerning your mind and body. You only get one mind and one body. And it¡¯s got to last a lifetime. Now, it¡¯s very easy to let them ride for many years. But if you don¡¯t take care of that mind and that body, they¡¯ll be a wreck forty years later, just like the car would be. 
¡°It¡¯s what you do right now, today, that determines how your mind and body will operate ten, twenty, and thirty years from now.¡± 
54 
Semicolon 
Omaha . January¨CAugust 2000 
Buffett began the first week of the millenniumin his office. In its first edition of the year, the Sunday Times 
of London said, ¡°ignoringtechnology seems to have made a chimp out of Buffett.¡±1 One of the first pieces of correspondence was an e-mail fromRon Ferguson, CEO of GeneralRe. 
Buffett was already bracinghimself. General Re had so far brought him nothingbut deplorable news. A year ago, after the company had admitted beingduped in the Unicover fraud mere weeks after Berkshire bought it, Ferguson had made a new confession. Movie producers and their lenders had talked General Re into guaranteeingticket sales on Hollywood films. The company said it would pay if the box office fellshort, without knowingwhat scripts would be filmed or who would star in them. Buffett had been incredulous when he found out. Within weeks, lawsuits began to unreelfrom the film-finance fiasco faster than the failed films¡¯ credits unfurled. It could have gone without sayingthat his favorite manager, the brilliant Ajit Jain, would never have guaranteed any dumb movie deals. Although it did get said. 
Then Ferguson belabored himinto a nitpickingmatch over how to underwrite an Internet lottery called Grab.com that Ajit was reinsuring. Buffett now realized that Ferguson had a sharply different philosophy from his. Buffett always liked to talk about how he would rather step over one-foot bars than look for 
seven-foot bars to hurdle. The Grab.comlottery dealoffered an easy profit¡ªa one-foot bar to step over. 2 Ferguson didn¡¯t want to do it because it was such a layup. General Re, he said, only did deals where it had an underwritingedge. 
Buffett roundhoused the match to an end, then decided that he needed a change in management. Yet he did not act, for nothingrequired himto do so. GeneralRe had a wonderful track record. The business needed mending, not a purge. FiringFerguson so soon after he bought the company would mean a brouhaha, a public hullabaloo. He hated firingpeople. 
Two months after the Grab.comdeal, come the millennium, Ferguson was confessingthat GeneralRe had lost another $273 million frombad insurance pricing. It struck Buffett that he could no longer hope these were isolated mistakes, but an infestation; GeneralRe seemed cursed since the day he¡¯d announced he had bought the damn thing. In its first twelve months as part of Berkshire, General Re¡ªformerly a paragon of discipline¡ªhad run straight into the ditch and had lost nearly $1.5 billion dollars from underwriting, the pricingand selection of risk. No company that Buffett had ever owned had lost money approachinga fraction of this magnitude. Buffett said little but recognized that he would have to do somethingsoon. 
When the news was published, investors rapidly readjusted their thinkingonce again. Had paying$22 billion for GeneralRe been a mistake?Buffett¡¯s reputation took another hit. 
Meanwhile, at Coca-Cola, despite the change in management, all was not well.3 Its new CEO, DougDaft, had laid off six thousand people in January as his openingact. Investors reacted with shock. Only a minority on Wall Street had been pointingout the sediment risingin Coke¡¯s river of profits and investors were not yet convinced they were right. So Coca-Cola got socked, and alongwith it, BRK, already cheap at $56,100 on January 1, started to plummet. 
Two weeks later, on February 9, in the early-morningsanctuary of his office, Buffett sat with half an eye fixed on CNBC, sortingthrough his reading. The hotline on the credenza behind his desk rang. Only Buffett answered this phone. He picked it up instantly. JimMaguire, who traded BRK on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange, was on the other end. It was a short conversation. 
¡°Yep¡­Uh-huh. Mmm-hmm¡­Okay. Mmm-hmm¡­Not now. Okay. Mmm-hmm¡­Mmmmmm-hmmmmmmm¡­Okay. Thanks.¡± Click. 
Maguire was callingto tellhimthat sell orders were pouringin for BRK. While Buffett had been playing bridge online the previous evening, an Internet bulletin-board writer on Yahoo! who went by ¡°zx1675¡± had posted, ¡°Warren in Hospital¡ªCritical.¡± Over the next few hours, the rumor spread virally fromposters like ¡°hyperpumperfulofcrap,¡± who said over and over ¡°BUFFETT OLD AND WEAK, SELL,¡± and ¡°SELL, SELL, SELL, SELL, SELL.¡± With the rumors filteringthrough Wall Street and convincingpeople that 
Buffett was in the hospitalin critical condition, BRK was tradingheavily and gettinghammered.4 
Buffett¡¯s personalphone line started ringing. It had been an unusually busy morningfor calls. He answered it himself, as usual, lightingup with a biggrinning ¡°Oh, hiiiiii!¡± to show he was happy to hear fromthe caller. 
¡°How are you?¡± the caller inquired, with a slight tone of urgency. 
¡°Well¡­never better!¡± 
If a tornado were barrelingstraight toward Kiewit Plaza, Buffett would say that things were ¡°never better¡± before mentioningthe twister. People knew to read his tone of voice; today it sounded stressed. All morning, callers had wanted to know¡ªhow was he, really? 
I¡¯m fine, Buffett explained, everythingis fine. Really. But fromthe way BRK was trading, people were listeningto hyperpumperfulofcrap. This was the power of new media. As BRK continued slidingon rumors of Buffett¡¯s impendingdemise, shareholders were ringingtheir brokers, demandingto know whether Buffett was alive. People who knew people who knew Buffett grilled them: ¡°Are you certain? Have you seen him? How can you know for sure?¡± 
CNBC broadcast the rumors about Buffett¡¯s possible demise, flamb¨¦ingthe story with word of his 
reassurances. Skepticismgrew. If he was sayinghe was fine, he must not be. A second rumor began to circulate that he was takingadvantage of the situation to buy Berkshire¡¯s own stock cheap. That hit him on the tender spot where his reputation for personalintegrity collided with his reputation for ruthless rapacity. 
For two days the siege continued while BRK traded down more than five percent. By presuminghis indispensability, the rumor paid Buffett a sort of inverted compliment. But he was outraged that anyone would think he would cheat his own shareholders by buyingback stock at their expense under false pretenses. And he hated beingblackmailed by some jerk who manipulated the stock price through the Internet. He couldn¡¯t stand beinga dogon anyone¡¯s leash. He was appalled at the thought that respondingto manipulation would reward and encourage more rumors¡ªand thereby set a precedent. 
Eventually, he reasoned, the rumors would die under their own demonstrated falsity. But ¡°eventually¡± could take a longtime. A new reality had dawned:In the age of the Internet time was compressed, and he had less and less controlover public perception of him. Finally, he capitulated and issued an extraordinary press release. 
RecentlycertainrumorshavesurfacedontheInternetregardingsharerepurchasesandMr.Buffett¡¯s health.Whileithasbeenalong-standingBerkshirepolicytonotcommentonrumors,wearemaking anexceptionwithrespecttotheserecentrumors.AllrumorsregardingsharerepurchasesandMr. 
Buffett¡¯shealthare¡°100percentfalse.¡±5 
The announcement was useless. BRK plunged eleven percent that week and didn¡¯t recover. 
On March 9, Newsday hit the stands quotingHarry Newton, publisher of Technology Investor Magazine: ¡°I¡¯ll tell you what Warren Buffett should say when he releases his statement to shareholders: ¡®I¡¯msorry!¡¯ that¡¯s what.¡± The next day, BRK hit a low of $41,300 per share, tradingat scarcely more than the value at which its pieces were carried on its books. The legendary ¡°Buffett premium¡±¡ªthe high price the stock supposedly traded at just because of Buffett¡ªwas gone. The day before, the NASDAQ index had bounded up the Andes to reach 5,000. Since January 1999 it had doubled, its component stocks increasingmore than $3 trillion in value. 
The contrast was too sharp to leave alone. A money manager wrote that investors like Buffett were ¡°fallen angels, disgraced with poor rankings¡­made obsolete in 1999 by mavericks who say the old laws of investing have been repealed and backed up their theories with eye-poppingnumbers.¡±6 
Buffett was miserable about the bad publicity, though he never considered changinghis investment strategy. Owners of BRK apparently would have been better off investingin an index of the market over the past five years¡ªthe most prolonged drought in Berkshire¡¯s history. His Coke investment, once valued at a frothy $17.5 billion, would now fetch only $8.75 billion. His determination not to give up his margin of safety meant that Berkshire had piled up billions in unused capital, which was loafingin low-yieldingbonds. Buffett understood the basics of computers perfectly well. But he would not consider buyinga technology stock at any price. ¡°When it comes to Microsoft and Intel,¡± he said, ¡°I don¡¯t know what that world will look like ten years from now. And I don¡¯t want to play in a game where the other guy has an advantage¡­. The software 
7
business is not within my circle of competence¡­. We understand Dilly Bars and not software.¡± 
In February 2000, the SEC had denied Berkshire Hathaway¡¯s request to keep some of its stockholdings confidential. It weighed the various interests of investors in a stable market versus the right to know, and ruled in favor of the right to know. Instead of accumulatinga huge block of stock like American Express or Coca-Cola, he would only have time to tweezer up stocks in little bits before people could ride his coattails. Although he would continue to fight back, the SEC had turned himinto Ben Graham, who opened up his books for the whole world to see. Fromnow on, acquiringentire businesses¡ªwhich had always been his favorite way to use capital, anyway¡ªwould be the main use of money at Berkshire. It was goingto become much harder to put large amounts of money to work in stocks. That stungat a time when the media referred 
to Buffett as ¡°formerly the world¡¯s greatest investor.¡±8 
On March 10, the day after Harry Newton said that Buffett should apologize, the Wall Street Journal wrote 
that almost everyone was makingmoney in tech except the stubborn, curmudgeonly Buffett, whose stock was down forty-eight percent fromits high.9 The Journal compared his performance to a retired AT&T employee whose portfolio was up thirty-five percent, sayingthat this technology-stock dabbler ¡°isn¡¯t exactly 
Warren Buffett¡ªthank goodness.¡±10 
Never in Buffett¡¯s career had resolution and clear thinkingbeen put to the kind of test that he had endured for the past three years. Every indication in the market said that he was wrong. Because of his determined clingingto a set of moldy ideas, the public, the media, and even some of his own shareholders thought he was corked. He had only his inner conviction to steer him straight. And this was the needy man who over the years had grown habituated to a streamof accolades as steady as his daily dose of Cherry Coke; who was so sensitive to public criticismthat he ran fromanythingthat would expose himto it; who had sculpted his life around managinghis reputation; and who fought like a tiger against anythingthat could sully it. 
Yet, even under siege to his reputation, this time, Buffett never fought back. He neither wrote editorials, nor testified before Congress about the dangers of the market, nor dueled in the press, nor gave television interviews to defend himself, nor arranged that his proxies do so on his behalf. He and Munger carried on their regular dialogue with Berkshire¡¯s shareholders, sayingthat while the market was overvalued, they could not predict how longit would last. Finally, not for the record but as a warningand a way of teaching, Buffett explained his views once and for alland predicted that the market would fallfar short of investors¡¯ hopes for two decades in a tour de force of a speech to the elite at Sun Valley that he shortly afterward turned into a Fortune article for Joe and Jane Investor on the street. 
It had taken one great surge of courage to burst past his fears and begfor help fromNick Brady to save Salomon. But to show such restraint, then commit himself to such a forecast in the face of years of criticism and ridicule, took a different kind of courage, makingthe Internet bubble one of the greatest personal challenges of his career. 
On March 11, twenty-four hours after the Wall Street Journal said thank goodness the retired AT&T employee was a better investor than Warren Buffett, Berkshire Hathaway issued its annual report, and Buffett graded himself a ¡°D¡± for failingto invest Berkshire¡¯s capital. He did not say, however, that he considered avoidingtechnology stocks to have been a mistake. He simply reframed investors¡¯ expectations, writingthat, because of its enormous size, Berkshire was now likely to grow in value only ¡°modestly¡± better than the market. This, he knew, would set off debates about what ¡°modestly¡± meant. But he felt it had to be said. 
Separately, Buffett announced that BRK was so cheap that Berkshire would now entertain offers from investors to buy its own stock. To do so¡ªto give money back to shareholders to whom he hadn¡¯t paid a dividend in decades; to even contemplate it¡ªwas as if Buffett, a glutton for capitalall his life, had suddenly turned ascetic. 
And for the second time, Buffett was publicly announcingwhat he wanted to buy in advance. Not since the Great Unwindingof the partnership in 1970 had he said, ¡°I will buy Berkshire Hathaway.¡± Once again, investors had to ask themselves which side to play. This time, many people understood the message. His willingness to put up money for Berkshire stock made such a statement that, before he could buy a single share, BRK rose twenty-four percent. 
The followingweek, the NASDAQ, fullof technology stocks, sent up a warningplume of ash.11 By late April, it had cratered thirty-one percent, amongthe largest losses in historic terms. 
By Easter, Buffett did not care; he was doubled over in pain. He could not believe it. Right before his all-important shareholder meeting, the critical performance of his year, the rumors about his health had come true. Susie Jr. rushed him to the hospitalat three o¡¯clock in the morning, where he spent the next severaldays tryingto pass a kidney stone. The nurses kept wanderingin and out, addressinghimas Bill. Although he was in such agony that he never asked, he wondered what the hellwas goingon. He phoned BigSusie repeatedly 
in panic. She was away in Grand Lake, Colorado, with her group of ¡°hen¡± friends fromhigh school; there was nothingshe could do.12 Finally, he felt somewhat better, so his doctor sent him home. When his daughter picked himup, she explained that the nurses had been callinghim ¡°Bill¡± because he¡¯d been registered under Doc Thompson¡¯s name. 
Almost immediately, however, Buffett had to rush back to the hospital, still tryingto pass the damn kidney stone. Once again he sat up all night drinkingtumblers of water until, finally, the water torture worked. But from then on he had to worry about a part of his anatomy that had not previously concerned him, because kidney stones recur. ¡°The plumbing thing¡ªI hate it. Basically that¡¯s what goes wrong as you get older,¡± he said. 
He took inventory of his problems. The stock was in such disrepute that only his offer to buy it himself had saved it. General Re, his largest deal, seemed cursed. Coca-Cola was naggingat his thoughts. How could so much damage have happened so quickly in a business with such a bulletproof brand? Could it really allbe poor old Ivester¡¯s fault? And now a problemwith his health had reared up to stare himin the face. 
The fact of mortality dwelled beneath the surface of Buffett¡¯s bathtub memory, periodically slidingits way back up into the tub.13 He had still never come to terms with his father¡¯s death. He had never decided on a suitable memorial to Howard. He had moved the large portrait of Howard so that it hungon the wallbehind his desk, floatingabove his own head. Howard¡¯s papers sat in the basement of his house, untouched. Warren could not bringhimself to go through them. He teared up if he even thought about it, obviously terrified to let the emotions that had been held back all these thirty-five years erupt. 
He¡¯d warned that trees don¡¯t grow to the sky; someday everythingmust end. Yet he himself couldn¡¯t face the day he would have to draw the line under his career and say: ¡°This is it. I¡¯mdone. The Sistine Chapel is finished. No further brushstroke will improve it¡ªany further effort will produce an ordinary result.¡± 
He was sixty-nine years old. He couldn¡¯t believe that he was sixty-nine years old; he still felt like a young man. He comforted himself with the knowledge that decades remained until he reached the age at which his mother had died. General Re would be fixed, and Coca-Cola, as he knew, could be run by a ham sandwich. The kidney stone¡­Whoosh! The bathtub memory went to work. He returned to preparingfor his shareholder meeting, which had become the happiest week of his year. 
For several days at the end of April, the town grew more crowded, the airport grew busier than usual, a rivulet, then a streamof people arrived in the hotellobbies to check in, and tables in the outdoor cafes of restaurants downtown started to fill. The rental car companies ran out of cars. The bar at the Marriott Regency¡ªat the time a sort of unofficial headquarters for meeting ¡°insiders¡±¡ªwas packed. People wearing Berkshire Hathaway meetingcredentials strolled through Omaha as if identifyingthemselves as members of a club. In Buffett¡¯s office, the phone rangwith urgent last-minute requests for press credentials, meeting passes, and requests from guests to bringtheir own guests to the most exclusive event of the year in Omaha¡ªBuffett¡¯s private Sunday brunch. With outward patience but increasingirritation at the more brazen requests, Buffett¡¯s secretary, Debbie Bosanek, unsnarled the bottleneck and told people no. 
On Friday night, Buffett made the rounds from public events to private parties. Some of his disciples, dressed in gigantic yellow foamcowboy-style hats like members of a cult, mingled with longtime shareholders and big-time money managers at the Borsheim¡¯s cocktailparty, where much of Omaha joined the out-of-town shareholders to scarf down free drinks and food. Susan Jacques of Borsheim¡¯s staged this event, which Buffett supported because it increased turnover, despite his suspicions that a lot of freeloaders showed up. 
Over at the Civic Auditorium, the shareholder meetingitself¡ªwhich had multiplied to include thousands of staff, vendors, and volunteer employees; acres of exhibits, flowers, and displays; truckloads of turkey sandwiches, hot dogs, and Coke; signage, exhibits, security, media, sound, video, lighting, and private parties for the vendors and helpers¡ªwas designed, choreographed, and overseen by just one employee, Kelly Muchemore, whom Buffett called the ¡°Flo Ziegfeld¡± of Berkshire Hathaway. Kelly did not even have a secretary. Technically, she was a secretary. It would take four people to replace Kelly, Buffett pointed out with pride. One side effect of this kind of praise was that it sometimes caused people to wonder whether they were gettingpaid a quarter of what they were worth.14 Buffett, however, was skilled at payingpeople with more praise than cash. Those who sat closest to the sun, Muchemore, Bosanek, and the receptionist, Deb Ray, were the most Carnegized of all Buffett¡¯s employees; every shareholder had heard all about how wonderful they were. The Carnegizingseemed to work like a sort of sunscreen helpingprotect themfrom Rickershauser¡¯s Law of Thermodynamics. Thus, they threw themselves into the fray, while keepingtheir boss sheltered in his private cocoon down at the end of the hallway, separate fromeverybody else. In the weeks leadingup to the meeting, they all pulled double duty. On meetingday, Deb and Debbie handled the most important VIPs and the press room, while Muchemore ran around with a walkie-talkie, field-marshaling. 
By four o¡¯clock in the morningon Saturday, several hundred restless people wearinglaminated meeting credentials on lanyards around their necks lined up outside the Civic Auditorium, waitingfor the doors to open. Three hours later, people stampeded past the guards who checked their credentials to claimthe prime seats on the floor. After hangingtheir jackets and sweaters over the backs of their chairs to save seats, they made their way to the concession stands for the free breakfast of sugary sweet rolls, juice, and coffee. By eight o¡¯clock it became clear that they needn¡¯t have bothered to show up before dawn. Half the seats in the 
house were empty. Thirty minutes later, the auditorium held nine thousand people.15 While most CEOs would be thrilled (or horrified) at such a turnout, it didn¡¯t compare to the fifteen thousand who had come the year before. Attendance was down by forty percent. 
On schedule, the auditoriumdarkened and the filmrolled for the premeetingmovie, which had been growing longer with each year. It opened with a cartoon featuringWarren as a superhero, with Charlie in a supporting role, shillingfor Berkshire products. Next, Judge Judy adjudicated a mock dispute over a two-dollar bet between Buffett and BillGates. Comedy videos and commercials for Berkshire products followed; finally Susie Buffett sanga Berkshire-ized version of the Coca-Cola theme song, ¡°What the world wants today¡­is Berkshire Hathaway.¡± 
Around nine-thirty Buffett and Munger walked onto the stage in suits and ties and looked out over the shrunken crowd of the faithful, clad in everythingfrom business garb to shorts. Yellow foam hats bobbed here and there in the audience. After a five-minute business meeting, the question-and-answer session opened as usual, with shareholders lined up at microphones positioned around the auditorium, lobbing questions on how to value stocks. Somebody asked about technology stocks. ¡°I don¡¯t want to speculate about high-tech,¡± Buffett said. ¡°Anytime there have been real bursts of speculation, it eventually gets corrected.¡± He compared the market to the phony riches of chain letters and Ponzi schemes. ¡°Investors may feel richer, but they¡¯re not.¡± Pause. ¡°Charlie?¡± 
Munger opened his mouth. The audience perked up slightly. Munger often said, ¡°Nothingto add.¡± But whenever Buffett handed the microphone to him, the auditoriumhummed with the subtlest sensation of danger. It was like watchingan experienced lion tamer workingwith a chair and a whip. 
¡°The reason we use the phrase ¡®wretched excess,¡¯¡± Munger said, ¡°is because it produces wretched consequences. It¡¯s irrational. If you mix raisins with turds, they¡¯re stillturds.¡± 
The crowd gasped. Did he say turds? Did Charlie just compare Internet stocks to turds in front of children who had come with their parents, not to mention in front of the press? He said turds! It took some time for the meetingto settle back into its normal rhythm. 
Somebody asked ¡°the silver question.¡± Around then, people started headingdown into the basement to shop for shoes and Ginsu knives and See¡¯s Candies. An annualquestion about Buffett¡¯s silver position had become a tedious ritual. In 1997, he had announced he¡¯d bought almost a third of the world¡¯s silver supply. Instead of bringingup recollections of Blue Eagle stamps, this announcement had sent metals enthusiasts into a frenzy 
over the Oracle¡¯s sudden likingfor their niche.16 More attention was paid to this single transaction than any in Berkshire¡¯s history. Buffett was not a metals bug; he followed metals as a business, based on their supply and demand, not to speculate on themor use themas a hedge against inflation. He thought stocks of companies that could raise prices were the better hedge, even though inflation eroded their gains. He had bought the silver as a good investment, but what he really wanted was to go and visit the silver. He pictured himself in the secret London vault, smilingas he counted the gleamingbars.17 The silver question sent Buffett¡¯s and Munger¡¯s eyes rollingheavenward a fraction of an inch, although Buffett responded politely that owningthe silver had been a dullride. He refrained frommentioningthat a visit to the silver would have livened up the ride considerably. 
The questions droned on as Buffett and Munger listened, unwrappingDilly Bars with much rustling. Shareholders began to voice complaints. They didn¡¯t like the stock price.18 One said she was goingto look into correspondence schools, since her Berkshire stock would no longer pay for college.19 Gaylord Hanson of 
Santa Barbara, California, stood at the microphone to harangue that he had bought BRK near its highs in 
1998 because of Buffett¡¯s track record and had come out okay only because the money he¡¯d lost had been made up by four technology stocks.20 He urged Buffett to invest at least ten percent of Berkshire¡¯s assets in technology, ¡°the only game in town. Isn¡¯t there enough left in your brain power to maybe pick a few?¡± 
The questions kept veeringalongthese lines. What about famous money managers like Stanley Druckenmiller, who had given in and bought technology at Soros?Given Berkshire¡¯s disappointing performance, couldn¡¯t Buffett find somethingnew to do?If not technology, couldn¡¯t he make some international investments? 
It was worse than humiliating. Lookingout into the audience, Buffett saw that, for the first time, some of them assumed that he was lettingthemdown: the effort of nearly fifty years rolled backward, undone, his own shareholders turned against him. His age suddenly signified not experience but obsolescence. In the press, people now referred to himas an old man. It seemed that the world today did not want Berkshire Hathaway. 
Afterward, Buffett guzzled Cherry Coke while signingautographs, then donned a baseballuniformto throw out the first pitch at the Omaha Royals game. He made another round of parties with Astrid, stillwearinghis baseball uniform, Dilly Bars drippingin his wake. He held court at Gorat¡¯s with the family on Sunday night, then oversaw the board meeting¡ªanother teachingexercise¡ªon Monday morning. Afterward, he, Susie, and the kids and their families flew to New York. By the time he was catchingup with friends, eatingout and seeingshows with the family, and dutifully checkingoff his list the unloved annualchore of buyingsuits at Bergdorf¡¯s, the bathtub memory had done its work. While in New York, he also taught a session of the modern version of the Ben Grahamcourse at Columbia and met with half a dozen journalists attending 
Columbia¡¯s business-journalism program. 21 
Saturday morninghe summoned three members of GeneralRe¡¯s management to his suite at the Plaza Hotel. Ron Ferguson brought a series of PowerPoint handouts and began to pace through General Re¡¯s stringof terrible results. Buffett listened for a few minutes, frowningand fidgeting. Finally he said, Why don¡¯t we just jump to the end. Results had to improve. The lines of authority must be reinforced. Clients were dictating 
terms to General Re, not the other way around. This must end. Somebody had to be accountable.22 
He stopped short of tellingFerguson to retire, betrayed by his weakness for older managers. He sympathized with Ferguson, who¡¯d suffered a subarachnoid hemorrhage in late 1999. Ferguson, who had seemed just slightly off-kilter for some time afterward, had offered to step down then. Buffett had told him no. He didn¡¯t believe in puttingpeople out to pasture; some of his best managers had been elderly, includingMrs. B, who had worked until age 103 and died a year later. He missed her caustic little soul, but felt great relief that she had not outwitted the terms of her noncompete. His own goalwas to outlive Mrs. B, not by just a few years but by five years beyond forever, as he had once feared that she would outlast him. He bragged allthe time about Berkshire¡¯s geriatric crew, and his board of directors was beginningto resemble the elderly U.S. Supreme Court. 
Imagine, therefore, if Buffett¡¯s genie had been watchingover his shoulder a few weeks later, as he played bridge after dinner at Bill and Melinda Gates¡¯s house. He was answeringquestions in the raspy voice that meant he hadn¡¯t been sleeping, repeatingthat he was ¡°just fine,¡± but clearly not enjoyinghimself. Sharon Osberg, who knew how to read the signs that meant Buffett was in real distress, conferred with the Gateses, who immediately summoned a doctor, over Buffett¡¯s protests.23 
The doctor was surprised that Buffett had never had a colonoscopy. He gave hima painkiller to get himhome in comfort. But, he said, you really should go in and have a complete examination and a colonoscopy when you get back to Omaha. 
The genie would have been less tactful. Howard Buffett had had colon cancer and died of complications from it. What was Buffett thinking, at age sixty-nine, never havinghad a colonoscopy? This was certainly not treatingyour body like the only car you¡¯d ever own. 
A month later, BRK had recovered by nearly $5,000 a share to $60,000. Fortune magazine noticed that even though he ¡°lost his heavenly touch¡± in 1999, Berkshire¡¯s recent forty-seven percent recovery from its March low made hima ¡°good revivalist.¡±24 He would need some revivingin other ways, however. 
Buffett had scheduled the dread procedure at last.25 So much medicalattention at once¡ªonly a month after the kidney stone. But a colonoscopy could be considered ¡°routine.¡± He distracted himself by talkingon the phone and playingbridge. He played helicopter on the computer. When people asked himabout the upcomingprocedure, he said, ¡°I¡¯mnot the least bit worried.¡± 
But he woke up from the colonoscopy to a nasty shock. A sizable benign polyp was nestingin his gut. The polyp had taken over so much real estate that removingit would require demolishinga good chunk of the surroundingneighborhood. It had a few small friends nearby as well. This was not somethingto trifle with. Buffett decided to have surgery in late July, after Sun Valley. ¡°Oh, I¡¯m not worried at all,¡± he said, making jokes and stressingthe good results from his cardiology tests. ¡°I never worry about my health. Unless you¡¯d brought it up, I never would have even thought about it.¡± 
But Buffett now seemed cornered into issuingpress releases about his health, this one blaringin embarrassing detail: 
WarrenE.Buffett,ChairmanofBerkshireHathawayInc.(NYSE:BRK.A,BRK.B),expectstoenter anOmahahospitalinthenextmonthtoundergosurgerytoremoveseveralbenignpolypsinhiscolon. ThepolypswerediscoveredonMondaywhenMr.Buffettunderwentaroutinephysicalexamination, whichotherwisefoundhimtobeinexcellenthealth.ThesurgeryisexpectedtokeepMr.Buffettinthe hospitalforseveraldays,afterwhichheexpectstoreturnquicklytowork.BerkshireHathawayis releasingthesefactstoforestallthekindoffalserumorsaboutMr.Buffett¡¯shealththatdisruptedthe 
marketforitsstockearlierthisyear. 26 
The surgery took severalhours, duringwhich fifteen inches of Buffett¡¯s innards were removed, and left him marked with a seven-inch scar. He spent a week recoveringat home. He also grew a beard for the first time in his life. Deprived of Berkshire Hathaway, he talked a lot on the phone. He sounded weak. 
¡°Oh, no, I¡¯m not tired at all, I¡¯m perfectly fine,¡± he said. ¡°I¡¯ve lost a few pounds I needed to lose. Astrid¡¯s taking good care of me. The doctor says I can eat anything I want. By the way, did I tell you that I went into the hospital with a colon, but I came out with a semicolon?¡± Asked if he was concerned about a recurrence: ¡°Oh, no, I¡¯m not worried at all about that. I never worry about anything, you know. Incidentally, did I tell you that the anesthesiologist used to be my caddy at the country club? I told him before he put me under that I sure hope I tipped him well.¡± 
Berkshire Hathaway¡¯s press release simply noted that the polyp was confirmed benign and no further treatment was required. Despite the announcement, rumors raced over the Internet and around WallStreet again. Some insisted that Buffett must have had cancer; polyps did not require surgery. But Warren was not sick and certainly did not feel old. He stillfelt like the ¡°Firebolt.¡± 
Yet after toleratingcavalier treatment all his life, his health was beginningto set limits. Someday, his wrestlingmatch with infinity would end; the questions he was avoidingmust be faced. Since Berkshire and 
Buffett were interchangeable in his mind, everythingin his nature rebelled against this task. Many of the questions hinged on BigSusie, who was goingto outlive him. He told people that she would take care of everything. 
55 
TheLastKayParty 
Omaha . September 2000¨CJuly 2001 
By the time Buffett got his semicolon, the Internet boom had boomeranged. The dotcoms were dyingat the pace of one a day:Arzoo.com, Boo.com, Dash.com, eToys.com, Flooz.com, FooDoo.com, Hookt.com, Lipstream.com, PaperFly.com, Pets.com, Wwwwrrrr.com, Xuma.com, Zing.com.1 The NASDAQ was trading at less than half the value of its peak; the old economy stocks were still swooning. The Federal Reserve had started to cut interest rates once again. Buffett¡¯s reputation, however, began to revive. 
Berkshire dipped its soup ladle into a huge stockpot of capitalfor Buffett to buy private companies, bankrupt companies, under-the-radar companies as the window to invest began to open again. He bought U.S. Liability, an insurer of unusual risks; Ben Bridge, another jeweler;2 and Justin Industries, parent of Acme Brick and Tony Lama and Nocona Boots;3 Shaw, the world¡¯s largest carpet maker;4 and Benjamin Moore 
Paint.5 He bought Johns Manville, a home-building-products maker,6 and Mitek, a high-tech steel component fabricator.7 Even so, by the end of 2000 Berkshire stillhad billions of unused capital:a baled-in-the-basement, batched-to-the-rafters, wadded-to-the-walls, stashed-up-the-chimney, thatched-to-the-rooftop 
mass of money that continued to pour out fromthe self-perpetuatingcash-spinningmachine.8 
Buffett¡¯s forebodingprediction about the market in his 1999 Sun Valley speech had proven right so far. Now he sermonized in his letter¡ªwhich had become a global media event, released on the Internet and awaited by so many thousands of people that the Berkshire Web site nearly crashed on the appointed Saturday morning¡ªthat the birth of the Internet was a chance for cynical financiers to ¡°monetize the hopes¡± of the credulous. He alluded again to the Aesop¡¯s fable he had invoked in his Sun Valley speech: Investingin the Internet is layingout the bird in the hand¡ªmoney today¡ªto get birds in the bush. The resulting ¡°wealth transfer on a massive scale¡± was goingto benefit only the very few. 
¡°By shamelessly merchandising birdless bushes, promoters have in recent years moved billions of dollars 
from the pockets of the public to their own purses (and to those of their friends and associates)¡­. Speculation is most dangerous when it looks easiest.¡±9 The audience listened, and at the 2001 shareholder meeting, the crowds started comingback. 
A smallpart of Berkshire¡¯s good fortune came froma turnaround at Gillette, where Buffett had been instrumental in replacingits CEO, Mike Hawley, with Jim Kilts.10 Shortly before that, near the end of 2000, he had thrown off his torpor as a Coca-Cola board member once again when DougDaft, the new CEO, tried to make a deal to buy Quaker Oats. Buffett was one of several board members whose lack of support spiked the deal. But it remained to be seen whether the changes at Coca-Cola would make a difference. Certainly replacingone hamsandwich with another had not helped the stock. 
Buffett¡¯s return to Sun Valley in 2001 was another opportunity to table-thump. But as the Gulfstreamjets glided their way down the mountain wave to Hailey, the corporate chiefs headingto the Sun Valley Lodge had deals on their mind and rumors were flying. Most of the rumors concerned AT&T fightingoff an unfriendly offer for its cable assets fromComcast. 
For the first time, an archipelago of television news tents filled the lawn in front of the Sun Valley Inn. Equipped as though for a movie shoot with distractinglights, silver reflectingsheets, producers, cameramen, assistants, makeup people, and reporters, allwaitingto wrestle CEOs into givinginterviews, they fueled the rumor mill. TVcameras hovered around the Duck Pond; reporters pounced on the willingand unwillingafter their speeches. They chased after people fromcompanies that were supposedly involved in the deals. 
On Friday afternoon, after playingbridge, Katharine Graham, who was now left in relative peace at age eighty-four, rode back to her condo in the little golf cart she used to get around in Sun Valley. Talland stillon the slender side, she had had both hips replaced, and one worked better than the other. People noticed that she seemed worn out and ¡°fading,¡± but she had been sayingwhat a marvelous time she was havingthis year. The company that she and her son Don had created, with much help fromBuffett¡¯s advice, was now regarded almost as iconic for its financial and journalistic success at a time when newspaper profits were slippingbadly. Graham took obvious pleasure in the way the Allen conference brought together so many of the people she enjoyed. She had been assigned an assistant to escort her everywhere, but she had the grit to resist handling, so for much of the conference she was seen on the arm of either Don or Barry Diller, chairman of USA Networks and a close friend. At the moment, however, she was alone. 
Susie Buffett Jr. and her mother, in their car, spotted Grahamand drove into the employee parkinglot where Graham could not see them, so that they could watch her climb the four steps to her condominium. She was takingthe anticoagulant Coumadin, which greatly increased the risk of serious hemorrhage should she fall. 
She clungto the handrailand looked shaky but made it inside without incident.11 
Later, outside on the deck of the Wildflower condos, overlookingthe golf course and mountains, where Graham often sat readingthe Washington Post in the afternoons, fashion designer Diane von Furstenberg threw her annual women¡¯s cocktailparty for Kay, a Sun Valley tradition. Susie Buffett brought See¡¯s 
lollipops, and they all gathered around Graham for a picture, with lollipops in their mouths.12 After a while, Don Keough, Diane¡¯s husband Barry Diller, News Corporation CEO Rupert Murdoch, and severalof the other men crashed the party and joined Don Graham. 
Saturday dawned. The audience settled into its chairs to hear Andy Grove, head of Intel, kick off the morning with ¡°Internet Interrupted.¡± Then Diane Sawyer moderated a panel, askingMegWhitman of eBay; Sir Howard Stringer, CEO of Sony; and AOL Time Warner¡¯s Steve Case ¡°Pulse of America:How Do You Find It?¡± Sun Valley frothed and bubbled like a junior high school cafeteria beingfilmed for a documentary, with reporters round-robiningrumors that USA Networks, or AOL Time Warner, or Disney, or Charter 
Communications, or some combination of them, were goingto hook up with AT&T Broadband.13 Many of those present wished the television tents would disappear. 
After Diane Sawyer, Buffett was once again the scheduled speaker. Since the market¡¯s peak in March 2000, over four trillion dollars of stock-market value had evaporated.14 At least 112,000 dotcomemployees had been fired.15 Meanwhile, the survivingInternet businesses were enteringtheir adolescence. Surely, some 
reasoned, he would no longer think Internet stocks overvalued. The audience was hopinghe would relent from his previous bearishness. 
Yet Buffett showed them a graph indicatingthat the value of the market was stillone-third larger than the economy. That was far higher than the levelat which Buffett said he would buy stocks. It was considerably higher than the market had ever stood in modern history¡ªhigher, even, than the peak of the Great Bubble of 1929. In fact, the graph suggested that the economy would have to nearly double, or the value of the market 
would have to fallby nearly half, before he would get really excited about it.16 He told themthat despite two years of keelhauling, even with the NASDAQ down by more than half, he would still not buy. He expected the stock market (with dividends included) to grow at no better than about seven percent a year, on average, 
for possibly as longas the next twenty years.17 That was only about one percent higher than he had said two years before. It was a dispiritingmessage, most of allto Buffett himself¡ªwho was about to celebrate his seventy-first birthday¡ªand to the track record he wanted to maintain. 
¡°That shouldn¡¯t be the way markets work,¡± he said, ¡°but that is the way markets work. And in the end, that¡¯s what you should remember.¡± He put up a slide. 
ANYTHING THAT CAN¡¯T GO ON FOREVER WILL END. 
18
¡ªHerb Stein 
Many in the audience were shocked and sobered¡ªbut impressed. ¡°You basically have to listen to Warren,¡± said Jeff Bezos, CEO of Amazon.com. Amazon was tradingat $17, down from $113 at its high. ¡°Some things he said were quite painful, but, by God, the man is a genius and so far seems to be right.¡±19 
Buffett enjoyed congratulations for his speech at lunch under a tent on the deck behind Herbert Allen¡¯s condo, where a group of about a hundred people, includingthe Grahams, had gathered. He sat with President Vicente Fox of Mexico¡ªwhom he thought of as ¡°an old Coca-Cola guy¡±¡ªand kicked around the 
economy. 20 Then he went off to play golf. 
Kay Graham rode over to the bridge roomto play cards. After a while she said she was not feelingwell and had decided to go back to her room. She called to alert her assistant, whom she had left waitingfor her at Herbert Allen¡¯s condo next door to her own, then walked out to her golf cart and drove back to her condo alone. 
The assistant had started to check out the window for her every couple of minutes. She looked and saw that Kay¡¯s golf cart had already arrived, but it was empty. She sprinted outside and saw Kay lyingat the top of the steps on the porch in front of her door. Runningover, she bent and spoke to Graham, who didn¡¯t respond. 
She started screamingfor Herbert Allen to come out.21 By the time the emergency medical technicians arrived a few minutes later, Don Grahamhad rushed back from the golf course. He was goingto need someone to help himmake decisions, and asked Buffett whether he wanted to come along. But Buffett could 
not do it.22 Griffith Harsh, a prominent neurosurgeon who was married to eBay CEO MegWhitman, went with Don to look at the CAT scan at St. Luke¡¯s hospital in Ketchum, about ten minutes away. 23 
PhotoInsertFour 

Image72 
BuffettandFederalReserveChairmanAlanGreenspanappearattheGreaterOmahaChamberof Commerce,February20,2004. 

Image73 
¡°EndZone¡±BuffettexplainsthefinerpointsofthegameduringacharityeventforJeanNat¨¦. 

Image74 
WarrenholdsSusiecloseinJuly2004,oneofherfewpublicappearancesafterrecoveringfromoral cancersurgery. 

Image75 
BuffettshowshisfeelingsforGEICOatthecompany¡¯snewAmherst,NY,facilityinJanuary2005. 

Image76 
CharlieMungergoesforareadinEngland. 

Image77 
BuffettandformerpresidentBillClintonataGirls,Inc.fund-raiserinOmaha,December2006. 

Image78 
BuffettwithfriendSharonOsberg. 

Image79 
BillGatesSr.,BillJr.,andWarreninChina,1998. 

Image80 
Bittenbyacheetah,chasedbyapolarbear¡­photographerandconservationistHowieBuffettdonatesto wildlifepreservation. 

Image81 

Image82 
AtBuffett¡¯s75birthdaypartyatSharonOsbergandDavidSmith¡¯shouse,heandGatesattempttolearn landscapepainting.Afterward,Buffettstandsbyhisfinishedworkofart. 

Image83 
Afterhiscolon-polypsurgeryin2000,Warrengrewabeardforthefirsttimeinhislife. 

Image84 
Warren,Doris,andBertiereenacttheirchildhoodphotograph(seePhotoInsert1)withexpressions appropriatetotheirfeelingsatthetime. 

Image85 
BuffettandArnoldSchwarzeneggerataNetJetsconferenceforbusinessleadersinEngland,September 2002. 

Image86 
BuffettinterviewsSanFrancisco49erscheerleadersforflightattendantjobsatanotherNetJetsevent. 

Image87 
BuffettconcedesdefeattoArielHsing,thenine-year-oldping-pongplayerwhotrouncedhimonhis birthday,August30,2005. 

Image88 
InMay2004inNewYork,BonopresentsSusiewithapicturehepaintedofherfeaturingU2lyrics. Afterwardhedeclaredtheywere¡°soulmates.¡± 

Image89 
Buffett¡¯sfriendWalterSchlossboogiesthenightawayathisninetiethbirthdaypartyin2006. 

Image90 
OnhisbirthdayonAugust30,2006,twoyearsafterSusie¡¯sdeath,WarrenmarriesatearfulAstridina privateceremonyatSusieJr.¡¯shouse. 

Image91 AscenefromPeterBuffett¡¯sSpirit:TheSeventhFire,ashowaboutrecoveredidentity.ThePhiladelphia InquirercomparedittoaPhilipGlassopera,with¡°guitarrollsthatwouldputU2¡¯sTheEdgetoshame.¡± 

Image92 
BillandMelindaGatesshareajoyfuldaywithBuffettonJune26,2006,whenheannouncesthathewill 
givemostofhisfortunetotheBillandMelindaGatesFoundation. 
Susie Jr. drove off to meet Don and Herbert Allen at the hospital. She knew very wellthat no one could expect her father to dealwith any kind of medical crisis. BigSusie had had a cardiac catheterization in 1997, and Warren got on a plane to go to San Francisco to be with her. When Kathleen Cole called to say that Susie was goingto be okay, he turned the plane around in midair and went back to Omaha. Since then, Susie had been in the emergency roomrepeatedly with excruciatingabdominal adhesions and intestinal blockages. In 1999 she had her gall bladder removed. Throughout allof her medicalproblems over the years, Warren had 
never once been able to endure the emotional distress of goingto the hospital to be with his wife.24 
Shortly after he and Don arrived at St. Luke¡¯s and the radiologist took the CAT scan, Dr. Harsh saw it and said, ¡°Kay needs to get to a trauma center.¡± The hospitalhelicoptered her to St. Alphonsus RegionalMedical Center in Boise; Herbert Allen arranged a private plane¡ªsomewhat bigger than a ridinglawn mower and flown by a couple of cowboys in jeans and T-shirts¡ªto take Don and Susie to Boise. 
While all of this was transpiring, Warren retreated to his condo. BigSusie had left earlier that day for a weddingin Greece and knew nothingof what was goingon. Peter and Jennifer, Howie and Devon were still at Sun Valley; Peter and Howie came by briefly, but even at such a time it was unnatural for Warren to tune the unfamiliar instrument of his emotions to make an openhearted connection with his sons. Sharon Osberg was not at Sun Valley; nor, of course, was Astrid. With both his wife and his daughter also unavailable to him, it was Bill and Melinda Gates, Ron and Jane Olson, and Susie Jr.¡¯s boyfriend who sat with him waiting for news of Kay. Their job was to help distract himfrom what was goingon by talkingof anythingbut her. 
Susie Jr. had called fromBoise to say that she was goinginto surgery, but that was all.25 
Kay was taken into the operatingroom, then brought out. Around midnight, Dr. Harsh came by to tell Don and Susie that things looked worse and Kay needed another CAT scan. They wheeled the gurney back into surgery and handed her watch to Susie Jr., who felt her stomach drop.26 
Around two o¡¯clock in the morning, since there had been no further word fromBoise, Buffett decided to go to bed. Everybody left. 
Ninety minutes or so later, the doctors moved Kay to intensive care. ¡°We¡¯re really not sure what¡¯s goingto happen,¡± they said. Susie Jr. called her father and woke him up. She told himto get the family on the plane. Buffett had to calleveryone and organize their departure. 
A couple of hours later, when the NetJets plane taxied into Boise, Warren called Susie Jr. and said he didn¡¯t feel he could come to the hospital. She told himthat he had to come; Don was distraught and needed him to be there. Even if Kay was not conscious and couldn¡¯t see him, she would be able to sense his presence. Reluctantly, he acquiesced. 
When he got to the hospital, his daughter met himdownstairs in the lobby. She knew he was so frightened that he would have to be coaxed. ¡°You have to come upstairs,¡± she insisted. ¡°You have to come.¡± She led him to intensive care, where Don Graham, red-faced from weeping, was sittingalone with his mother. Kay, drained of color and unconscious, lay connected to monitoringdevices that blinked little lights and made tiny noises. There was an oxygen mask over her mouth. Warren and Don clungto each other, sobbing. Lally Weymouth, Kay¡¯s oldest child and only daughter, arrived. Eventually, Susie Jr. took her father downstairs. There was nothingmore they could do. As the rest of Kay¡¯s children gathered in Boise, the Buffetts boarded 
a plane for a sad ride back to Omaha.27 
Two days later, the call came that Kay had died. Warren had already told Lally that he wasn¡¯t goingto be able to speak at Kay¡¯s service. He would be an usher alongwith BillGates. Astrid took care of himat home, and work consumed himat the office. When he wasn¡¯t working, Sharon played bridge with himor he played helicopter, anythingto distract himself fromthe many shocks and horror of Kay¡¯s death. So sudden, on such a happy occasion; not beingthere when it happened; the ambulance, the helicopter, Susie Jr. callingabout the surgery; sittingin the condo waiting, the phone call in the middle of the night, flyingto Boise not knowing; goingupstairs to see Kay lyingso stilland white, barely breathing; the normally controlled Don Graham so distraught; the terrible trip home away fromKay, whom he would never see again; the phone call with the news; no BigSusie to shepherd himthrough it all. No more Kay, no more Kay Parties, never again. 
And yet, the day after Grahamdied, Buffett arrived, as scheduled, to speak to an audience of college students at the Terry College of Business at the University of Georgia. He climbed onto the stage wearinghis stiff gray suit and lookingonly a little more awkward than usual, his breathy voice gratingslightly. ¡°Testing, one million, two million, three million,¡± he said at the microphone. This line could always be counted on to get a laugh, and it did. He then launched into a couple of Nebraska football jokes but, out of character, rushed the punchline and got only chuckles fromthe audience. 
Then he seemed to catch his rhythm. ¡°People ask me where they should go to work, and I always tell them to go to work for whom they admire the most,¡± he said. He urged themnot to waste their time and their life. ¡°It¡¯s crazy to take little in-between jobs just because they look good on your r¨¦sum¨¦. That¡¯s like saving sex for your old age. Do what you love and work for whom you admire the most, and you¡¯ve given yourself the best chance in life you can.¡± 
They asked himwhat mistakes he had made. Number one was Berkshire Hathaway, he said¡ªspending twenty years tryingto revive a failingtextile mill. Second, USAir. Buffett spoke of his failure to callthe Air-aholic hotline beforehand. Third, he said, had been buyingthe Sinclair gas station as a youngman. That mistake, he reckoned, had cost himabout $6 billion compared to what he could have earned on the money invested. 
But his mistakes of omission¡ªthings he could have done and didn¡¯t do¡ªhad plagued him most, he said. He mentioned only one¡ªfailingto buy FNMA stock, the FederalNational Mortgage Association. That, he said, had cost about $5 billion as of that date. There were others:passingon the television station that Tom Murphy had tried to sell him; not investingin Wal-Mart. The reason that he had made mostly mistakes of omission instead of commission, he explained, was his cautious approach to life. 
Buffett had talked many times before about mistakes. But when he spoke, as he often did, of his mistakes of omission, he never ventured beyond business mistakes. The errors of omission in his personal life¡ªinattention, neglect, missed chances¡ªwere always there, the side effects of intensity; but they were shadow presences visible only to those who knew himwell. He spoke of themonly in private, if at all. 
To the students, he explained his ¡°Twenty Punches¡± approach to investing. ¡°You¡¯d get very rich,¡± he said, ¡°if you thought of yourself as having a card with only twenty punches in a lifetime, and every financial decision used up one punch. You¡¯d resist the temptation to dabble. You¡¯d make more good decisions and you¡¯d make more big decisions.¡± 
He ran his life on Twenty Punches, too, with as little flittingas he could arrange. Same house, same wife for fifty years, same Astrid on FarnamStreet; no desire to buy and sell real estate, art, cars, tokens of wealth; no jumpingfromcity to city or career to career. Some of that was easy for a man so certain of himself; some of it came with beinga creature of habit; some of it was a natural tendency to let things compound; and some of it was the wisdom of inertia. When he gave somebody a punch on his card, they became a part of himand that decision was permanent. Any crack in the facade of permanence was extraordinarily difficult for him to face. 
*** 
A few days later, police arrived early in the morningto close nearby streets for the crowd they expected at 
the Washington NationalCathedral, its gargoyle-bedecked flyingbuttresses silhouetted against a bright blue sky.28 Television crews began to set up for an elaborately orchestrated event that had all the trappings of a funeralfor a head of state. By late morning, buses bearing Washington Post employees pulled up one by one. A blue-and-white-striped bus carryingmembers of the Senate arrived, and people began streamingin from cars and limousines. Gradually the front pews filled with dignitaries like Bill and Hillary Clinton and Lynne and Dick Cheney. Around the Cathedral famous faces were everywhere: Supreme Court justices Ruth Bader Ginsbergand Stephen Breyer; celebrity journalists Charlie Rose, TomBrokaw, Mike Wallace, and Ted Koppel; USA Today publisher Al Neuharth; Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan and his wife, journalist Andrea Mitchell; editor Tina Brown; Senator Ted Kennedy; Congressional delegate Eleanor 
Holmes Norton.29 Hundreds, then thousands, of people filed in through the enormous bronze doors to the sound of the National Symphony Orchestra and the Kennedy Center Opera House Orchestra Brass Ensemble, gradually assemblinginto what looked like the largest crowd the cathedralhad ever held.30 
From the nave, thousands of men in dark suits and white shirts formed a Mondrian backdrop for the women, a pointillist grid of black and white. The women wore houndstooth check and crisp seersucker; black suits with dainty white cotton blouses; sleeveless black sheaths with jackets and sleeveless black sheaths with bare arms; white skirts with black sweaters; and black jackets over dotted Swiss and black-and-white polka-dotted dresses. Their heads were topped with smallblack hats with discreet netting, black-and-white picture hats fit for Ladies¡¯ Day at Ascot, black straw bonnets with swoopingveils. The cathedral was awash in a sea of pearls, from pearls as smallas peppercorns to pearls like huge champagne corks, black and white pearls on hundreds of wrists, necks, and earlobes; women wearingstrands of pearls the width of a lingerie strap, a curtain tieback, a first-prize ribbon. Every detailpaid tribute to the woman who had awed the world for years in a summation and celebration of her life that had become the second, the grandest, the most stately, and the final Black and White Ball. 
As the service began, Buffett and Gates slipped into a pew next to Melinda. The music started. Historian Arthur Schlesinger spoke; Henry Kissinger spoke; Ben Bradlee spoke; Graham¡¯s children spoke. Near the end, former Senator John Danforth gave the homily. Graham, he thought, never said much about religion, but she lived the way a believer is supposed to live. ¡°She dismissed out of hand the notion that she was the most powerful woman in the world,¡± he said. ¡°In Washington, especially, a lot of people strut, and Kay did not strut¡­. We do not attain the victory of life by selfishness. Victory is for those who give themselves to causes beyond themselves. It is very biblical and very true that everyone who exalts themselves will be humbled and he who humbles himself will be exalted. That is a text for all of us. It was lived by Katharine Graham.¡± 
Melinda Gates reached up and wiped away tears while Buffett sat next to her husband with a frostbitten, grief-stricken face. The two cathedralchoirs, dressed in black and white robes, sangMozart. Carefully, the pallbearers lifted the casket to their shoulders and bore it down the aisle while the congregation sang ¡°America the Beautiful.¡± The family followed the procession out of the cathedral to the Oak Hill Cemetery across the street fromGraham¡¯s house, where she would be interred next to her late husband. 
Early that afternoon, more than four hundred people swept up the circular driveway to Graham¡¯s house and walked around to the rear garden, where her children and grandchildren stood about, chattingwith guests. At a buffet inside the tent, people ate finger sandwiches and sliced hamand tenderloin. They wandered around past the swimmingpool, and found their way into the house to gather the collection of memories that it held. They stood in the livingroomwhere President Reagan had gotten down on his hands and knees to pick up ice cubes he¡¯d spilled on the floor, and gazed for one last time at the books and knickknacks in the library where Mrs. Graham had pondered whether to print the Pentagon Papers. They paused by Napoleon¡¯s china on the walls next to the round diningtables in the golden room where American Presidents fromKennedy to Clinton 
had dined. From Jacqueline Onassis to Princess Diana, if Katharine Grahaminvited them, they all came. 31 The house itself was a kind of history. 
Warren walked through Kay¡¯s house for one last time to remember, but he did not linger. He left early and 32 
would never return. 
As the afternoon wore on, the rest of Katharine Graham¡¯s friends and admirers told her good-bye. They withdrew down the longhallway gallery past the rooms where she had entertained them so often and slipped past the garden outside. Then slowly, sometimes reluctantly, they left the last Kay Party, and began their final trip down the pebbled drive. 
56 
BytheRich,fortheRich 
Omaha . July 2001¨CJuly 2002 
Buffett flew back to Nebraska alone. He knotted every wakingminute into a web of distractions. He read the financial reports that came into his office. He read the Financial Times, the New York Times, the Wall Street Journal. He watched CNBC. He talked to people on the phone. He played bridge in the evenings after work. He surfed the Internet for news online. In between, he played helicopter on the computer. 
A week later he was cryingon the phone, great gulpingsobs, choking, gaspingcries that left himout of breath. The convulsion broke through the damthat had kept his grief contained. 
A moment later, after the torrent of grief had poured out of him, he was recovered enough to speak. He regretted not beingable to eulogize Kay at her funeral, he said. It shamed him. The man who had worked so hard to become comfortable on a stage felt that he should have been able to do that for Kay. And there would be more regrets, more second thoughts. 
¡°If I¡¯d been playing bridge with her that day she might not have fallen,¡± he reflected later, sadly. ¡°I would have taken her back in her golf cart myself. She might not have died.¡± 
But Kay probably would have walked up the steps by herself anyway. And nobody knew whether she died from the fall or whether she had fallen because she had a stroke. 
Still, Warren was plagued by a sense of lost opportunities. He felt at times that, had he been with her, he could somehow have kept Kay safe. 
As weeks passed, if her death was mentioned, his eyes teared and the conversation would come to a stop while he collected himself. Then, like a motor turningover and restarting, he would brighten and shift to other subjects. 
DuringAugust, other events helped to turn his mind away from the tragedy. He was planningthe tenth and final Omaha Classic charity golf tournament, which would take place in September. And he was already lookingforward to the Buffett Group meetingin Biarritz, France, in October. In the meantime, he flew to 
Cody, Wyoming, with BigSusie for a longweekend at Herbert Allen¡¯s J¡ª9*33 ranch on the North Fork of the Shoshone River. 
Buffett would much rather watch a western movie than visit a dude ranch. But as with Sun Valley, he went for the mix of elephant-bumpingand people he considered friends. At Cody, he and Susie spent a leisurely, relaxed time with media CEO Barry Diller and his wife, Diane von Furstenberg; Don and Mickie Keough; film director Mike Nichols and his wife, newscaster Diane Sawyer; producer Sydney Pollack; actress Candice Bergen; and Intel CEO Andy Grove and his wife, Eva, amongothers. 
The Buffetts arrived late in the eveningand spent the first night in one of the hand-hewn cedar-shake log cabins that encircled the central lodge. They began the next morninggreetingother early arrivals over 
breakfast, which for Warren usually meant last night¡¯s leftover dessert. The rest of the day, as guests trickled in, he relaxed in the lodge or his cabin, readingbooks, playingbridge on the computer, and readingthe newspapers that Allen had printed off the Internet for him. The others began to entertain themselves with trail rides up the canyon on some of Allen¡¯s ranch geldings to see the elk and deer. Some people headed off on mountain-bike expeditions or went fishingin the river that ran through the property. Buffett skipped all of this. But at mealtime he appeared at the longrectangular table in the lodge, where the guests sat surrounded by dark leather furniture and romantic rustic paintings by Thomas Hart Benton and Frederic Remington. Buffett presided over a salon at the dinner table, talkingpolitics, money, and world affairs. While the rest ate 
fish, chicken, game, and salads, the cook at Cody challenged his appetite with huge slabs of meat.1 
After dinner, Allen¡¯s friend Al Oehrle took over at the piano. The guests sangfromCandice Bergen¡¯s songbook, standards by Gershwin, IrvingBerlin, and Cole Porter. Susie often sangsolos. Buffett played his ukulele, and, as he did every year, sanga duet of ¡°The Hut-Sut Song¡±¡ªan appallingnumber fromthe 1941 Hit Parade¡ªwith movie producer Sydney Pollack¡ªa performance always dreaded by the audience, which made himlook forward to singingit all the more. 
Hut-Sut Rawlson on the rillerah and a brawla, brawla sooit. Hut-Sut Rawlson on the rillerah and a brawla sooit.2 
The return fromCody effectively marked the end of Buffett¡¯s summer vacation. His birthday would be arrivingin a few weeks, somethingto which he feigned indifference but actually dreaded. The one highlight was hundreds of cards, gifts, and letters fromfriends¡ªor, by now, mostly strangers¡ªthat poured into Kiewit Plaza every year for weeks beforehand. Buffett was far from jaded, but it was hard to thrill a multibillionaire¡ªone who didn¡¯t want to be a year older and cared nothingabout possessions¡ªwith a birthday gift. He appreciated the cards and letters, the sentimental, and was touched by anythingunique that reminded himof past episodes of his life. Otherwise, he had so much Coca-Cola memorabilia by now, so many Nebraska football posters, so many flags, quilts, paintings, collages, and other tributes to him and photographs of himself with other famous people that there was hardly any space left on an entire floor of hallways. His actualbirthday was a low-key event, usually just dinner at someplace like the Olive Garden with family and perhaps a few friends. 
This year he was turningseventy-one. He could not believe he was seventy-one. He could not believe it, either, when he¡¯d turned forty, and fifty, and sixty, and seventy. But this year, especially, he did not want to think about his birthday, because he did not want any reminders of time passingso soon after Kay¡¯s death. 
Fortunately, the Omaha Classic golf tournament, an annualevent that the Buffetts sponsored to benefit various local institutions, followed his birthday like recess after study hall. Corporate CEOs and celebrities, friends and relatives, people he knew and enjoyed, were comingto play golf and tennis at the Omaha 
Country Club.3 The guests at this event were another collection, like his shareholders, like the people who came to Omaha for his shareholder meeting, like the members of the Buffett Group. As the days counted down, the staff juggled shiftingguest lists, airport transportation, and food and entertainment for golfers at the club. Buffett enjoyed knowingthe details: who would come, how many times a guest had come before, who was attendingfor the first time, and how much money the event would raise. 
Most of the guests arrived Monday eveningfor a dinner at the Omaha Country Club with entertainment by Academy Award¨Cwinningsongwriter Marvin Hamlisch.4 Every year he sat at the piano and made up personal songs on the spot for anyone who asked. 
¡°He didn¡¯t play golf. He came to the tournament some years ago, and he likes Little Sooz, and she likes him. And he said, ¡®Why don¡¯t you let me do a little show the night before for the people who come in early?¡¯ It got to be the best part of the golf tournament. You say, ¡®I wish I could get rid of that damn hook that I have with my three wood,¡¯ and it¡¯s a song. People thought it was rigged. It wasn¡¯t rigged. If you said, ¡®I can¡¯t believe my mother-in-law steals the sugar packets from restaurants,¡¯ thirty seconds later he¡¯s banging out a little tune and singing a song to that refrain.¡± 
The next morningdawned under a flawless blue dome of sky. Around eight o¡¯clock, Buffett¡¯s phone rang. It was Devon Spurgeon, a Wall Street Journal reporter who had been coveringBerkshire Hathaway. ¡°Oh, my God, Warren, turn on the TV,¡± she said. He turned it on to a news channel. At opposite ends of the phone line they watched what appeared to be a horrible aviation accident. The cameras were runningfootage that panned across the North Tower of the World Trade Center, whose upper stories were slashed through by a jagged, gapingwedge of flames. An airplane appeared, circled toward the building, and plunged into the side of the South Tower, explodingin a corona of flames like a bomb goingoff. They watched in silence as the news channelbegan repeatingthe footage: Plane turns, dives into building. Plane turns, dives into building. ¡°Devon,¡± said Buffett, ¡°the world has changed.¡± He started askingher about her office, which was two blocks from the Sears Tower in Chicago. Listen, he said, that¡¯s not a safe place to be. The Wall Street Journal headquarters in New York was across the street from the World Trade Center. They discussed the fact that the Journal staff must be evacuatingand reportingat the same time. Spurgeon could hear Buffett 
switching, as they spoke, into his fastest-thinking, most rational, problem-solvingmode.5 
As he was hangingup the phone, the FAA halted all flight operations at U.S. airports, and minutes later American Flight 77 crashed into the Pentagon. About fifteen minutes after that, while the White House was evacuating, Buffett, his mind latticingbits of information into a plan, called General Re, where he was supposed to be speakingthe next day to a group of employees. He said that he was stillplanningto fly out to 
Connecticut if the airports reopened and flights resumed.6 General Re and its neighbor in Connecticut, Ajit Jain¡¯s Berkshire Re, were both internationalgateways to insuringpotentiallosses fromterrorism. Meeting with them now would enable himto talk with his managers about suddenly significant issues at a critical time. 
While Buffett was workingout logistics with GeneralRe, the South Tower, burningfrominside, collapsed, as did a portion of the Pentagon. Within minutes, United Airlines Flight 93 crashed near Shanksville, Pennsylvania. Over the next half hour, government buildings were evacuated, and the North Tower collapsed. The New York Stock Exchange closed and civilians fled the clouds of smoke and debris in lower Manhattan. 
Almost everyone in Omaha at the golf tournament was affected in some way or another, however remotely. Many had friends, relatives, neighbors, or business acquaintances who worked in the towers. The tournament staff took care of their needs and helped themwith logistics. One, Ann Tatlock, the CEO of Fiduciary Trust, which was headquartered in the Trade Center, spent the rest of the day in her hotelroom, makingphone 
calls.7 About a hundred Fiduciary Trust employees would prove to be missing. Berkshire, of course, had employees in businesses scattered all across the country. In the end Buffett would find that Berkshire had lost no employees¡ªonly money. 
Some people decided to leave the golf tournament immediately, but with all airports closed this was not easy. A few started makingarrangements to rent cars and leave. Others stayed, some because they didn¡¯t want to insult Buffett, many because they had no choice.8 Radio commentator Rush Limbaugh, on the way to the tournament, had turned his plane around in midair and headed back to New York.9 
While these momentous events were occurring, Buffett proceeded with his schedule, compartmentalizingas he did under stress even in extreme situations. He arranged to complete the acquisition of a small business that was already in process. Then he went ahead with a meetingthat had been scheduled with the head of 
Home Depot, Bob Nardelli.10 Afterward he showed up at the Omaha Country Club, where about a hundred guests were millingaround or diningon hamburgers and ice cream. Buffett said that things would go on as planned but people should do whatever they needed or wanted to do. Guests wandered in and out of the club makingcalls and checkingthe news on television. Tony Pesavento and Gary Wiren, the local pros, followed lunch with a golf lesson, and the tournament got rollingin a surreal atmosphere. Buffett rode a golf cart 
through a planned circuit of stops at different tees so guests could have their picture taken with him.11 A strange calmhungover the event, which was like a celebrity golf tournament the day Pearl Harbor was attacked. And in fact, like Buffett, more than a few of the golfers could remember Pearl Harbor and its aftermath. This was not an excitable crowd. Most of them were prominent businessmen accustomed to stress and pressure, from a generation of men that considered poise and equanimity in the face of disaster as essential as the suits and ties they wore every day to work. 
Buffett had fallen automatically into statesman mode, movingthrough his routine with smooth composure. Even so, his brain was busy turningover the threat of terrorism and its broader implications for weapons of mass destruction, as wellas the possible effect this would have on the economy. 
He was more prepared for this than most because he had already been thinkingabout terrorismrisk. In May, he had told General Re and Berkshire Re to cut back on insuringbuildings and clients that represented a concentration of exposure to terrorismrisk, his mind workingas it always did to extrapolate toward potential catastrophes. He had actually cited the World Trade Center as an example of a buildingcomplex where a 
cluster of clients might create too much risk.12 While the risingthreat of terrorismin the late 1990s and early-millenniumyears was no secret, Buffett¡¯s attempt to protect Berkshire against the danger had been unusually prescient, and probably unique amonginsurers.13 
Allday longBuffett had been thinkingabout what to say that eveningafter dinner. He knew that the stock market, which was closed, would plunge as soon as it reopened. He realized that the innocence of the United States had now been shattered, and the government would be grapplingwith an unseen enemy. He saw his role as to convey his thoughts on what all of this meant. 
The guests who attended the dinner that night watched President Bush¡¯s speech on a giant TVscreen, then heard Buffett speak about terrorism, contrastingit with conventional war. ¡°Terrorists have a huge advantage. They pick the time, the place, and the means. It¡¯s very difficult to defend against fanatics¡­. This is just the start of things. We don¡¯t know who our enemy is. Now, it¡¯s us versus a shadow. There could 
14 
be many shadows.¡± 
The followingmorningand over the next few days, as airports gradually began to allow flights to resume on a 
limited schedule, the Buffetts organized dinners, tennis, and golf for the remainingguests untileveryone was able to straggle home fromOmaha.15 With the cleanup under way in lower Manhattan, and ¡°Missing¡± posters goingup all over New York City, Buffett considered how he could use his nationally recognized reputation to help the country. The stock market was about to reopen after its longest recess since the Great Depression. He agreed to go on 60 Minutes with former Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin and Jack Welch, the recently retired CEO of General Electric. Americans would recognize himas an expert on investingand the stock market, more than anyone else. On the show that Sunday evening, Buffett said that he would not be sellingstocks¡ªhe might be a buyer if they declined enough¡ªand explained that he had confidence in the ability of the United States economy to surmount the ripples fromthe terrorist attack. By now Warren Buffett¡¯s reputation for honesty, built over decades, was known to anyone who cared about the stock market. When he said something, people knew he meant it. At Sun Valley, of course, Buffett had said the value of the market would need to fall by half before he would get really excited. So when he said he might be a buyer if stocks declined enough, the savvy knew he meant it¡ªbut they also knew ¡°enough¡± meant ¡°a hellof a lot.¡± 
The next day, the Dow fell684 points, or seven percent, its largest point decline ever in a single day. The FederalReserve began to take action after the market plunged on its reopening, cuttinginterest rates fifty basis points (half a percent). By the end of the week, the Dow had fallen more than fourteen percent, its largest one-week drop in history. Yet the drop as a percent of investors¡¯ wealth was less than half that of 1987, when the market plunged by one-third. From the time tradingopened, sellers concentrated on sectors like insurers and airlines, where the most serious financial consequences would be. People were less panicked than they were gropingin the dark to try to make intelligent guesses about the unknowable. 
Within days, as barricades and new security gates were installed all over Manhattan amid bomb scares and the Buffett Group trip to Biarritz was canceled, Buffett talked to Berkshire¡¯s insurers and tried to assess the damage to Berkshire Hathaway. The initial estimates, which would later be revised slightly upward, indicated 
that Berkshire had lost $2.3 billion.16 This was many times its largest loss fromany earthquake, hurricane, tornado, or other naturaldisaster to date. Of the total, $1.7 billion came fromGeneralRe. 
Buffett had had enough. He went to work writinga special letter that he posted on his Web site, excoriating 
General Re for havingbroken the ¡°basic rules of underwriting.¡± Since he had never, in the history of Berkshire Hathaway, publicly dressed down the management of one of his companies, the effect was to brand GeneralRe with a red-ink scarlet letter, which remained posted on the Web site for all to see. It was now in a precarious situation. Havingpublicly embarrassed Buffett in such a dramatic way, it risked becomingthe next Salomon¡ªa business that he could never embrace, that would instead become only another cautionary tale. 
*** 
After the stock market crash of 1987 and then again after the collapse of Long-Term, the Federal Reserve had slashed interest rates three times within seven weeks, primingthe market pump with easy money. Now, to prevent panic, the Fed took interest rates down to historically low levels once again. The Fed¡¯s role was to maintain the bankingsystem¡¯s liquidity. This time, however, the Fed would keep interest rates artifically low 
for three years. 17 Fueled by cheap money, one month after the attacks, stocks completed a full recovery, restoring$1.38 trillion in market value. But the upheavalwas far fromover, and the market remained in a nervous mood, partly due to uncertainty over the outcome of the United States and British invasion of Afghanistan a few weeks after 9/11. Then, in November, an energy tradingcompany called Enron stuck a pin in the remains of the late 1990s stock-market bubble, which had shrunk but not burst. As the Justice Department moved in, Enron melted into bankruptcy in the heat of an accountingfraud. 
Enron was an extreme but not isolated situation. The excesses of the stock-market bubble and the opportunity for executives to pillage their companies led to a whole series of accounting-fraud and securities-violation cases: WorldCom, Adelphia Communications, Tyco, ImClone. As 2002 began, New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer mounted a blitzkriegassault against the WallStreet banks for havinginflated stock 
prices by toutingnew offerings duringthe Internet bubble usingbiased stock research.18 Valuations of stocks and bonds began to fall apart as investors lost confidence in the numbers reported to themby managements. 
Berkshire¡¯s best opportunities always came at times of uncertainty, when others lacked the insight, resources, and fortitude to make the right judgments and commit. ¡°Cash combined with courage in a crisis is priceless,¡± said Buffett. Now his time had come round again. Anyone of normal energy might have been overwhelmed, but Buffett had been waitingfor years for the kind of opportunities that sleeted down upon Kiewit Plaza. Every one of his faculties seemed engaged at once. He bought a group of junk bonds, which had become cigar butts, for Berkshire. He bought the underwear maker Fruit of the Loom, quipping, ¡°We 
cover the asses of the masses.¡±19 He bought Larson-Juhl, which made picture frames. Berkshire¡¯s MidAmerican Energy subsidiary invested in the troubled Williams Companies and bought its Kern River Pipeline.20 Berkshire bought Garan, the maker of Garanimals children¡¯s clothing. It picked up the Northern 
NaturalGas pipeline fromDynegy, another troubled energy company. 21 Within days, MidAmerican lent more money to Williams Companies.22 It bought The Pampered Chef, which sold cookware at parties through a sales-force of 70,000 independent ¡°kitchen consultants.¡± It bought farm-equipment maker CTB Industries and teamed with investment bank Lehman Brothers to lend $1.3 billion to strugglingReliant Energy. 
Ajit Jain quickly moved into the terrorism-insurance business, fillinga sudden vacuumby insuringairlines, Rockefeller Center, the Chrysler Building, a South American oil refinery, a North Sea oil platform, and the Sears Tower in Chicago. Berkshire was paid to unburden the Olympics of the dubious risk that either the Games would be canceled or the U.S. would not show up at least twice before 2012. It insured the Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City against a terrorist attack. It insured the FIFA World Cup soccer championship 
against terrorism.23 Buffett was handicapping. 
Some of Berkshire¡¯s businesses struggled in a weak economy. Buffett had always said he¡¯d rather have a lumpy fifteen percent return than a steady ten percent. It didn¡¯t bother him. Most would naturally right themselves over time. NetJets, however, was struggling, not just because of the economy but because the premise for buyingit¡ªthe uniqueness of its franchise¡ªwas lookingless unique. Other people who forgot to call the Air-aholic hotline kept settingup businesses to compete with NetJets, even though the economics of the fractional aviation business were unattractive. Buffett now realized that it was testosterone that caused Air-aholism. ¡°If only women could be CEOs of companies that flew planes,¡± he said, ¡°I think it would be a lot better. It¡¯s like sports franchises. If only women could own sports franchises, they¡¯d sell for one-tenth what they sell for now.¡± He told the shareholders that NetJets would return to profitability and would dominate its market. He did not point out, however, that it might not earn the margin on capital he had hoped, at least not any time soon. It was a letdown, but still a lot better than a money-losingtextile mill. Besides, NetJets was fun. He knew mountains of minutiae about how the planes were purchased, managed, scheduled, routed, maintained, insured, piloted, crewed, and even how the pilots were trained. NetJets was cool. He did a lot of elephant-bumpingat NetJets events. He would never sell it, even if the world¡¯s other mega-billionaires tried to arm-wrestle himfor it. 
The more serious, if smaller, problemwas Dexter Shoe, the modern equivalent of the textile mill. Buffett 
would later say it was the worst acquisition he had ever made, quotingBobby Bare¡¯s country song: ¡°I¡¯ve never gone to bed with an ugly woman, but I¡¯ve sure woke up with a few.¡±24 He changed the management. Frank Rooney and Jim Issler, who ran Brown Shoe Company, a more successful operation, eventually shut 
down Dexter¡¯s U.S. operations and moved themoverseas.25 For every dollar they were payingworkers in the U.S., it cost a dime to hire employees to make shoes elsewhere. 
¡°I was wrong about the economic future of that one. The people working in the town of Dexter, Maine, were wonderful people who were very good at what they did. But even if they were twice as good as the Chinese, the Chinese would work for a tenth as much.¡± 
Yet even with all this money-spinningactivity, Buffett felt that the most important opportunity given him in the aftermath of 9/11 had nothingto do with business. Rather, he now had both the privilege and the responsibility to use his pulpit to influence events and ideas. After the bubble of hubris that had enveloped the financial community for the past severalyears, America had become more sober-minded, and less blind to the corner-cuttingin the name of greed that had gone on in the late 1990s. Buffett thought the time was right for himto speak up about the rapacity of the rich and the way it was beingvalidated by fiscalpolicy. 
His sense of justice was particularly inflamed by a proposalthat was a centerpiece of President Bush¡¯s new budget¡ªa plan to gradually repeal the decades-old federal estate tax, which took for the government a slice of the largest inheritances. Supporters of the plan referred to the estate tax as the ¡°death tax,¡± which had an ominous sound. The mantra was that death shouldn¡¯t be a taxable event. They called the estate tax a barrier to the ambitions of hardworkingentrepreneurial people. They cited a proverbial family that would have to sellthe family farmto pay the tax when its patriarch died. Undoubtedly, there were some such families. Buffett argued that the sufferingof those few was far outweighed by the effect on everybody else. 
The estate tax was technically not a death tax; it was a gift tax. Anytime someone gave a large gift of money, he paid a gift tax.26 All gift taxes were a blockade against the return of the robber barons, who controlled so much of the nation¡¯s riches through gifts and inheritance in the nineteenth century that they became like a government unto themselves¡ªa plutocracy¡ªa rulingclass based on wealth. The estate tax, however, was paid at a lower effective rate than the tax imposed on gifts from livingpersons, allowingrelatively large posthumous gifts to go untaxed. Buffett used his preacher¡¯s pulpit to point out that of the roughly 2.3 million 
Americans who died each year, fewer than fifty thousand¡ªtwo percent¡ªpaid any estate tax at all. Half of all the estate taxes paid came fromfewer than four thousand people¡ªtwo-tenths of one percent of those who had died.27 These were the monumentally, colossally rich, rich on the scale of beingable to own a 
Gulfstream-IV, buy the new Maybachs, own a vineyard in France, and wear jewels that look like rock candy and lemon-and-lime sourballs. 
As to the question, it was their money, why shouldn¡¯t they be able to do what they wanted with it?¡ªwhy should they ¡°subsidize¡± others?¡ªBuffett¡¯s answer was that they owed some minimumamount to the society that enabled themto become so rich. If they thought they did it all themselves, reincarnate themas one of five children of a scared, starvingmother in Maliand see how rich and successful they would be after being sent to work as a slave on a cocoa plantation in C.te d¡¯Ivoire. 
If the estate tax were eliminated, he said, somebody else would have to make up the difference, since the same amount of money would still be required to pay for runningthe government. 
For years a supply-side theory had postulated that cuttingtaxes would force the government to cut expenses. This theory had an intuitive logic; after all, if people were supposed to live within their income, why not the government? (Of course, by 2002, the populace was busy settingup home-equity lines of credit based on artifically cheap interest rates to avoid livingwithin its income.) Debate over supply-side policy still boiled after twenty years; the taxes the government was collectingusually didn¡¯t cover its costs, and it was borrowingto make up the difference. The theory by now looked more dubious. Killingthe estate tax would mean that the government would have to raise taxes or borrow even more money, and the interest on that debt, alongwith its ultimate repayment, would eventually be passed on to everybody else in the form of higher taxes. Buffett felt that proposingan estate-tax cut while runningthe federal budget at a deficit was, in 
fact, the height of hypocrisy.28 
The average person who would pay these higher taxes if the estate tax were repealed would never face an estate tax. The push to repealthe estate tax was not comingfrompeople who owned small ranches in Oklahoma. No, the real push, Buffett said, was comingfrom a tiny percentage of the country¡¯s population, people he actually knew, people who were rich enough (often very suddenly rich enough) to own a triplex penthouse in Manhattan, a nine-bedroomlogcabin in Deer Valley, a summer house in Nantucket, and a condo in Costa Rica. Buffett felt that politics had slithered into the hands of people who could pay hush-puppy lobbyists from K Street to whisper in the ear of Congress and funnelpoliticaldonations where they would do the most good. He didn¡¯t blame people for actingin their own interests; he even felt pity for the politicians who were chained to the grindstone of endless fund-raising. It was the system that he scorned, in which money bought power. 
Shortly after President Bush¡¯s inauguration in 2001, Buffett had gone to the LBJ Roomin the Capitol Buildingto speak about political campaign financingto a group of thirty-eight Senators who were part of the Democratic Policy Committee, then followed up with appearances on ABC¡¯s This Week and CNN¡¯s Inside Politics. Buffett said that the campaign finance systemwas corrupt. The current way of electingpoliticians had echoes of nineteenth-century Tammany Hall, where votes and influence were literally for sale. The laws were shiftingin ways that enhanced the ability of the rich to get ever richer, to keep more of what they made, and to pass more of it alongto their heirs. Buffett called this ¡°government by the wealthy, for the wealthy.¡± 
He pointed out a growingarmy of hush-puppies and tax panderers whose job was to push for legislation that benefited the interests of the rich. He said, however, that nobody lobbied for the other ninety-eight percent of Americans. Lackingtheir own lobbyists, the best redress for the ninety-eight percent was to understand what was goingon and to quit votingfor people who enacted laws that took taxes out of the average person¡¯s pockets so the rich could pay a lower share. 
Paul Newman, Bill Gates Sr., George Soros, a smatteringof Rockefellers, and nearly two hundred other rich 
and influential people agreed and signed a petition published in the New York Times that opposed Bush¡¯s plan to eliminate the estate tax.29 Buffett didn¡¯t join the petition because he thought it did not go far enough. He thought that rich people were lucky and blessed, and they should pay taxes. ¡°I don¡¯t believe in dynasties,¡± he said. Repealingthe estate tax would be like choosingthe nation¡¯s Olympic teams fromthe children of past 
Olympic champions, he added.30 
¡°Wealth is just a bunch of claim checks on the activities of others in the future. You can use that wealth in any way you want to. You can cash it in or give it away. But the idea of passing wealth from generation to generation so that hundreds of your descendants can command the resources of other people simply because they came from the right womb flies in the face of a meritocratic society. 
¡°I¡¯d have a higher tax at the higher levels of wealth. I wouldn¡¯t mind having no tax up to a point and then a hundred percent tax for an estate over a hundred and fifty million dollars. 
¡°The most important thing is to ask, ¡®And then what?¡¯ If you eliminate the twenty billion dollars or so raised by the estate tax, you¡¯ve got to make the money up by taxing everybody else somehow. It¡¯s amazing how hard the American population will fight for the families of those few thousand people who pay large estate taxes and for the whole rest of the country to pay for it out of their own pockets. 
¡°I don¡¯t like anything that, in effect, creates a residue of humanity. I don¡¯t like a tax system that goes in that direction; I don¡¯t like an educational system that goes in that direction. I don¡¯t like anything where the bottom twenty percent keep getting a poorer and poorer deal.¡± 
But the debate over estate taxes turned shrill and bitter. Buffett was portrayed as a silver-spooned populist, a rich old crocodile who was tryingto keep the next generation frombootstrappingits way to success in the classic American entrepreneurial manner. 31 
¡°Dynastic wealth turns a meritocracy upside down,¡± he wrote to Senator Ken Salazar. ¡°In effect it says that the people who should allocate the resources of this country should be the descendants of those who excelled in amassingresources longago.¡±32 
Subtly or not, the estate tax feud was informed by the issue of Buffett¡¯s own money. Some people called rich guys like Buffett tax-dodgers, because they had amassed their money through lightly taxed investments. But to say that Buffett invested to dodge taxes was like sayingthat a baby drank its bottle to fillits diapers. Indeed, Buffett was the first to say that the tax on investments was unfairly low. In fact, this was another of his causes. He liked to compare his tax rate to his secretary¡¯s, pointingout how unjust it was that she paid a higher tax rate on her income than he did, just because most of his income came frominvesting. 
Havingalready angered allthe plutocrats and would-be plutocrats, but with his credibility at a peak in other quarters, Buffett vowed to carry on the fight against repealof the estate tax, and would spin on this subject for years. He spoke again on another subject to the Democratic Policy Committee just days before the first shots were fired in the Iraq War in 2003. He said that President Bush¡¯s plan to cut taxes on dividends was more ¡°class welfare for the rich.¡± In the Washington Post, he wrote about ¡°Dividend Voodoo,¡± notingagain that his tax rate was lower than Debbie Bosanek¡¯s. The reaction fromconservatives against yet another of Buffett¡¯s populist manifestos was swift and savage. ¡°Millionaires are seethingat Warren Buffett¡¯s betrayalof 
33 
their class,¡± said one. 
That, of course, was his point. He felt that the United States of America was never meant to be a country where people with money were a self-perpetuating¡°class¡± who constantly gathered more wealth and power unto themselves. 
The rich, however, had been gettingvery rich indeed as the stock market continued its resurgence after 9/11. A dozen new hedge funds seemed to sprout every day. They were cashingin on allthe leverage from the low interest rates the FederalReserve had provided. So many people were rakingin stock options and takingfees of two-and-twenty percent of other people¡¯s money in private equity funds, hedge funds, and funds of funds, that billionaires were becomingas common as raccoons around a garbage can. A lot of the quick-bucks wealth of the new economy bothered Buffett because of the way it had been transferred in massive amounts from investors to middlemen without producinganythingin return. The average investor was still getting¡ªof course¡ªthe average return, but with allof these fees gouged out. 
One of Buffett¡¯s least favorite ways for the rich to get richer was through stock options¡ªsince his famous ¡°no¡± vote on the pay package at Salomon, no other board had ever asked himto serve on its compensation committee. Coca-Cola had given DougDaft options on 650,000 shares of its stock in 2001. Daft had originally asked to be compensated with stock options that would pay off only if earnings increased fifteen to twenty percent. The shareholders approved it with Buffett staringat his shoes thinking, Okay, this willnever happen. A month later, the compensation committee belatedly realized that the target was impossible and Daft would never get paid. It backtracked and bonus-pimped for him, loweringthe target to eleven to sixteen 
percent.34 That was like movingthe finish line in a marathon to the nineteen-mile mark. Buffett couldn¡¯t believe it¡ªthe shareholders had voted for twenty-six miles and would be handingout a prize after nineteen! 
Another vote for the rich. So far, Daft had not impressed, and Coca-Cola¡¯s stock had gone nowhere. Watchingtrophy-sized option payments proliferate despite risingoutrage, Buffett felt he had to seize the opportunity he had been waitingfor¡ªto finally kill counterfeit stock-option accounting. 
Managers loved stock options because of a quirk of accountinghistory that said that if companies paid their employees with options instead of cash, they booked no cost. It was as if the stock options did not exist. In the ¡°real¡± world, a privately owned business would instantly recognize this as a bogus idea. If the butcher, baker, and candlestick maker gave away options for shares worth, say, twenty percent of their businesses, they would be acutely aware that they had just given away a chunk of the profits as well. 
But the accountingrules had made stock options into play money. Thus, bonus-pimpingon an incredible scale had begun to occur in the late 1990s. CEOs had, on average, been paid forty-two times as much as the average blue-collar worker in 1980. Twenty years later, that ratio had increased to more than four hundred 
times.35 The top-earningCEOs got billion-dollar packages. In 2000, Sandy Weillwas paid $151 million at Citigroup, Jack Welch $125 million at GE, Larry Ellison $92 million at Oracle. Although Steve Jobs was takingonly a $1 salary at Apple for 1997 through 1999, he got a windfall $872 million stock-option grant in 
2000¡ªplus a $90 million Gulfstreamjet.36 

When the accountants had tried to change these rules in the early 1990s, corporate America, led by Silicon Valley, stormed the gates of Congress, armed with lobbyists and campaign contributions, beggingtheir representatives to save themfrom the terrible new accountingrules. Until the bubble finally burst in 2002, they had succeeded in stoppingthose rules dead in their tracks and had almost succeeded in murderingthe FinancialAccountingStandards Board, the accountingrulemaker, to boot. 
Buffett had been writingabout stock options since 1993 but now felt the time was finally ripe for change. He wrote a thundering, influential editorial in the Washington Post, ¡°Stock Options and Common Sense.¡±37 
¡°CEOs know what their option grants are worth. That¡¯s why they fight for them,¡± he wrote, and repeated the questions he had raised before. 
¡°If options aren¡¯t a form of compensation, what are they? 
¡°If compensation isn¡¯t an expense, what is it? 
¡°And if expenses shouldn¡¯t go into the calculation of earnings, where in the world should they go?¡± 
At Sun Valley in July 2002, emotions ran high over stock options. Buffett¡¯s loudly expressed view, combined with his influence, hungominously over the heads of the stock-option lobby. The thermometer hit triple digits, and the sweatingcelebrities and corporate chiefs headed off in buses to go raftingand escape the heat. 
Buffett himself went somewhere else shortly after he arrived, somewhere he needed help to face. Katharine Graham¡¯s condominiumhad been right next to Herbert Allen¡¯s, in the Wildflower group, a spot that people passed by often on their way to and fromevents. The Coca-Cola board would be conveninglater for a meetingat Allen¡¯s, since most of its members were on site. The purpose was to discuss stock options, and he would not miss this. But first: 
¡°I was with Bill and Melinda, and we went up to the spot where Kay fell. I wasshaking, and I couldn¡¯t stop. It was like I had the chills or something. And, you know, they were probably embarrassed. I really wasn¡¯t. I was just overcome at that point.¡± 
Afterward, Buffett was able to performhis ongoingmiracle of the bathtub memory, and carried on with composure. The Coca-Cola board made a decision duringits meetingand announced in a press release that it would start to book the cost of its employee stock options as an expense, which was currently allowed but not required. Nobody else did that. They used an argument like the kid who tells his parents: It didn¡¯t happen, but if it did I wasn¡¯t there. And if I was there, I didn¡¯t do it; and if I did, my friends made me. Businesses said that stock options weren¡¯t an expense; but if they were an expense, nobody knew how to calculate it. And if they could, the expense shouldn¡¯t be deducted fromearnings. It should only be disclosed in a footnote. Because it might confuse investors to know just how much the executives¡¯ stock options were worth. So Coca-Cola¡¯s announcement hit corporate America like a cluster bomb, its force magnified by the venue at which the new policy was proclaimed¡ªthe Sun Valley gatheringwhere the press had dugin outside its flowerpot barricades like an encampment. Buffett¡¯s thinly veiled hand could be seen behind this announcement. Right after Sun Valley, the Washington Post Company emulated Coca-Cola and announced 
that it, too, would expense stock options.38 Buffett followed up this victory with another salvo, a New York Times editorial, ¡°Who Really Cooks the Books?¡±39 
¡°I have a proposition: Berkshire Hathaway will sell you insurance, carpeting, or any of our other products in exchange for options identical to those you grant yourselves. It¡¯ll all be cash-free. But do you really think your corporation will not have incurred a cost when you hand over the options in exchange for the carpeting?¡± 
Strangely, no one took himup on this offer. Instead, Silicon Valley suited up for another fight in Congress. But one by one, other companies began to follow in the footsteps of Coca-Cola and the Washington Post Co., announcingthat they, too, would recognize the expense of stock options on their books. 
A year later, on the finalSaturday morningof Sun Valley ¡¯03, BillGates spoke, and announced that Microsoft was discontinuingthe use of stock options. It would simply pay people a different way. Fromnow on it would use restricted stock¡ªstock that could not be sold for some time. This move took considerable guts. 
¡°There was a lot of pressure on Microsoft not to do it¡ªa lot, a lot. The Silicon Valley reaction was¡ªtraitor. Microsoft had a lot of PR people around, advising him what to do. One of them told Gates it was like tossing a match into a room full of gasoline. 
¡°And my reaction to that was, they¡¯re the ones that filled the room with gasoline.¡± 
The battle over stock options would continue formally for nearly two years, untilthe Financial Accounting Standards Board finally made it official. But Coca-Cola¡¯s decision had kicked over the domino in a chain of events, and Microsoft¡¯s action had broken through the wallof Silicon Valley solidarity that had given the technology industry a united lobbyingvoice in Washington. 
Buffett¡¯s momentum as an influentialstatesman duringthis period was gatheringspeed. Although the estate tax was stillscheduled to be repealed, he found another target in the accountants who had facilitated the accountingfrauds of the past few years. If the auditors had not been sittingin the laps of the CEOs, wagging their tails, he felt, then managements would not have been allowed to loot the shareholders¡¯ pockets, transferringvast sums into their own pockets. Buffett appeared at an SEC roundtable on financial disclosure and oversight, sayingthat, instead of lapdogs, shareholders needed guard dogs, and directors who served on 
audit committees and oversaw the auditors must be ¡°Dobermans¡± who ¡°hold the auditors¡¯ feet to the fire.¡±40 
He said he had a short set of questions for the audit committee at Berkshire Hathaway: 
¡ªIf the auditor had prepared the financial statements herself (as opposed to their beingprepared by the company¡¯s management), would they have been prepared the same way? 
¡ªIf the auditor were an investor, could he understand how the company had performed financially fromthe way the financial statements were presented and described? 
¡ªIf the auditor were in charge, would the company follow the same internalaudit procedures? 
¡ªDid the auditor know about anythingthe company had done to change the timingof when sales or costs were reported to investors? 
¡°If auditors are put on the spot,¡± Buffett said, ¡°they will do their duty. If they are not put on the spot¡­well, 41 
we have seen the results of that.¡± 
These simple questions were so obvious, so clearly definingof right and wrong, so self-evidently useful in sortingout the truth and preventingfraud, that at least one or two other companies with directors who had common sense and were concerned about their exposure to liability from lawsuits actually copied Buffett and began to use them. 
*** 
As Buffett swunghis saber with ruthless accuracy, and accountants cowered and compensation committees ducked and muttered about why he publicized their bonus-pimpinginstead of just shuttingup, and as would-be tax-cutters tried to find even nastier terms than the ultimate pejorative, ¡°populist,¡± to throw at him, so encouraged was Buffett by all this newfound authority that in the springof 2002 he outdid himself and endorsed¡­a mattress. He let himself be photographed loungingon the ¡°Warren,¡± part of the ¡°Berkshire Collection,¡± sold by the Omaha BeddingCo., as seen on posters of ¡°Buffett and His Bed.¡± Now when he went down to the Nebraska Furniture Mart duringthe shareholder meetingweekend, he could lie on his own bed while sellinghis own mattresses. ¡°I finally landed the only job I really wanted in life¡ªa mattress 
tester,¡± he said.42 
The Sage of Omaha, at whom plutocrats railed and tax-cutters shook their fists, before whomaccountants quivered and stock-option abusers fled, whomautograph-seekers followed and television lights illuminated, was at heart nothingmore than a starstruck little kid, endearingly clueless in many ways about his place in the pantheon. He got excited over and over by fan letters from Z-list celebrities. Every time somebody wrote him to say he was their hero, it was like the first time. When porn star Asia Carrera called himher hero on her Web site, he was thrilled. He was thrilled to be anybody¡¯s hero, but beingcalled a hero by a porn star who was a Mensa member had real cachet. His favorite letters were fromcollege students, but when prisoners wrote and said he was their hero, he was proud that his reputation extended to convicts who were tryingto turn around their lives. He would much rather be idolized by porn stars and college students and prisoners than by a bunch of rich businessmen. 
Allthis baskingin the limelight meant that Debbie Bosanek and Deb Ray had to guard the phone and the door with dogged vigilance. Once, an overexcited woman who flew from Japan to get his autograph arrived in the office. She was so overcome by Buffett¡¯s presence that she prostrated herself to ¡°worship¡± himand had a sort of conniption on the floor. The secretaries hustled her out. 
She wrote later that her doctor had given her tranquilizers, and she hoped to be allowed in Buffett¡¯s presence again. She sent photographs of herself and wrote letters. 
¡°I like beingworshipped,¡± Buffett said in a plaintive tone. Nevertheless, the secretaries had their way and the woman wasn¡¯t invited back.43 
57 
Oracle 
Omaha . April¨CAugust 2003 
Buffett seemed to thrive like a trumpet vine as he grew larger than life. Yet he remained brilliant at balancinghis priorities. As requests for his time grew, his view that commitments are sacred and his natural inclination to conserve energy saved himfromsuccumbingto the flattery of beingin demand. He did only what made sense and what he wanted to do. He never let people waste his time. If he added somethingto his schedule, he discarded somethingelse. He never rushed. He always had time to work on business deals, and he always had time for the people who mattered to him. His friends could pick up the phone and callhim whenever they liked. He managed this by keepinghis phone calls warmhearted and short. When he was ready to stop talking, the conversation simply died. The kind of friends he had didn¡¯t abuse the privilege. While he had many fond acquaintances, he added true friends only at intervals of years. 
Susie added new ¡°friends¡± at intervals of days or weeks. Kathleen Cole handled a gift list that had grown to literally a thousand people. Susie called herself a ¡°geriatric gypsy¡± who lived in the sky. Cole smoothed the way logistically for her to travel for months on end¡ªvisitinggrandchildren, caringfor the sick and dying, vacationing, travelingon foundation business, seeingWarren and the family at scheduled times. Cole packed and unpacked for her, managed her three homes and staff, juggled the NetJets timetable, made the hotel reservations, scheduled the pedicures, fended off the phone calls, and organized the latest treasures from Susie¡¯s shoppingtrips. 
Not only was Susie a woman who couldn¡¯t say no; she was a woman who couldn¡¯t be reached. Susie was such a nomad, she was so helpless to limit her attention to anyone, and the number of people who felt they had claimto her time had grown so astoundingly, that by now even her close friends were allowed to contact her only through Kathleen. 
Some who loved her grew concerned, although they rarely saw her to say so. ¡°No one can have three or four hundred genuine friendships,¡± argued one. She seemed to run faster all the time. ¡°Allthis chasing, like chasingyour tail,¡± was another friend¡¯s reaction. ¡°You can¡¯t have friends if you¡¯re not around.¡± But ¡°if you¡¯re ill,¡± Susie said, ¡°I¡¯llhave plenty of time for you.¡± Some felt that her compulsion to serve and please had replaced livinglife in a straight line toward goals of her own. ¡°She never spoke her own truth,¡± said one. The metaphysically minded found it significant that her health problems arose in the throat and the gut; they associated the constant accumulation of collections and possessions and nonstop redecoration as an expression of what she was holdingin. ¡°Her life got heavier and heavier,¡± one person said. ¡°Stop!¡± another wanted to tellher. ¡°Get some perspective and nurture yourself.¡± But ¡°it was as if she couldn¡¯t slow down, because if she did, somethingwould happen.¡± 
Yet many others called her a saint, an angel, and even compared her to Mother Teresa. She gave so much of herself to so many that she struck people as fragile now; the warm woolen cloak she wore against the harshness of the world had grown lacy and thin. But isn¡¯t that the nature of a saint, mused one friend, to give 
of herself until nothingwas left? Isn¡¯t that exactly what Mother Teresa did?1 
Susie had foot surgery in the springof 2003 and had to give away her beloved Manolo Blahniks.2 While laid up, she wrote out her usuallist of ¡°nine hundred¡± things for Kathleen Cole to do. The second the doctor released her, she sprangout of bed and off she went. When she traveled, Susie had a decided preference for five-star service most of the time¡ªalthough many people had the impression that she usually slept on the floor in a hut. It was true, however, that she sometimes traveled without complaint in circumstances that would daunt many people. Susie sometimes actually did sleep in a hut, even though she suffered fromacid reflux and a tendency toward esophageal ulcers severe enough that she normally had to sleep propped up at a forty-five-degree angle. 
Warren wanted to spend time with her so badly that he agreed to go to Africa to celebrate her seventieth birthday. Howie had started planningthis trip, which was to take place late in the springof 2003, eighteen months earlier. ¡°It would have been the eighth wonder of the world to see my father in Africa,¡± he says. The Buffetts were goingto Londoloziand Phinda, two seven-star safari resorts in South Africa. Howie traveled to Africa often; in a characteristic move, his mother had gotten himinterested in photographingthe suffering people of the continent as well as its wild animals. For his father, he was havinga Wall Street Journal and a New York Times flown in daily on the trip. ¡°It would be three days late,¡± Howie says, ¡°but they would get the papers to him. It was goingto cost five hundred bucks a day, but they would hook it up so he could be online 
in his room and check the news. They already had the hamburger and french-fry thingdown because they do that for me.¡±3 The Buffetts would be leavingfor Africa a few weeks after their annual trip to New York, which always followed the annual shareholder meeting. 
*** 
On April 1, 2003, as the shareholder meetingdrew near, Berkshire announced the acquisition of a mobile-home manufacturer, Clayton Homes. This deal was like many others Berkshire was makingat the time¡ªa naturalcontinuation of buyingdiscount assets in the post-Enron slump. 
The Clayton deal had come about because years of low interest rates had given lenders piggy banks full of cheap money, and that had turned theminto pigs.4 Banks were quick to train consumers that low interest rates meant they could buy more stuff for less cash outlay now. Those with equity in houses learned it could 
be used as a checkingaccount. But whether it was credit cards, houses, or mobile homes, the lenders, in search of growth, increasingly turned to people who were the least able to repay¡ªbut wanted to participate in the American dreamanyway.5 In the case of mobile homes, the banks lent money to the manufacturers, 
who used it to lend money to the buyers. Historically, this process had worked, because if the mobile-home maker made bad loans, it faced the discipline of not gettingpaid back. 
But then the mobile-home makers began to sell their loans, handingoff the risk of not gettingpaid back. That was now somebody else¡¯s problem. The ¡°somebody else¡± who had assumed the problemwas an investor. In a process known as ¡°securitization,¡± for some years, Wall Street had neatly packaged loans like these and sold them to investors through a ¡°collateralized debt obligation,¡± or CDO¡ªdebt backed by the mortgages. They combined thousands of mortgage loans fromallover the U.S. and sliced theminto strips called ¡°tranches.¡± The top-tier tranches got first dibs on all the cash flow froma poolof mortgages. The next tranches had second dibs, and so forth down the line. 
These tranches allowed a ratingagency to assign the top AAA ratingto the first-dibs tranches, AA ratings to the second-dibs tranches, and so on. The banks sold off the tranches to investors. The banks analyzed the likelihood of default usinga model based on historical repayment patterns. The lendingsystem was changing, however, so that history was becomingless relevant. 
As lendingstandards declined, the hedge funds investingin CDOs took on more leverage, as much as $100 in debt per dollar of capital, and the quality of the CDOs¡ªeven AAA CDOs¡ªgot sludgier. Some investors did get nervous about the more obviously phony aspect of the way the market was operatingand wanted to 
hedge their bets.6 They tapped into a market that had developed to bet on whether loan defaults would occur: the credit default swap. If a securitization lost value because loans defaulted, the issuer of the swap would have to pay. 
Protected by credit default swaps, investingin CDOs now appeared to contain no risk. ¡°When money is free,¡± wrote Charles Morris later, ¡°and lendingis costless and riskless, the rational lender willkeep on lendinguntil there is no one left to lend to.¡±7 
If it was pointed out that risk did not disappear, those who participated in the market would explain with a sigh that securitization and swap derivatives ¡°spread¡± the risk to the far corners of the globe, where it would be absorbed by so many people that it could never hurt anyone. 
Thus freed, the rational people of the mobile-home business had lowered down payments, makingit much easier to get loans. As the real-estate market boomed, riskier types of home loans¡ªalongwith commercial and business and student and other loans¡ªspread like a cold virus in a kindergarten. These, like the mobile-home loans, were stripped, insured, ¡°securitized,¡± and speculated on over and over through credit default swaps. Meanwhile, other, more exotic derivatives proliferated. 
In his 2002 shareholder letter, Buffett called derivatives ¡°toxic,¡± and said they were ¡°time bombs¡± that were expandingunchecked and could cause a chain reaction of financial disaster. At the shareholder meetingthat year, Charlie Munger described the accountingincentives to exaggerate profits on derivatives, and concluded, ¡°To say derivative accountingin America is a sewer is an insult to sewage.¡± In his 2003 letter, 
Buffett wrote of derivatives as ¡°financial weapons of mass destruction.¡±8 So many of these deals existed, he wrote, that they had formed a daisy chain around the globe. Despite the advice of their mathematical models to buy rather than sell into a crisis, when trouble approached, investors fled their wateringhole like a herd of giraffes escapinga lion. And while many people appeared to be participatingin a market, in fact a handful of large financialinstitutions would always tend to dominate it usingtheir leverage. They would also have other assets that seemed uncorrelated with these derivatives but which would actually move in tandem with the derivatives in a collapsingmarket. 
General Re had a derivatives dealer, General Re Securities, which Buffett had shut down, either sellingits positions or lettingthemrun off in 2002. He had already turned Gen Re Securities into the cautionary tale of derivatives¡ªwritingat length to the shareholders about the expensive and problematic cost of shuttingit down. General Re had made Buffett so angry by losingalmost $8 billion by now from insurance underwriting that he could barely talk about it. The Scarlet Letter remained posted on the Berkshire Web site, though Ron Ferguson had retired, replaced by Joe Brandon and his number two, Tad Montross. GeneralRe¡¯s competitors gleefully told clients that Buffett was goingto sell the company or shut it down. Given the example of Salomon, these predictions were not spun from gossamer. Buffett had taken away part of General Re¡¯s new business after 9/11 and given it to Ajit Jain¡¯s Berkshire Re, rather than infuse more capital into General Re to 
shore up its balance sheet.9 He had also started fundingcompetitors of GeneralRe through Jain and through Lloyd¡¯s of London. He rationalized this in various ways; he himself may not have recognized a classic pattern¡ªwhen anxious, Buffett always sought escape hatches and trapdoors. He was not ¡°punishing¡± General Re; rather, Buffett was instinctively hedgingthe risk that GeneralRe was goingto underwrite itself, his $22 billion investment, and his reputation into the ground. 
It was goingto take billions of profits before GeneralRe groveled its way back into Buffett¡¯s good graces. Its derivatives business would have little to do with that, either way. The same was not true for the global economy. By a ¡°low but not insignificant probability,¡± Buffett said, sooner or later¡ªhe didn¡¯t know when¡ª¡°derivatives could lead to a major problem.¡± Munger was more blunt. ¡°I¡¯ll be amazed,¡± he said, ¡°if we don¡¯t have some kind of significant blowup in the next five to ten years.¡± While many safeguards had been put in place to protect investors in stock and bond markets, derivatives were lightly regulated and subject to minimaldisclosure. Since the early 1980s, ¡°deregulation¡± had turned the markets into the financial equivalent of a rugby scrum. The theory was that the market¡¯s forces were self-policing. (And yet, the Fed did seem to intervene at times when trouble cropped up.) 
By ¡°problem¡± and ¡°blowup,¡± Buffett and Munger meant that a bubble was brewingin this witch¡¯s cauldron of easy credit, lax regulation, and bigpaydays for the banks and their accomplices. They meant an unsnarlable traffic jamof claims fromderivatives leadingto financial-institution failures. Large losses at financial institutions could lead to a credit seizure¡ªa global ¡°run on the bank.¡± In a credit seizure, lenders become afraid to make even reasonable loans, and the resultinglack of financingsends the economy spiraling downward. Credit seizures had in the past tipped the economy over the edge into depressions. But ¡°that¡¯s not a prediction, it¡¯s a warning,¡± said Buffett. They were givinga ¡°mild wake-up call.¡± 
¡°Many people argue,¡± wrote Buffett in 2003, ¡°that derivatives reduce systemic problems, in that participants who can¡¯t bear certain risks are able to transfer them to stronger hands. These people believe that derivatives act to stabilize the economy, facilitate trade, and eliminate bumps for individual participants.¡± On a micro level, Buffett wrote, these things often were true, but on a macro level, derivatives could someday cause midair collisions over Manhattan, London, Frankfurt, HongKong, and other parts of the globe. He and Munger believed that derivatives should be regulated, more disclosure should be required, they should be traded through a central clearinghouse, and the FederalReserve should act as a central banker to the major investment banks, not just the commercialbanks. FederalReserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, however, 
defended the unregulated market and made sport of Buffett¡¯s wariness.10 Buffett¡¯s ¡°financialweapons of mass destruction¡± was quoted everywhere, often paired with a question about whether he was overreacting.11 
Even as early as 2002, however, the beginnings of mass destruction could be seen in the mobile-home industry. Stungby bad loans, lenders were cuttingoff fundingor raisinginterest rates to prohibitive levels. Clayton was not Buffett¡¯s first foray into the mobile-home business. In late 2002, Oakwood Homes, a mobile-home manufacturer, and Conseco¡ªa ¡°subprime¡± lender that made loans to people without good enough credit ratings to get a cheaper loan¡ªwent bankrupt. Buffett knew that the first sign of a deflating credit bubble is when the bankruptcy wolf cuts a weak sheep out of the pack. He lent some money to 
Oakwood and made a bid on Conseco Finance, the lendingarm of Conseco.12 Cerberus Capitaland two other private equity firms, which had been biddingon the property, topped his offer to buy Conseco Finance out of bankruptcy for $1.37 billion. Because they had to outbid him, Buffett¡¯s involvement had cost Cerberus, by some accounts, as much as $200 million, a fact the firmwould not forget. 
Buffett then joined two other funds to finance Oakwood through its bankruptcy in a deal that would make him Oakwood¡¯s largest shareholder once the mess unraveled¡ªand that, incidentally, would help Oakwood in payingback its loans.13 
Not longafter, a group of college students fromthe University of Tennessee had come to hear Buffett talk in the Cloud Roomon the fifteenth floor of Kiewit Plaza. He took questions for a couple of hours and expounded at length on his latest interest, the manufactured-housingindustry. AlAuxier, the professor who 
had arranged for this audience with Buffett, had a student present a gift¡ªFirst a Dream,14 a memoir by Jim Clayton, who had founded Clayton Homes. Buffett called Clayton, who passed the callon to his son Kevin¡ªwho had succeeded himas CEO in 1999.15 
Clayton Homes was the class act of the troubled manufactured-housingindustry. Even though it was fundamentally sound, its lenders were behaving, as Buffett said, like Mark Twain¡¯s cat, who, havingonce sat on a hot stove, wouldn¡¯t sit on a cold one. Buffett felt that Clayton¡¯s problemwas mainly that its financing was dryingup, and with enough money it could lead the industry to a better business model. Clayton stock had fallen with the rest of the industry to as low as $9. The Claytons, like Salomon duringits crisis, were startingto run out of fundingsources. They were motivated to sell. 
Kevin Clayton: ¡°We might entertain an offer in the twenty-dollar range.¡± 
Buffett: ¡°Well, it¡¯s not likely that we could ever come up with a number that would repay the sweat and time and energy that you and your father have built into this wonderfulorganization.¡± 
Clayton: ¡°Our financingis gettingtight. How about if you just lend to us?¡± 
Buffett: ¡°That doesn¡¯t work well for Berkshire Hathaway. Why don¡¯t you just throw together whatever you have lyingaround that tells about your company and send it to me someday whenever you have a chance?¡± 
This classic Buffett maneuver, Castingthe Line, resulted in the arrivalof a massive FederalExpress package the next day. The fish had snapped at the bait. The Claytons were like Z. Wayne Griffin, who had been willingto flip a coin over the phone to set a price for Blue Chip Stamps. Buffett knew the Claytons were ready to deal. 
WallStreet valued Clayton at more than all of its competitors combined, and its reputation was deserved: Most of the other mobile-home manufacturers were closingretail stores and losingmoney. Like most cult stocks, it had a founder with a strong, charismatic personality. JimClayton, the company¡¯s guitar-picking chairman¡ªa sharecropper¡¯s son, who had started the business by refurbishingand sellinga single mobile home¡ªthought of his shareholder meetings as ¡°mini-festivals¡± and had once strolled up the aisle fromthe rear of the roomtoward the stage singing ¡°Take Me Home, Country Roads.¡± He delegated the negotiatingto Kevin, who was a businessman like his father but not so much of a showman. Kevin, of course, had never heard of Buffetting. 
Buffett: ¡°$12.50 bid.¡± 
Clayton: ¡°You know, Warren, the board might entertain somethingin the high teens, more like $17 or $18 a share.¡± 
Buffett: ¡°$12.50 bid.¡± 
Kevin Clayton got off the phone and went and talked to the board. Even though the stock had recently traded around nine bucks, it was a hard nut to swallow, that the company was worth only $12.50. 
Clayton: ¡°The board would consider $15.¡± 
Buffett: ¡°$12.50 bid.¡± Although not part of the officialrecord, by this point he had almost certainly applied his other classic maneuver, the Circular Saw, slicingthe floor out fromunder the Claytons by stressing¡ªin a sympathetic way¡ªhow weak and vulnerable they were goingto be with their fundingsources dryingup. 
The Claytons and their board went through some further processes. 
Clayton: ¡°We¡¯d like $13.50.¡± 
Buffett: ¡°$12.50 bid.¡± 
More discussion. 
Clayton: ¡°Okay, we¡¯lltake $12.50, on the condition that we get Berkshire stock.¡± 
Buffett: ¡°I¡¯msorry, that¡¯s not possible. By the way, I don¡¯t participate in auctions. If you want to sell to me, you can¡¯t shop this bid against me to any other buyer. You have to sign an exclusive that you won¡¯t entertain any other offers.¡± 
The Claytons, who perhaps understood the direction that their industry was headed better than most experts did at the time, capitulated.16 
After Buffettingthe Claytons, Warren flew out to Tennessee to meet them, tour the plants, and visit with localKnoxville dignitaries. He had asked JimClayton to ¡°pick and sing¡± with him, and they had rehearsed a couple of songs over the phone, but when the time came, ¡°He forgot all about my guitar on the stand beside 
him,¡± wrote Clayton later. ¡°Give our new friend Warren a microphone and he forgets all about time.¡±17 Not used to beingupstaged, Clayton at least had the consolation of beingthe guy who brought the famous Warren Buffett to Knoxville. 
Yet while the local folks were mostly pleased with the deal, investors in Clayton were not. Buffett¡¯s aura worked against himfor the first time. Many of the investors knew about Buffetting, even if the Claytons didn¡¯t, and they were in no mood to be Buffetted themselves. 
After the dealwas announced, shareholders began to besiege the Claytons, pleading, ¡°You¡¯re a great company, the best in the industry; if I¡¯m goingto own somebody in the industry, I want to own you; please don¡¯t go away, you¡¯ll get through this and the industry will come bouncingback again,¡± or threatening, ¡°How dare you sell this company at $12.50 when it¡¯s been as high as $16 and we¡¯ve weathered the storm; the industry is gettingready to come back. How could you even think of sellingit that cheap?¡± Clayton¡¯s large investors thought Buffett was buyingat the ¡°bottomof the cycle¡± for mobile homes and had opportunely timed the dealto catch a bounce. At its peak in 1998, the manufactured-housingindustry, usingaggressive lendingtactics, had shipped 373,000 homes a year. By the end of 2001, that number was down to 193,000 as the economy suffered in the wake of 9/11, and the outlook for 2003 was a measly 130,000. But surely it would turn. Buffett¡¯s history as a savvy trader convinced themthat he must have bottom-ticked the price and that they would be suckers if they sold the company now. 
That was not what Buffett saw, however. He saw that the mobile-home market had backed itself into a corner by usingeasy financingterms to make a large percentage of its sales to people who could not afford to buy a home. Therefore the number of homes sold by the industry was not goingto bounce. 
But the dissidents knew how successfulClayton had been, and, given the numbers, were sure the situation would reverse. They were stewing, talkingon the phone far away from Omaha. 
Unperturbed by shareholder outrage, Buffett reveled in the thought of his future role as a mobile-home impresario. He kind of liked the trailer-park aspect of the thing. And buyinga company froma sharecropper¡¯s son appealed to the man who ate Dilly Bars at Dairy Queen, still lusted over model-train catalogs, owned a company that made prison uniforms, and got a huge kick out of havinghis picture taken with the Fruit of the Loomguys. The P. T. Barnumin him was already beginningto stir. He could picture it so vividly¡ªa giant mobile home installed in the exhibition space down in the basement of Omaha¡¯s new Qwest Convention Center at the 2004 shareholder meeting, next to the See¡¯s Candies shop maybe, or over by the area where the Justin people were sellingboots. The exhibition space kept gettingbigger and more dramatic, with more vendors and more merchandise for sale every year. The thought of a whole house, right there in the middle of his shareholder meeting, with a lawn even, and shareholders lined up to get into the house, gapingin awe, delighted him. How many mobile homes could you sellat a shareholder meeting? he wondered. None of the guys at Sun Valley ever sold a mobile home at their shareholder meetings. 
Not only that, but Clayton was another company that married his business instincts with his urge to preach. He was goingto give the bad actors of the mobile-home business hellfire and damnation. He was goingto lead the mobile-home business to financial salvation. 
*** 
Buffett called in Ian Jacobs, his new project guy. They had a brief conversation: ¡°Ian, here¡¯s a file on Clayton. It gives you all kinds of dope on foreclosures and advances. Now, I¡¯d like you to go out and see some retail dealers, and I¡¯d like you to do a scuttlebutt approach to learning how this damned business works. The more you can learn about the sales practices, Ian, if there¡¯s any real change going on from how it was done in the past, and who does it right, and who does it wrong, I would just soak up everything you can about what is going on and what is the logical way of conducting a business like this.¡± 
Like Marc Hamburg, Berkshire¡¯s chief financialofficer, and others before him, Ian¡¯s ability to interpret and work off directions like this with virtually no further instructions or supervision would be crucialto his career at Berkshire Hathaway. For the right kind of person it was the learningopportunity of a lifetime. Ian flew off to scuttlebutt. 
By the end of the month shareholders jammed every flight into Omaha¡¯s airport and filled every hotel room in town for the 2003 shareholders¡¯ meeting, to see the man whompopular magazines had been proclaiming the ¡°Comeback Crusader¡± and ¡°The Oracle of Everything.¡± And there was some surprisingnews too. The HongKongStock Exchange had disclosed that Berkshire had bought a stake in PetroChina, the giant, mostly state-owned Chinese oil company. It was Buffett¡¯s first publicly acknowledged foreign investment in many 
years. 18 He was notoriously cautious about investingoutside the U.S. and had not owned a significant position in a foreign stock since Guinness PLC in 1993.19 
Reached by reporters hungry for an explanation of this radical departure fromthe past, Buffett said he knew nothingmuch about China and had bought it for the oilthat was denominated in yuan, the Chinese currency. He was pessimistic about the dollar and optimistic about oil. Buffett had written an article for Fortune, ¡°Why 
I¡¯m Down On the Dollar,¡±20 in which he explained that he had made significant investments in foreign currencies out of a belief that the dollar would decline in value. The reason was somethingcalled the trade deficit:Americans were buyingmore from other countries than they were selling, and at a fast-accelerating rate. They were payingfor the difference through borrowing; foreigners were buyingTreasury bonds, an I.O.U. from the U.S. government. In short order, the country¡¯s ¡°net worth,¡± he said, ¡°is beingtransferred abroad at an alarmingrate.¡± He posited a hypothetical example of two countries called Thriftville and the deficit-spendingSquanderville:Sooner or later, the Thriftville citizens who were buyingSquanderville Treasury bonds started wonderingif Squanderville was good for the money. When that happened, they still traded with Squanderville¡ªbut instead of bonds, they took less risky hard assets:land, businesses, office buildings. ¡°And eventually,¡± wrote Buffett, ¡°the Thrifts own allof Squanderville.¡± 
To ward off the United States becominga version of Squanderville that was sellingoff pieces of itself to other countries, Buffett proposed a systemin which United States companies that exported would be issued ¡°Import Certificates¡±¡ªin totalabout $80 billion a month. They could trade these (like the old warehouse certificates issued by Rockwood Chocolates could be traded). Anybody wantingto import into the United States would need an Import Certificate, and would have to buy froman exporter. Presto, companies would get paid a higher price to export than to sell domestically, automatically increasingexports. That, of course, would increase the importers¡¯ (foreign companies¡¯) costs. While this systemcould be viewed as unfriendly¡ªa tariff, or tax on imports, which in the past had led to trade wars that depressed economies ¡ªBuffett felt that importers were goingto suffer anyway as their goods became more expensive with the fallingdollar. The Import Certificate idea at least used the market to allocate who was willingto suffer. Over time, demand for Import Certificates would gradually increase exports to rebalance trade and restore parity between Thriftville and Squanderville. 
The plan had many nuances, but its bottomline was hallmark Buffett in many ways. The article showcased Buffett¡¯s thinking; it was a lesson on economics; it was a warningof potential catastrophe; it had a margin of safety (while it might not improve the trade balance as much as he hoped, the market mechanismmeant it was unlikely to make things worse); it was a blend of a market and government solution; it was a complex, ingenious, comprehensive system¡ªand, of course, a no-risk deal in which most parties would be at least somewhat better off than the alternative of doingnothing. 
Executingit would also require a wholesale change in thinking; a coalition of politicians would have to grasp the economics and care deeply enough about themto take the considerable political risk of pushingthrough Buffett¡¯s idea. Moreover, the plan would attack a problem before it had turned into a crisis¡ªalways unlikely in Washington. The odds of anythingremotely resemblinga tariff beingenacted into law with President Bush and free-marketeers controllingthe White House were zero. Thus the Import Certificates were an elegant solution that was goingabsolutely nowhere. Buffett¡¯s father, however, would have been extremely proud of him. 
And at least Buffett would have the honor of beingthe first prominent figure to go on record warning ¡ªloudly¡ªabout the risk of a fallingdollar. To hedge that risk for Berkshire, he had been lookingat Chinese stocks because of China¡¯s burgeoningeconomic power. He had found PetroChina, studied it, and gotten comfortable enough to buy it. Although he was able to purchase only $488 million, he said he wished he could have bought more. His endorsement of PetroChina sent investors over the moon. Warren Buffett had bought a foreign stock! PetroChina soared. And so did attendance at the BRK shareholders¡¯ meeting. 
That year, 15,000 people came to Omaha¡¯s Woodstock for Capitalists. Buffett¡¯s $36 billion fortune was once again exceeded only by Bill Gates¡¯s. He had bounced back, almost to the top of the heap. 
¡°What is the idealbusiness?¡± a shareholder asked when the questions began. ¡°The ideal business is one that earns very high returns on capital and that keeps using lots of capital at those high returns. That becomes a compounding machine,¡± Buffett said. ¡°So if you had your choice, if you could put a hundred million dollars into a business that earns twenty percent on that capital¡ªtwenty million¡ªideally, it would be able to earn twenty percent on a hundred twenty million the following year and on a hundred forty-four million the following year and so on. You could keep redeploying capital at [those] same returns over time. But there are very, very, very few businesses like that¡­we can move that money around from those businesses to buy 
more businesses.¡±21 This was about as clear a lesson on business and investingas he would ever give. It explained why Berkshire was structured as it was, although what it said about the stock market¡¯s longhistory of disappointed investors was sobering. It explained why he was always lookingfor new businesses to buy, and what he was planningto do with Clayton Homes. He expected to invest part of Berkshire¡¯s extra capital 
in Clayton so that it could survive to take market share away from its bankrupt competitors and to buy and service their portfolios of loans.22 
The fifty-some journalists fromaround the globe who had flown in to cover BRKfest were more interested in PetroChina and whether that investment signaled a new interest in foreign stocks. They got their chance to ask him and Munger about it at the press conference on Sunday. Many of them wanted to ask a version of a question that they knew would resonate with their home audiences: What stocks would you buy in Australia? Taiwan? Germany? Brazil?Russia? Buffett stressed that he was stillbuyingmainly in the United States. Most foreign stocks, he said, were not in his circle of competence. The PetroChina stock didn¡¯t change that. 
On Monday morningat the Berkshire board meeting, Buffett held a little seminar, explainingto the board the things he most wanted to teach themabout this year, which consisted of the risk that the dollar would decline against foreign currencies and the problems involved in the financingof mobile homes. 
Tom Murphy and Don Keough had just been voted in as directors, joiningCharlie Munger, Ron Olson, Walter Scott Jr., Howie, BigSusie, and KimChace, the lone representative of the old Hathaway textile family. There had been some grumblingabout these appointments, with shareholders makingnoises about cronyism, and lack of balance and diversity. But the idea of a board of directors overseeingWarren Buffett was ludicrous. A board made up of Barbie dolls would do just as well. When the Berkshire board met, it was to listen to Buffett teach, just as every occasion¡ªfrom a party to a luncheon to a sing-alongwith Jim Clayton ¡ªturned into an opportunity for Buffett to figuratively stand at the blackboard, fingers dusty with chalk. 
The reason shareholders cared about Berkshire corporate governance was not oversight, however, but the question of who would succeed Buffett, who was now almost seventy-three. He had always said there was a ¡°name in an envelope¡± crowninghis successor. But he would not acquiesce to the pressure to revealthe name, because that would tie his hands to one person, and events could change. It would also effectively begin the transition, and he certainly wasn¡¯t ready for that. 
There was, of course, a guessinggame about who this person could possibly be. Most of the managers of the various companies Buffett bought seemed unlikely candidates. Buffett liked managers like Mrs. B¡ªpeople who shunned the spotlight, who worked as tirelessly as a human anthill¡ªbut these people did not manage capital. Where was the capital allocator who could run this thing? The right person had to be willingto sit behind a desk readingfinancialreports allday long, yet excelat dealingwith people in order to retain a bunch of managers who wished they were stillworkingfor Warren Buffett. 
¡°I have this complicated procedure I go through every morning,¡± Buffett said, ¡°which is to look in the mirror and decide what I¡¯m going to do. And I feel at that point, everybody¡¯s had their say.¡±23 The next CEO would have to be a superb leader¡ªand yet oversized egos need not apply for the job. 
As the board meetingended on Monday, the town emptied of shareholders, and the Buffett family headed to New York for their annualtrip. Every year they traditionally attended a dinner with the East Coast members of the Buffett Group, held at Sandy and Ruth Gottesman¡¯s house, where Susie would pile into Warren¡¯s lap and run her fingers through his hair, and Warren would gaze enraptured at his wife. But this year it seemed obvious that Susie wasn¡¯t feelingwell. At lunch one day, dressed beautifully in a light wool skirt suit with a wraparound shawl, she ate only a tiny piece of chicken and some carrots with a glass of milk. She said she was fine but wasn¡¯t that convincing. 
Within two weeks, shortly before they were to have left for the trip to Africa that she was so excited about, she was admitted to the hospital with another bowel obstruction. There, the doctors found that she was anemic and had an esophageal ulcer. In a huge disappointment for the family¡ªat least some in the family¡ªthe Africa trip had to be postponed by a year, to the followingspring. Even Warren was dismayed, because he knew how much the trip meant to Susie. But, asked if he was worried, he said, ¡°Oh, no, it would bother Susie if she thought I was worryingabout her. She wants to worry about me, not the other way around. She¡¯s a lot like Astrid in that sense. I¡¯mnot a worrier in general, y¡¯know.¡± 
Although the reason for the cancelation was regrettable, it turned out to be a good thingthat Buffett was 
around that June. As the meetingat which the Clayton shareholders would vote on the merger approached, 
opposition to the deal swelled like a blister chafed by shareholders¡¯ resistance to the price¡ªeven to the very idea of sellingto Berkshire. Rumors started that another bidder would come in.24 Investors assumed that Buffett was goingto make a lot of money, because with Berkshire¡¯s hoard of capital and good credit rating, he could fund the Claytons, more or less forever, on terms more attractive than anyone except a sovereign government. It seemed almost unfair. Some of the shareholders were convinced that the Claytons had sold out to Buffett too cheap in order to keep their jobs and benefit themselves or to get access to that war chest. The potential conflict of interest when the management of a public company wanted to sell the company to Berkshire was about to set off a war. 
William Gray of Orbis Investment Management, for one, thought the Claytons were heistingthe company on behalf of Buffett. He filed a petition with the SEC and a lawsuit with the Chancery Court in Delaware, where Clayton was incorporated; his argument was that the Claytons were not tryingto get the best deal for shareholders, because they had signed the exclusive clause preventingthemfromentertainingcompeting offers. He sought a rulingthat they not be allowed to vote their shares on the deal and wanted a special 
shareholder meetingcalled to replace the Clayton board.25 After all, said one investor, ¡°if Buffett bids for something, it must by definition be undervalued.¡±26 
Buffett¡¯s reputation, which had been an asset for so many years, had begun to work against himin certain other ways as well. He was such a magnet for publicity that anyone who wanted publicity for themselves or their cause could hijack his shareholder meetingor misappropriate his fame to get it. And so it happened that just before the shareholder meetingand around the time that Berkshire had announced the Clayton deal, Doris Christopher, CEO of The Pampered Chef, called him with just such a problem. 
The Pampered Chef sold kitchenware at home parties through independent salespeople, mostly women. After Berkshire¡¯s purchase of the company, members of pro-life organizations had begun boycottingtheir parties. Berkshire¡¯s position was that it made no donations to pro-choice or reproductive rights groups, but only acted as a conduit for its shareholders, who through the charitable-contributions programhad the right to allocate $18 per share to the charity of their choice. Of the $197 million that had been donated to nonprofit groups of all types, the largest number of recipients were schools and churches, many of them Catholic, and most of the money went to causes not related to abortion. But a significant amount of money had gone to reproductive-
rights organizations.27 As it happened, Warren and Susie¡¯s personalshare of the contributions¡ªabout $9 million in 2002¡ªwent to the Buffett Foundation, where it mostly funded reproductive rights. That Berkshire¡¯s money should be funneled this way was what was botheringthe pro-life groups. The argument 
that the contributions were not Berkshire¡¯s fellon deaf ears. 28 In 2002, Buffett had tried to square things with one of these groups by showingthemhow much money went to causes other than family planning. He got a reply fromthe president of Life Decisions International, saying, ¡°Even if only $1.00 went to Planned Parenthood and $1 billion was donated to pro-life organizations, the former gift would still land Berkshire 
Hathaway on The Boycott List.¡±29 If the price of fillinga parkingmeter was enough to attract a boycott, that was a pretty clear sign that Berkshire would find little roomfor compromise. 
Doris Christopher had tried to mediate, tellingher people that while she personally did not agree with Buffett, 
¡°it is not my place to ask or to judge¡± how he donated money. Fewer than a thousand of the 70,000 Pampered Chef consultants were petitioningChristopher over this issue.30 Still, the boycott was affecting business and hurtingthe people involved. They were beingintimidated by pro-life picketers who were now makingappearances at the hosts¡¯ houses duringsales parties. Christopher called Buffett to tellhimthe disruption to her business was gettingworse. 
¡°She didn¡¯t ask me, but I could tell she was hoping I would cancel the program. And you know, I¡¯ll do it. I thought we could tough it through, but we can¡¯t. It¡¯s hurting too many people that I don¡¯t want to hurt. It hurts Doris, and these are her flock. They¡¯re getting injured, and they¡¯re innocent. They¡¯re in her office, crying.¡± 
In late June, Buffett called Allen Greenberg, his former son-in-law and executive director of the Buffett 
Foundation, into his office and explained that he had talked to Charlie Munger. Rather than sellThe Pampered Chef¡ªone of the options¡ªthey had decided to shut down the charitable-contributions program. Greenbergwas astounded. The year before, ninety-seven percent of shareholders had defeated a resolution by a pro-life shareholder to cancel the program. Combinghis hands through his dark wavy hair, he paced back and forth, pointingout that the contributions came fromindividuals, not the corporation. People could still donate on their own. Shuttingdown the program would accomplish nothing. But Buffett had made up his mind. 
Greenbergreturned to his office to draft a press release that went out to the news wires right before Sun Valley, over the Fourth of July weekend. The phone rangand rangfor several days; the secretaries grew weary from ferryingmessages up and down the hall. Life Decisions almost instantly put out its own release droppingBerkshire fromits boycott list. 
But Buffett¡¯s friends, no matter what their views on abortion, mostly reacted the same way:They were stunned. Some were angry. ¡°I was surprised that he gave in on that,¡± one said. ¡°It didn¡¯t sound like him to back down so easily. Warren is such a principled person. Was it such a bigdeal that it had to be done?¡± asked 
another.31 
Though other people in his position might have chosen to stand up to the right-to-lifers, Buffett said he was worried that such a stance might put The Pampered Chef consultants at risk. He didn¡¯t say it, but implicitly, not just their livelihoods but their physicalwelfare was at stake. Buffett himself was a very bigtarget, not just Sid the Dry Cleaner down on the corner whomnobody had ever heard of; takinga stand might make 
Berkshire Hathaway, as wellas him, a symbolof pro-choice defiance, which was dangerous.32 He shrank from confrontation anyway; this was somethinghe simply could not do. 
Afterward, he never showed any sign of rancor over the criticismor the pro-life victory laps. You can always tellthemto go to hell tomorrow, as Murph said. There was never any need to do it today. Over the years he had saved himself a lot of trouble by followingthis advice. Almost as soon as he got past The Pampered Chef sidebar, he simply stopped thinkingabout it. 
Alas, this did not solve the other problemcaused by beingWarren Buffett instead of Sid the Dry Cleaner. Shareholders at Clayton Homes had begun weighingin for and against the Berkshire bid as the July 16 meetingto vote on the dealapproached. Prices of peer companies had started to float upward. Lenders suddenly became more lenient. The argument about the ¡°bottomof the cycle¡± gained currency. About thirteen percent of the investors, includingrespected money managers like Brandywine Asset Management, Schneider Capital, and CalPERS, the California Public Employees¡¯ Retirement System, said publicly that they would oppose the deal. Kevin Clayton trotted around the country, meetingwith investors and pitching the merger, while Orbis and other naysayers worked the phones and the press. By then Berkshire had lent $360 million to Clayton to finance its stopgap needs. Buffett put out a news release in which he said that he would not raise his price ¡°now or in the future.¡± If the dealfell through, he would walk away. He also used 
the release to give an economic forecast for the industry, sayingno turnaround was coming.33 
Before Buffett bid, nobody had wanted Clayton. Despite a faithful followingof hard-core shareholders, it was like a good-lookinggirl who couldn¡¯t get a partner at the dance. Now she was on Warren Buffett¡¯s arm, headed to the middle of the floor as the fiddlers and pickers began the schottische. The former wallflower suddenly looked prettier to others. At midnight two days before the shareholder meeting, Cerberus Capital, which had outbid Buffett on Conseco¡¯s lendingbusiness, faxed a letter to Clayton suggestingthat it was likely to make a higher bid. When it came to money, Buffett¡¯s attitude was defiant. ¡°Okay, let them,¡± he said. He was certain that Clayton without Berkshire wasn¡¯t worth more than $12.50 a share. 
And, indeed, by the day of the meeting, exactly zero other bidders had emerged for Clayton Homes. It was still a toss-up whether the Claytons had enough votes to win approval of the sale, however. JimClayton faced an hour-longbarrage of questions fromagitated shareholders who had packed the auditoriumwhere the meetingwas held. Manufactured-housingstocks had been on a tear since the deal was announced, making the $12.50 price look even worse by comparison. Some shareholders wanted Cerberus to have a chance to make its offer, even though it had had two months to prepare a bid and there was no way to be certain that Cerberus was serious about buyingClayton¡ªas opposed to showingup as a spoiler to Buffett by comingin at the last minute. 
The Claytons were caught in a terrible bind. If the vote failed, which it very wellmight do¡ªfor one large shareholder, Fidelity Investments, had announced its intention to change its vote from yes to no¡ªthere might be no deal, and Clayton could get sued for havingsigned the agreement not to consider other bids. If the vote passed and Clayton sold to Berkshire, Clayton could get sued for ignoringanother, possibly higher bid. 
Kevin Clayton left the meetingto callBuffett and ask him to agree to a delay on the vote, to allow Cerberus time to make a bid. Buffett said okay¡ªif they would pay Berkshire $5 million for the delay. Clayton agreed to Buffett¡¯s price, reconvened the meeting, and adjourned it before takinga vote.34 
By now the business press was coveringthe story as a David and Goliath set piece in which a gangof tiny Davids¡ªthe hedge funds that were fightingthe deal¡ªtried to defeat the greedy Claytons and the colossus Buffett. Journalists are automatic skeptics of establishment figures; hedge fund managers, by and large, are anti-establishment by nature; they had learned to play the press for mutualbenefit like a virtuoso with his Stradivarius. The press turned on the mighty Buffett. If he was buyingsomething, the price must be too cheap. 
The test of whether Buffett was stealingClayton would be whether another bidder could be found. A week later, when seventy accountants, lawyers, and financialspecialists fromCerberus Capital and three other firms¡ªthe Blackstone Group, Credit Suisse, and Texas Pacific Group¡ªdescended on Knoxville, Tennessee, led by the Cerberus chairman, former Vice President Dan Quayle, the clock began to tick toward the moment of truth. Clayton housed themin its fanciest mobile homes, adjoiningthe headquarters. Most of the team toured Clayton¡¯s plants and pored through rooms fullof documents, focusingincreasingly on the huge maw 
of the mortgage unit and the way it sucked down capital.35 Quayle roamed the hallways shakinghands, repeatingthat Cerberus was a ¡°family-friendly company.¡±36 
While Cerberus and the other firms were deliberating, the Denver Area Meat Cutters and Employers Pension Plan filed a lawsuit against Clayton, chargingit with ¡°self-dealing, abusive control, and lack of candor.¡±37 
Buffett felt he was beingblackmailed. The Meat-Cutters¡¯ Union¡¯s lawsuit was orchestrated by Darren Robbins, a partner of MilbergWeiss, a law firmthat specialized in representinginvestors in class-action lawsuits. ¡°It¡¯s a well-known fact that they committed a fraud,¡± said Robbins.38 Twenty-two plaintiff¡¯s 
lawyers, assistants, and researchers descended upon Knoxville. Plaintiff¡¯s lawyers do not stay in mobile homes. They reportedly bunkered into nine luxury condominiums downtown, ready for a six-month battle.39 
After a week of their own digging, the Cerberus people returned to New York and faxed a sheet labeled ¡°for discussion purposes only¡±: ¡°Clayton Recapitalization¡ªSources & Uses.¡± The sheet was not an offer, but it contained a price:$14 a share. The Claytons¡¯ first impression was that Cerberus had beaten Buffett¡¯s offer by a healthy margin. However, a closer look revealed that Cerberus planned to give shareholders only $755 million in cash, whereas Buffett¡¯s $1.7 billion was an all-cash deal. Under the Cerberus deal, the outside shareholders would get $9 a share out of the $14 total. The balance would be paid in a ¡°recapitalized¡± stock. 
The $9 a share, however, would actually be paid by Clayton itself. Cerberus wasn¡¯t goingto invest any money. Clayton would have to borrow $500 million and sell off $650 million of assets.40 
This was a typicalleveraged-buyout proposal, in which a company¡¯s assets are sold and it takes on debt in order to finance its own sale. The recapitalized stock, nominally worth $5, would consist of a piece of a financial company that had piled additional debt on top of a shrunken capitalbase. Debt was the blood coursingthrough the veins of mobile-home makers; without it they were dead. And lenders were already shyingaway from the business. Why would they lend to a company whose ability to repay themhad just been gutted? The Cerberus people obviously knew this; they had delivered a proposal that was the best that financial engineeringcould do. The Claytons called Cerberus to discuss it and, without any rancor, they 
agreed to go their separate ways. 
But CNBC and the financial press were now portrayingBuffett as a ruthless financier who had connived with the Claytons to buy the company cheap. The way that the Clayton deal was playingout in the media, and the manner in which Buffett¡¯s reputation had compounded to the point where it worked against him, represented a dramatic reversal of the image of the wise, grandfatherly man who attracted legions of would-be coattail-riders. The blister had popped; the opposition to the Clayton merger showed that large investors were no longer coattail-riding, waitingfor his reputation to take prices higher; they wanted to use his reputation against him, to block him. 
Buffett, however, had never really specialized in buyingthings that other people wanted at a price that was too cheap. Instead, he bought things that other people didn¡¯t want and thought that they were better off without. True, they had often been mistaken about that. Increasingly, since the Buffalo Evening News, however, Berkshire had bought properties that most people really were better off without. There weren¡¯t many companies that had the balance sheet to look a union in the eye and stare themdown, that had the financial wherewithal to finance Clayton¡¯s debt, that could make decisions on deals like Long-TermCapital in an hour rather than a week. Berkshire could do allthose things, and more. Many of the companies Berkshire was now buyingwere businesses like NetJets, built by entrepreneurs who wanted to sellto a buyer 
who would treat their babies well, and who trusted Berkshire to behave honestly.41 Buffett¡¯s real brilliance was not just to spot bargains (though he certainly had done plenty of that) but in havingcreated, over many years, a company that made bargains out of fairly priced businesses. 
On what turned out to be Susie Jr.¡¯s fiftieth birthday, the adjourned Clayton shareholder meetingfinally reconvened. After four months, no other bidder had come forward, and Cerberus had declined to make a deal. In the end, 52.3 percent of the shareholders voted for the Berkshire deal, barely enough. Excludingthe Claytons, the other shareholders had voted no by a margin of two to one. Buffett sat by the phone until he got the news. Then he took his daughter out and gave her the gift he had selected for her with the help of Susan Jacques at Borsheim¡¯s¡ªan eternity ringcrowned with a large pink heart-shaped diamond¡ªand her latest million-dollar birthday gift. The supposedly cold-blooded financier was a soft-hearted sentimentalist when it came to his daughter, with whomhe had an increasingly close and even dependent relationship. He had been carryingthis ringaround for a couple of weeks, pullingit out to look at it and gettingteary-eyed with anticipation of his daughter¡¯s reaction. When Susie Jr. saw the ring, she threw her arms around him and cried. 
While they were hugging, MilbergWeiss and Orbis¡¯s WilliamGray were already startingto try to undo the vote. Gray challenged the election and won the right to audit the ballots. The Delaware Chancery Court upheld the vote. Handed defeat, Orbis then joined with MilbergWeiss to ask Tennessee Blount County Circuit Court Judge Dale Youngto restrain the deal from beingconsummated. Judge Younginstead said the merger should proceed. With MilbergWeiss barkingat the door, the Claytons wasted no time. On August 7, the day the merger was scheduled to close, Clayton¡¯s Delaware attorneys were waitingat the door of the 
Secretary of State at daybreak to file the paperwork to certify the merger. By seven-thirty a.m. it was done.42 
As soon as the merger was effective, MilbergWeiss and Orbis rushed to file an appeal with the Tennessee Court of Appeals to overrule Judge Young¡¯s decision of the day before. The next day, the Tennessee Court of Appeals concurred and temporarily blocked the merger, which had already closed. That prevented Berkshire from payingout the proceeds. The Court of Appeals gave the lower court a homework assignment, askingit to rule on a number of issues within two weeks. Clayton started workingto fulfillMilbergWeiss¡¯s eighteen-page document request. Lawyers and company people were workingalmost around the clock. 
Kevin Clayton and his wife had just had a baby; she was colicky froma protein allergy. ¡°It took twenty-seven formulas before we found one fromLondon that would work,¡± says Clayton. ¡°Plus, I got shingles right in the middle of it, fromstress. I called up my dad and said, ¡®Dad, this is rough.¡¯ And he said, ¡®Well, son, I had paralysis on the left side of my face when I was your age fromstress.¡¯ Then I called up Warren, and he said, ¡®Well, Kevin, when I was younger, I lost a lot of my hair fromstress.¡¯ I got no sympathy from either one of them.¡± 
On August 18, Judge Youngordered a trial before a jury. Clayton immediately appealed. 
Clayton stock had ceased tradingweeks ago, but Berkshire could not pay out the merger proceeds, since the deal marinated in the galley of the appellate court. Forty thousand shareholders awaited their money from Berkshire Hathaway. All$1.7 billion sat in the bank, earninginterest for Berkshire. 
Buffett got a fax froma couple who were beingforeclosed out of their home. They needed the money from the Clayton stock to pay their mortgage. Pay what you can, he told the couple, and just explain the situation. Probably that willbe enough to avoid foreclosure. 
¡°It¡¯s the Perils of Pauline,¡± he said. 
The stalemate dragged on for nearly two weeks. Finally, as the calendar turned to September, the court found ¡°not a scintilla of evidence¡± that the Claytons had manipulated the votingprocess. Six days later, Milberg Weiss filed an appeal with the Tennessee Supreme Court. Buffett was incredulous¡ªor, rather, he would have been incredulous had it been any law firmbut MilbergWeiss. They were stillseekingto have the merger overturned. That was not goingto result in a bigfat check for the law firm. How did they expect to get paid? The photocopy machines were runninglate at night at Clayton¡¯s law firm, kachunkingforth documents and legal bills. Buffett reasoned that MilbergWeiss must be tryingto make such a nuisance of itself that Clayton 
would simply pay it to go away. He talked to Kevin Clayton. Never, Clayton vowed.43 
Buffett mused about the historic position of the Tennessee Supreme Court, which potentially could become the first court in the history of the United States to unwind a merger that was already complete. The court, evidently findingitself of the same mind, dismissed the appeal. 
Clayton¡¯s insurance company, St. Paul, wanted to settle the remainingshareholder suit filed by Milberg Weiss for $5 million. The Claytons and Buffett hated the thought of payingpeople they considered stickup artists and ambulance chasers because so little of the money would go to the shareholders¡ªmaybe a nickel a share. The lawyers would get most of the money. However, the insurer argued that unless they settled, the legal bills would cost the company even more. Feelingransomed, they went ahead and paid. And thus ended the battle to buy Clayton Homes. 
But soon it became clear that sales of manufactured housingwere not goingto turn around.44 Buffett had not bought just as the bounce was comingback. In fact, as Ian Jacobs had flown back to report, the downward spiralin manufactured housinghad just begun. The price that had looked so cheap was barely reasonable. To help the deal¡¯s economics, Buffett had Kevin Clayton begin buyingportfolios of distressed loans. It was goingto take some mighty fine footwork to make the Clayton deal work out. 
58 
Buffetted 
Omaha . Summer¨CFall 2003 
In September, Buffett was in a state of high excitement. Fortune magazine had named himthe most powerful person in business. To many oohs and aahs, he had recently auctioned his battered wallet with a stock tip inside for $210,000 to benefit Girls Inc., a nonprofit cause of Susie Jr.¡¯s. Next, he had auctioned himself off on eBay¡ªor, rather, lunch for eight people with him¡ªto benefit Glide Memorial Church in San Francisco, Susie¡¯s main cause. Glide gave HIVtests duringservices and held funerals and memorials for gay men whose families and churches had rejected them. The Reverend Cecil Williams¡¯s watchword was ¡°unconditional love,¡± a termthat Susie had adopted like a mantra and even Warren now used fromtime to time. At Glide, everyone was welcome:hookers, junkies, winos, drifters.1 Accordingto the highest of fifty bidders on eBay, two hours of Buffett¡¯s time and a lunch for eight at Michael¡¯s were worth $250,100¡ªthat is, more than the stock tip in his wallet. Within days, an artist¡¯s renderingof himdressed in a toga as if descended fromMount Olympus would appear in Forbes to illustrate a list of ¡°Best-Dressed Billionaires.¡± However limited the competition for that list (although billionaires were becomingpretty commonplace these days), Buffett could never have been considered a contender for best-dressed anything, were he not so celebrated and popular that pictures of himsold magazines. Not only that, the two Susies were scheduled to speak on philanthropy at Fortune¡¯s Most PowerfulWomen Summit the followingweek, at the beginningof October, before an audience made up of many of the most important women in America, includingCEOs, entrepreneurs, and women of stature in many different fields. Buffett was elated at this coronation of his wife and daughter, particularly that they would be makingthe presentation together. 
On the Friday afternoon before the conference began, Susie called Warren to tellhimthat she was goingto be arrivinga day late, because on Monday she was havinga biopsy. She had seen her periodontist in June, an appointment that had been delayed from May by her earlier bowel obstructions, esophagealulcer, and and anemia. The periodontist had found some pin-dot-size spots on the floor of her mouth and referred her to a specialist. Two months had passed as Susie tried to work around the specialist¡¯s schedule and her own complicated travelitinerary to arrange an appointment. Once the appointment was finally booked, she had almost canceled it in favor of a visit to the Gates Foundation. 
¡°No. No, no, no, no, no. You¡¯re not canceling,¡± said Kathleen Cole. It was rare for Cole to contradict her friend and boss outright. But now she insisted, ¡°You have to go.¡±2 
At the appointment, Dr. Deborah Greenspan had felt around Susie¡¯s neck and found swollen lymph nodes on one side. She insisted that Susie see yet another specialist, Dr. Brian Schmidt, the followingMonday for a biopsy. Susie seemed unconcerned about the biopsy. She wanted to delay it in order to avoid missingany of the Fortune conference. ¡°I have to do this,¡± she told Kathleen, referringto her appearance there. The 
specialist, Dr. Schmidt, refused to postpone the procedure, however.3 
Buffett absorbed the news quietly, but was deeply shaken. A few hours after Susie called, he carried on a long, ramblingphone conversation with someone else, fillingthe unrelentingminutes after he got home from work. Seconds before his bridge game was due to begin, he said casually, but in a low, serious voice, Oh, by the way, Susie¡¯s havinga biopsy on Monday. 
For what?! asked his shocked listener. 
Some kind of thingin her mouth, he said. Well, I¡¯lltalk to you later. Then he hungup. 
Susie had the biopsy. She went and spoke at the conference, then flew east to Decatur to visit Howie on the farm, see her grandkids, and ride on the combine for the harvest before returningto San Francisco. With hindsight, Howie would think to himself, Gee, she¡¯d always talked about comingout for the harvest, but 
she¡¯d never done it before.4 At the time, however, he noticed nothingunusual, for she behaved as she always 
did.5 
Warren kept his face glued to the computer screen, whether surfingthe news or playingbridge or helicopter. His risinganxiety showed in the usualmanner; he repeated the same questions and statements about a subject over and over while denying¡ªif asked¡ªthat he was concerned. 
On Friday, Susie and Kathleen Cole went to USC Medical Center to learn the biopsy results. Susie continued to seemoblivious to the potentialseriousness of the situation. When they arrived at Dr. Schmidt¡¯s office, Susie said to Kathleen, ¡°You¡¯re so nervous. Why are you so nervous?¡± Kathleen thought, ¡°Oh, my gosh, doesn¡¯t she get that this could be bad news?¡± When they met with the doctor, he told Susie that she had stage-three oral cancer. She was stunned by the diagnosis. ¡°It was like somebody shot a thunderbolt through 
her,¡± says Cole. She had apparently not even considered this as a possibility.6 
Susie had her moment of tears. Then, characteristically, by the time they got into the car she had pulled herself together and started chicken-soupingeverybody but herself. She called Warren. He did not say much. She called Susie Jr. and told her, ¡°Call your dad. He¡¯s goingto be a mess.¡± Then she went home and talked to 
Warren again and to Susie Jr., Howie, and Peter.7 By then, Susie Jr. had already gone to the Internet to research.8 She called her father and said, ¡°Don¡¯t read the oralcancer Web site.¡± 
Oral cancer strikes only 34,000 people a year but kills more than 8,000. An often painless but fast-growing cancer, it is more deadly than melanoma, brain cancer, liver cancer, cervicalcancer, or Hodgkin¡¯s disease;9 it is particularly dangerous because it¡¯s usually discovered only after it has spread to the lymph nodes of the neck, at which point the primary tumor may have invaded surroundingtissue and potentially migrated to other organs. A person with oral cancer has an especially high risk of developinga second primary tumor. Survivinga first bout with the disease carries a twentyfold greater risk of recurrence. 
At least ninety percent of those diagnosed with oral cancer are longtime smokers or use smokeless tobacco. Alcohol use combined with smokingraises the risk even more. Susie Buffett never smoked or drank. She had no significant risk factors. The fact that her cancer was stage three meant that it had already spread to at least one lymph node but probably not to more distant sites. 
Susie returned to her apartment overlookingthe Golden Gate Bridge, every wall covered with a souvenir of a trip, a gift froma friend, or a piece of art that meant somethingto her. The woman who never let go of anythingor anybody started tellingpeople, ¡°I¡¯ve had a wonderfullife. My kids are grown. I¡¯ve lived to see my grandkids. I love my life, but I¡¯ve done my job and I¡¯m not really needed anymore.¡± 
¡°If it were up to me,¡± she told Kathleen, ¡°I would go off to a villa in Italy in privacy and just die.¡± She was far more fearfulof a protracted, painfuldeath than of dyingitself. But if she simply gave up, she would be abandoningpeople who were important to her, people who had been part of her life for decades. It was really Warren for whom she was goingto have the surgery. However, she told Kathleen and her friend Ron Parks, amongothers, that she hadn¡¯t decided whether to do the follow-up radiation that was a standard part of the treatment to reduce the risk of a recurrence, which was high. For some reason, perhaps because she was in a 
state of shock, she didn¡¯t seemto grasp how important it was. 10 
The followingmorning, as she and Kathleen were makingplans for what was to come, Susie unaccountably refused to authorize Kathleen to pay for the equipment that would be needed to make her apartment accessible postsurgery. Kathleen needed to get elevator chairs to carry her up allthe flights of stairs to her apartment at the top of the building. Susie would not hear of it. Kathleen decided that Susie was in some kind of shock or denialand finally called Susie Jr., who simply said to ignore her mother and make the necessary arrangements. 
Meanwhile, a stunned Warren paced through his routine, as he invariably did in a crisis. He escorted a very upset Astrid to the Nebraska football game in Lincoln. He flew out to San Francisco the followingmorning, where he learned that Susie needed major surgery within the next few weeks. She had a fifty percent chance of survivingfor five years. A large portion of her jaw and most or all of her teeth might be removed. For more than a month after the surgery, she would be fed through a tube in her nose that led directly into her stomach. She would not be able to talk duringthat period and the surgery was potentially disfiguring. Susie told Warren little more; she did say she was worried that she would frighten her own grandchildren. They decided she would fly to New York City for a second opinion at Memorial Sloan-KetteringCancer Center the following week, although this was largely a formality. 
Once back in Omaha, Warren filled his every conscious moment with phone conversations, Internet bridge games, work, and strategizinghow to handle an upcomingmeetingwith Karen Elliott House, publisher of the Wall Street Journal. Buffett by now had had severalrun-ins with the Journal over its coverage of him, beginningwith the 1992 story that called hima ¡°tough, polished man¡± beneath the ¡°mask¡± of a folksy sage. House was arrivingperhaps on a repair mission, perhaps to sound him out about buyingthe financially troubled paper. But his mind never really left Susie; he touched on her in brief cloudbursts of conversation. He had decided to spend every weekend in San Francisco with her duringthe comingmonths. Although he didn¡¯t really know what he was lettinghimself in for, he wanted to give her in some fashion what he knew she would have given him, had their situations been reversed. He felt certain, he said, she needed his presence. For sure, he was goingto need hers. 
The meetingwith House proved uneventful; nobody got strangled, nor did Buffett buy the paper. For the rest of the week he started every morningin a thunderhead mood¡ªa sure sign that he was not sleeping well¡ªthen brightened through the course of the day. Other than Debbie Bosanek and a few other people, nobody at Berkshire Hathaway headquarters knew the reason. 
Duringthat week he rarely left his corner of the floor next to the Xerox room and the two file rooms, spendingmuch of his time on the phone with Susie. Although they talked for hours, she was vague about the ordeal that she faced. Initially, she herself had not grasped the extensiveness of the surgery, which might also involve a bone graft taken fromher leg. The surgeons were not sure how much of her face would be involved, although they thought they could spare her tongue. Most devastatingto her was that she would probably not be able to singagain. She had discussed the surgery with her former son-in-law, Allen Greenberg, who had a longtime familiarity with her medicalproblems, havingtaken his friend, boss, and former mother-in-law to the emergency roomseveraltimes over the years. Sensitive to the way Buffett recoiled at anythingto do with illness, Greenbergdid not even mention Susie when he went to Buffett¡¯s office to update himon the foundation¡¯s projects. 
Yet while Warren didn¡¯t want to know much, he talked and talked about what he did know. ¡°They¡¯ve got a team of five guys, and it¡¯s at least a ten-hour deal. She¡¯s got the best care in the world. She got a letter from Howie that¡ªno mother could get a better letter. She¡¯s got a lot going for her. But it¡¯ll be a tough ordeal. They¡¯ve given her a lot of information, and she knows I don¡¯t want the details. She¡¯s told me what she thinks I can handle. I¡¯m sure the doctors think it¡¯s crazy that I¡¯m not talking to them directly. But I can¡¯t take that, so she¡¯s sort of told me the key elements.¡± 
A few days later Susie flew into Omaha to pick up Susie Jr., who was goingto accompany her to Memorial Sloan-Ketteringin New York for her second opinion. Tests there gave themthe good news that there was no indication that the cancer had spread, and they flew back to Omaha, where BigSusie was goingto spend the weekend. But while there she had another episode of cripplingpain from her abdominaladhesions. This attack, comingless than five months after the obstruction that had prevented the Buffetts fromtravelingto Africa the previous May, was disturbing. She had to stay over at Susie Jr.¡¯s, but for once heavy doses of painkillers enabled her to avoid hospitalization, which had always been required before. 
Haggard and pasty-faced, Buffett dragged himself to the office, then left in the middle of the week for a Coca-Cola board meetingin Atlanta. By the time he returned, Susie had begun to recover and went to pay a visit to Astrid. When she saw Susie, Astrid simply broke down in sobs, and, once again, it was Susie¡¯s turn to comfort someone else. 
After the weekend, when Susie flew back to San Francisco, Buffett¡¯s mood turned dark again, his voice went gravelly, and he was clearly havingtrouble sleeping. The biennialBuffett Group meeting, which was being held a few days later, weighed on his mind. Susie¡¯s doctors didn¡¯t want her to travel to the meeting, which was takingplace in San Diego. Thus, for the first time since 1969, Warren would be goingalone. Not only would Susie not be there, but his friend Larry Tisch, an early partner and the head of Loews Corporation, also would be absent, because he was too illwith advanced stomach cancer to attend. 
Buffett was obviously preoccupied with thoughts of what it would be like to go to this meetingwithout Susie. News of her illness was sure to cause a stir simply because many of the people attendingwere findingout about it shortly before the meeting. For five days he was goingto have to answer questions about her, accept sympathy, and keep his emotions in check. He would have to performhis role of master of ceremonies, maintaininginterest in what was goingon without strikingany false notes of excessive good cheer. Buffett had mastered the art of compartmentalizingto such a degree that these skills were second nature to him¡ªbut under the circumstances, it was stillgoingto be a hell of a performance. Once he was back in his hotelroom at the end of the evening, he would be alone in the dark with his thoughts and his dreams. 
¡°I dream a lot,¡± he said the day before leavingfor San Diego, and the dreams could be disturbing. ¡°I have a multiplex going on in there. It¡¯s a full-time occupation.¡± That eveninghe ordered a club sandwich for dinner and ate with a visitor in his office, wantingto fillthe time until Sharon took over to distract himwith a bridge game, then conversation till all hours. Now he sat talking, at first strugglingthrough a brittle discussion about business and politics. Eventually, the conversation wound its way to what had been bubblingbeneath the surface for days: the surgery that would take place shortly after the meetingended. 
For the briefest fraction of a second, a look of surprise flickered across his face. Then his face began to crumple, and collapsed into his hands. His shoulders heaved and rocked and he slid forward in his chair, like a tower crumblingin an earthquake. Dry, desolate, heavingsobs, like silent screams, came gaspingout of him. There wasn¡¯t any consolation for this. 
Gradually the wrackingsobs spent themselves. Then he began to talk about Susie. He cried quietly, off and on, for about two hours. He was afraid of what she was goingto have to suffer through. She was stronger than he; his main concern was the pain she would face. He was even more worried that she might accept death as a natural thingand not fight it as he would. He was terrified of losingher. Assumptions that were part of the very core of his beinghad been upended. He had always assumed that he would never be alone because she would outlive him. He had always assumed that he could count on her wisdomand judgment to handle any life-and-death decisions that might have to be made. He had always assumed that she would run the foundation after he was gone. She would keep peace within the family if he was not there; she would see to it that Astrid was taken care of; she would resolve any conflicts, soothe any bad feelings. She would handle his funeraland shape the way in which everyone would remember him. Above all, he had been countingon Susie to be there for himat the end, to sit beside himand hold his hand and calmhis terror and ease his sufferingwhen death was approaching, just as she had done for so many others. For the first time he had to contemplate that it might not work out this way. But these thoughts were so unbearable that he could only glance at thembefore shuttingthemdown. He was sure that her doctors would take care of her and that she would live. By the time he left the office for his bridge game, he was in a somber mood but calmand collected. 
The next morninghe flew to San Diego. At the Buffett Group conference, he struck people as subdued but not despondent. He presided over three days of meetings that included a dinner at the Gateses¡¯ house, a talk by Bill Ruane about his project to improve the schools in Harlem, Jack Byrne on management succession, and Charlie Munger on the life of Andrew Carnegie, the great industrialist, who had maintained that he who dies rich dies disgraced. Howie Buffett dropped in to describe the motivations behind the photographs in his book, Tapestry of Life, which showed scenes of human sufferingin impoverished Africa; Geoffrey Cowan, dean of the AnnenbergSchool for Communications at USC, gave a speech entitled ¡°FromYoungIdealists to Old Bureaucrats,¡± about the agingof the so-called Silent Generation, those born in the 1930s and early ¡¯40s, 
which comprised most of those who were in the room. 11 
While Warren was in San Diego, Astrid was at the Canyon Ranch spa in Tucson, where he had sent her because she was so upset about Susie that he wanted her to get away to a place where she might be able to relax. She had never been to a spa before and resisted at first. Pamperingherself at a swanky hacienda was like attemptinga triple lutzto a woman who had never so much as treated herself to a pedicure. Astrid had no vanity whatsoever; she packed just a few T-shirts for her week at the famous resort. Handed a turkey wrap for lunch on arrival, out of habit she began to badger the staff about recyclingand Styrofoampackaging. At the reception area, a nurse took her into a small office to design a spa and wellness regime for her. When asked how she was feelingand what concerns she had, Astrid replied that her concern was her friend Susie. The nurse apparently recognized that she was dealingwith one of those women who focus on everybody else at the expense of their own needs. Gently, she steered Astrid toward relaxingtreatments, like ¡°healing touch.¡± Astrid took a couple of yoga classes, went on a bird walk, took some cookingclasses, got a facial, had a couple of massages, and learned some golf. She groused about beingtaken care of but, to her surprise, managed to survive it, and found that some aspects of it were not so terrible. 
Buffett flew fromthe meetingin San Diego to San Francisco the day before Susie¡¯s surgery. He had been scheduled to attend a NetJets marketingevent that day and had made up his mind to go, but Susie Jr., who recognized this as a formof denial, told himhe must come to San Francisco instead. Reluctantly, therefore, he joined the family for dinner at Susie¡¯s apartment. Everyone behaved in character. Since Susie had no one to care for (but herself), she avoided discussingher feelings about the next day¡¯s surgery with the family and busied herself talkingon the phone. Warren spent much of the eveningplayinghelicopter, with his eyes leashed to the computer. 
Very early the next morning, the family accompanied Susie to the University of California, San Francisco Medical Center, where the technicians hooked her up to an IVand drew a huge oval fromher knee to her left ankle with a Magic Marker. This, they said, was to indicate the area where they were goingto open her legto take out what they needed for the bone graft. Dr. Isley, Susie¡¯s surgeon, came by to tellthemthat he would leave the operatingroomafter ninety minutes or so to let themknow for sure whether the cancer had spread. 
Then Susie took her daughter into the bathroomand shut the door behind them. She didn¡¯t want Warren to hear what she had to say. ¡°Listen,¡± she said, ¡°he is a wuss. You need to understand that if they get in there and there¡¯s more cancer, don¡¯t let themoperate. I¡¯m so afraid he¡¯s goingto tellthemto operate even if it¡¯s really widespread, because he won¡¯t want me to die.¡± 
By eight a.m. Susie was in surgery, and the family went to the main surgical lounge, where they awaited word, alongwith all the other people who were passingthe time watchingJerry Springer on television while their loved ones were in the O.R. Warren pretended to read the newspaper. Fromtime to time, he closed the paper, held it up before his face, reached a hand behind to wipe tears fromhis eyes, then opened it again. 
Dr. Isley returned only forty-five minutes later. Although he had found cancer in two lymph nodes, it had not spread from there, which was good news. The surgery would remove only the lower floor of her mouth, the inside of her cheek, and about a third of her tongue. She did not need a bone graft. After Dr. Isley left, Warren began to ask, ¡°Well, now, Sooz, was that what he said would take an hour and a half, or is he going to come back out again? Are you sure? Willthey really know?¡± Each time, Susie Jr. reassured himthat they already had the answer, and each time he would wait a few minutes and ask her again. ¡°Well, how did they know so fast?¡± He kept saying, ¡°I don¡¯t think this is good. Maybe he¡¯s goingto come back out.¡± 
Sixteen hours later, Susie was in the intensive-care unit, breathingthrough a tracheotomy tube. Her left arm was bandaged from wrist to elbow where the surgeons had carved a slice of flesh for the skin graft inside her mouth. Because her tongue was swollen out of her mouth, a feedingtube had been threaded through her nose into her stomach. She coughed continually, cloggingthe trach tube, which had to be cleared frequently so 
that she could breathe.12 
The next morningat the hospital, Susie Jr. told her father, ¡°You need to get really ready for this. It¡¯s a shockingthingto see.¡± Warren steeled himself as he walked into Susie¡¯s room. He knew he could not allow her to see any spasmon his face that would revealto Susie how ghastly she appeared. Makinga huge effort of will, he managed to sit unflinchingwith her for a little while. Then Susie Jr. told himand her brothers that they could go home. There was nothingfurther they could do. Havingstuffed his feelings into a Pandora¡¯s box while he remained at Susie¡¯s bedside, after he left he says he ¡°spent two days just crying, basically.¡± 
He went back to San Francisco for the followingtwo weekends. Then, just before Susie was goingto leave the hospitaland go home, he flew down to Georgia and spoke to a group of students at Georgia Tech. He didn¡¯t talk about business much, but he invoked many of his familiar themes. He told themthe fable of the genie, and he talked about philanthropy. He said the best investment they could make in life was in themselves. He told them about his hero Ben Graham and said to choose their heroes carefully, because heroes matter in your life. He told themto work for people they admired. 
They asked himwhat had been his greatest success and greatest failure. He didn¡¯t tellthemabout his business mistakes of omission this time. Instead he said: 
¡°Basically, when you get to my age, you¡¯ll really measure your success in life by how many of the people you want to have love you actually do love you. 
¡°I know people who have a lot of money, and they get testimonial dinners and they get hospital wings 
named after them. But the truth is that nobody in the world loves them. If you get to my age in life and nobody thinks well of you, I don¡¯t care how big your bank account is, your life is a disaster. 
¡°That¡¯s the ultimate test of how you have lived your life. The trouble with love is that you can¡¯t buy it. You can buy sex. You can buy testimonial dinners. You can buy pamphlets that say how wonderful you are. But the only way to get love is to be lovable. It¡¯s very irritating if you have a lot of money. You¡¯d like to think you could write a check: I¡¯ll buy a million dollars¡¯ worth of love. But it doesn¡¯t work that way. The more 
13 
you give love away, the more you get.¡± 
*** 
Warren continued visitingevery weekend after Susie went home to her sunshine-filled apartment overlooking San Francisco Bay. The egg-yolk-yellow rugs were gone, lest their dust clogthe trach tube. Chair elevators carried her up the four flights of stairs. The nurses used a rented suction-tracheotomy system. The doctors began to prepare Susie for the six-week course of radiation, which was intended to kill any remainingcancer cells. It would begin in December and continue through the holidays. The radiation, which she had never quite agreed to in the first place, was goingto burn her throat. The doctors had told her to bulk up before the surgery because she could expect to lose around fifty pounds over the entire course of the surgery and radiation. That was a lot of weight, but one of the thoughts that had comforted her before the surgery was that she could afford to lose a good bit of it. Now, as the feedingtube came out, the nurses began to feed Susie six units of liquid meal replacement a day. It took her much of the day to get it down, because of the pain. 
Under stress, Warren had gained a little weight. He felt that he needed to lose twenty pounds and had decided to diet alongside Susie¡¯s liquid mealregimen. ¡°That can¡¯t be a lot of fun,¡± he said, ¡°so I won¡¯t have any fun either.¡± 
Buffett¡¯s manner of dietingwas as eccentric and unhealthy as the rest of his eatinghabits. He decided to stick with his usualapproach, which was to consume only a thousand calories a day and budget it however he liked. That meant he could spend the thousand calories on licorice, peanut brittle, hamburgers, or whatever else he wanted to eat so longas he didn¡¯t exceed the self-imposed limit. The easiest step was to cut back on all the Cherry Coke, replacingit with nothingand thereby dehydratinghimself. The idea behind the thousand-calorie starvation regimen was to get the pain of dietingover with fast. He was impatient and cut off debate over the health merits of such a diet. At my height and age, he said, I reckon that I can eat about a million calories a year and maintain my weight. (The nice round, even number of a million calories pleased him.) I can spend those calories however I want. If I want to eat a bunch of hot-fudge sundaes in January and starve the rest of the year, I can do that. 
It was completely rational (on the surface) yet totally ludicrous. But since he had never been either seriously overweight or seriously ill, it was pointless to argue with him. (He went on this crash diet every year right before the shareholder meeting; it is possible, however, that all that dehydration may have had nothingto do with his earlier kidney stone.) Regardless, Buffett had a way of winningarguments before they ever occurred. The one extremely rare exception was when he argued with the press over how it presented him. He never sparred with the Financial Times or the New York Times, both of which he read religiously. His problem, always, was the Wall Street Journal. 
Through the years, his penchant for lettingthe rubes in on the fact that Wall Street was a sort of speakeasy inhabited by people who were out to fleece them had made traffickingwith the Journal, WallStreet¡¯s official broadsheet, dangerously fraught. He had once done an ¡°editorial board¡± luncheon at the Journal that backfired on him. Editorialboard meetings were an opportunity for Buffett to put on his teachinghat and explain the economic issues of the day to editors¡ªsomethinghe relished¡ªbut this time, an off-the-record quote had shown up in the paper. Kay Graham¡¯s rule of journalismhad tripped himup¡ªGraham¡¯s maxim 
beingthat a statement given off the record means the quote willnot be used¡ªunless it is really good.14 Buffett had been furious, and obtained excuses and apologies fromthe Journal over its betrayal, which could not be undone. Moreover, the Journal¡¯s editorial page poured vitriol on himperiodically because he supported shiftingthe tax burden away fromthe poor and middle class and toward the rich. 
*** 
He would not dream, however, of skippinga day of readingthe Journal, even on Fridays, the day he drove out to Eppley Airfield for the three-hour NetJets flight to San Francisco. Sharon Osbergpicked himup at the airport and took himstraight to Susie¡¯s apartment in Pacific Heights. Not wantingto disturb her or to be awakened by the light that came in through Susie¡¯s huge uncurtained windows, he slept down in the ground-floor apartment that Susie used mainly for storage. While Susie napped and slept, he went to Sharon¡¯s much of the time to watch football on TVand cry on her shoulder. Sometimes they went to midnight movies. 
When Warren was in town, Susie saw no visitors, only her daughter, her nurses, and a couple of people like Kathleen who were caringfor her day to day. Nearly everyone, even Jeannie Lipsey Rosenblumand Warren¡¯s sister Bertie, who had bought apartments in the same building, were kept away allthe time¡ªnot just duringthe weekends¡ªthe feelingbeingthat even a soup.on of attention would be too drainingfor Susie. Every day Jeannie wrote Susie a card and left it downstairs for her. Like many of Susie¡¯s loved ones, Bertie was sad about not beingable to see her sister-in-law. She had always looked up to Susie for her wisdom about people, and now, in the wake of her husband¡¯s recent death, she felt that she had gained a similar wisdom herself. ¡°Hilt was a psychologist,¡± she says, ¡°and even without trying, he could see what people¡¯s meta message was. When Hilt died, what he willed to me was that I can see things about people that I never saw before. All of a sudden my eyes opened about things I had never understood.¡± Bertie felt that now her relationship with Susie would be different, more equal, so that she would no longer have to lean on Susie. She also felt she was startingto understand Susie for the first time. 
As her brother traveled back and forth to San Francisco every week, he, too, was learningabout things he had never known before¡ªmedication, radiation, and the ins and outs of dealingwith doctors and nurses and hospitalequipment. And he was also exploringa new emotionalterritory¡ªfacingSusie¡¯s fears as well as his own. When talkingabout this new world he had just entered, he measured out his words, keepinghis feelings private, adjustinghow much he shared accordingto how wellhe knew his audience. Sometimes he used as a distraction a favorite prop, Arnold Schwarzenegger, a fellow elephant friend whomhe had recently endorsed as the Republican candidate in a recall election to unseat Gray Davis, the governor of California. ¡°My wife had an operation in San Francisco about six weeks ago, and I¡¯ll be out there a couple of days every week. (Pause) Well, you know, Arnold, sometimes people can¡¯t tell which one is which, when we¡¯re next to each other. When we¡¯re stripped down, nobody has a chance.¡± 
When someone he knew better called, he struggled to talk about a subject that formerly he would have avoided at allcosts. 
¡°Oh, hi, Chuck. Yeah. Well, she¡¯s doing better in every respect than people have told us would be the case going in. She doesn¡¯t have any energy and it¡¯s¡ªit¡¯s been an experience like she hasn¡¯t had before. But in terms of her mouth healing, in terms of swallowing¡ªeverything, it¡¯s all going fine. And the people are terrific. Not a lot of pain right now. I think it¡¯s psychological more than¡ªI mean, she¡¯s not finding life any fun at all at the moment but. 
¡°The annual meeting? Well, I would say this, now with Susie¡¯s condition the way it is, I think we¡¯re going to skip the music and just¡ªthere¡¯s no way she¡¯ll be singing in this May¡¯s meeting, so let¡¯s see what happens next year.¡± 
From time to time he still talked about Susie beingable to singagain, even though that wasn¡¯t goingto happen. And only with people with whomhe was very close, such as his daughter, would he drop the occasional hint that he needed help. 
¡°Hello? Hi. I feel fine. I¡¯m getting two hours of sleep every night. Oh, great. Why don¡¯t you come down and 
swap cars with me? Oh yeah, there¡¯s a ham to pick up, incidentally too. It¡¯s here¡­. We will. Maybe tomorrow or something. Okay. Okay? Okay.¡± 
Two hours¡¯ sleep a night. 
¡°If I¡¯m thinking about something I¡¯m not going to sleep. I slept two hours last night, actually, and I feel fine. It doesn¡¯t kill me not to sleep. Susie¡¯s going through this thing again about whether she wants the radiation. 
¡°We¡¯ll get over it. Her inclination over this was going in a worse direction when I left San Francisco but it¡¯s still better than it was when I got there. So. 
¡°The only good thing about Susie having the operation is that this is the first year, in thirty-odd years, that I won¡¯t go to Emerald Bay for Christmas. I¡¯m not even sure my house is there anymore.¡± 
59 
Winter 
Omaha and San Francisco . December 2003¨CJanuary 2004 
Susie was still resistingthe idea of radiation, so anxious about it that she was takinga lot of Ativan. And ¡°Dr. Isley started givingme little Ativan speeches,¡± said Susie Jr., ¡°about how I needed to stop askingfor so much Ativan for her. But she was very agitated about the radiation.¡± 
Warren¡¯s view was that it was a formof handicapping:If radiation improved your odds, why not do it?The surgery, he told her, was the hard part. The radiation wouldn¡¯t be nearly as hard. But the radiation oncologist had told Susie, if anyone tells you about their radiation and says it¡¯s not that bad, don¡¯t believe them. Radiation in your mouth is not like any other radiation. Everythingwill taste like metal. Your whole mouth will be burned. Your salivary glands will be damaged or destroyed. You may lose all your taste buds. There will be a lot of pain. Susie had already had a lot of pain. She felt she had the right to refuse more pain. 
¡°She¡¯s seen a lot of people die, seen people go through more than they needed to go through. We both want control over the end of life. She has no fear of death, but somehow she got the idea that by having radiation, she would lose control and that radiation would increase the chances of a terrible end. We went on for hours and hours, around and around. It¡¯s up to her to decide what to do. But on the other hand, nothing makes sense right now. She keeps saying, ¡®I know my brain isn¡¯t working right.¡¯ And she¡¯s had these two doctors prepare her for sort of a worst-case scenario, in the nicest way, but just because they¡¯d rather do it that way.¡± 
To calm her anxiety, every night she went through a bedtime ritual centered around a songby the singer Bono, who had befriended Susie Jr. after meetingWarren at a NetJets event. Now Susie put on U2¡¯s Rattle and Hum DVD when she was goingto bed and fellasleep to ¡°All I Want Is You.¡± 
¡°All the promises we break From the cradle to the grave When all I want is you¡­¡± 
At the NetJets event, Bono had initiated his connection to the Buffetts when he told Warren that he just wanted fifteen minutes of his time. 
¡°I knew nothing of Bono to speak of. So he asked me a few questions, and for some reason we hit it off. When I gave him an idea and he liked it, he¡¯d say, ¡®That¡¯s a melody!¡¯ And at the end he said, ¡®I can¡¯t believe it. Four melodies in fifteen minutes.¡¯¡­I love music. But actually U2¡¯s music doesn¡¯t blow me away. What interests me is that Bono splits the revenue of U2 among four people absolutely equally.¡± 
Buffett could at times be brutally rational about the way vast sums of money made a person more attractive, funny, and intelligent. Still, his wonderment had never quite ceased that celebrities of any rank sought him out. No matter how coolhe tried to play it, he was flattered that no less a personage than Bono had deemed him smart. When Bono came out to Omaha duringhis Heartland of America tour, he contacted Buffett and through him met Susie Jr. Still a rock-and-roll girl at heart, Susie Jr. in turn was flattered and captivated by the singer¡¯s interest in her. The soulful leader of what some considered the biggest rock band on earth, he had a romantic hipster nobility that appealed to both her and her mother. U2¡¯s music spoke of a spiritual longing for love and peace. Their message¡ª¡°the more you take, the less you feel, you gotta give it away¡±¡ªwas exactly the kind of thingboth Susies would respond to. He invited Susie Jr. to join the board of his charitable operation DATA (Debt, AIDS, Trade, Africa). And he had made a huge impression on Susie¡¯s children too. 
¡°He was just terrific with my grandkids¡ªSusie¡¯s kids, Emily and Michael. He talked to Emily and had an enormous effect on her.¡± 
Bono had invited Emily to work as an intern at DATA the followingsummer. BigSusie, however, had never met her granddaughter¡¯s rock-star boss. She seemed to feelthat she had finished her own personalmission on earth. ¡°Why can¡¯t I just lie in bed the rest of my life,¡± she said, ¡°and the grandchildren can come out, and it will be fine.¡± Is she kidding? thought Susie Jr. This is not goingto happen. ¡°You have to get up!¡± she told her mother. ¡°You can¡¯t just lie in bed the rest of your life! You¡¯lldo the radiation and you¡¯ll get better, and 
you¡¯ll be able to travelagain.¡± BigSusie looked surprised. ¡°Do you really think so?¡± she asked.1 
Finally Susie was persuaded to go through with the radiation. She went in to be measured for the mask that the radiologist had to construct to cover her face so that the radiation could be safely applied. Buffett was now involvinghimself more and more in the details of his wife¡¯s treatment. 
¡°I¡¯m just nuts about her radiologist, who designs the mask and the angle of attack. She shows me on her computer exactly what gets hit from every angle, where the tongue and the vocal cords are.¡± 
Some of Susie¡¯s friends questioned whether she was once again doingsomethingto please everybody else instead of makingher own choices. Nevertheless, she had agreed to thirty-three treatments, five treatments a week, with weekends off, beginningin mid-December. Since the doctors had stressed the importance of continuous radiation, the rationalBuffett ruminated over the fact that the off days happened to coincide with weekends. He thought it awfully convenient for the doctors, and wondered whether his wife¡¯s health was beingcompromised. 
A week after the first treatments began, he flew to Buffalo to announce a new $40 million GEICO service center the company was goingto open near Buffalo to manage its rapid expansion, holdinga news conference with New York Governor George Pataki. The new center would bringtwo thousand or more jobs 
to the state, replacingsome of the 17,700 jobs the Buffalo¨CNiagara region had lost in the past three years. 2 Buffett Carnegized Buffalo, a city chosen for its ¡°smart, friendly people.¡± 
From there, he headed out to San Francisco for Christmas, which occurred duringthe first two weeks of Susie¡¯s radiation. For the first time since the 1970s, she was not goingto be with her children and grandchildren over the holidays. But she wanted everyone else to be together for Christmas, so the rest of the family gathered at Susie Jr.¡¯s in Omaha while Warren and Susie spent the time together in San Francisco. 
For Christmas, Warren and Susie gave each of the kids another six hundred shares of Berkshire stock for 
their foundations¡ªa complete surprise, which thrilled allof them.3 Howie had donated most of his money so far to wildlife and environmental causes, Susie Jr. to education and localcauses in Omaha, and Peter to environmental, Native American, and local causes in Wisconsin.4 With an eye to the future, knowingthat 
they would one day have much larger sums of money to distribute, their parents had decided to give them this gift to train them in philanthropy. Within two years of Warren¡¯s or Susie¡¯s death, thirty, forty, fifty billion dollars or more¡ªdependingon Berkshire¡¯s stock price at the time¡ªwould sluice into the foundation, and the law required that shortly thereafter the foundation begin givingaway five percent each year. Buffett did not believe in perpetual foundations that entrusted money to the whims of future generations of trustees. But with only a couple of employees, the Buffett Foundation was woefully ill-equipped to ramp up fast enough to 
give away a billion dollars a year. 5 Warren had been givingthis problema lot of thought, and it occurred to him that one way Susie could choose to dealwith it was to turn some of the Buffett Foundation money over to the Gates Foundation. The Billand Melinda Gates Foundation had grown since its establishment in 2000 to a multibillion-dollar philanthropy. Gates said that 4.2 billion people in the world, most of the earth¡¯s population, made less than $2 a day. Yet each of their lives was worth as much as any American¡¯s. These people lived in the here and now, not in some generation far in the future. 
¡°Bill Gates is the most rational guy around in terms of his foundation. He and Melinda are saving more lives in terms of dollars spent than anybody else. They¡¯ve worked enormously hard on it. He thinks extremely well. He reads thousands of pages a year on philanthropy and health care. You couldn¡¯t have two better people running things. 
¡°They have done incredible work, they¡¯ve thought it through, their values are right, their logic is right.¡± 
Warren was stillassumingthat Susie ultimately would be the one to make these decisions, however. 
¡°Susie gets all the money. And she is in total charge of everything. My will just gives it to her, and her will just gives it to me. 
¡°It¡¯s crazy to try and write complicated instruments; you don¡¯t need to do it. Now, she could give it all to my kids¡¯ foundations if she wants. She is not restricted. But Susie doesn¡¯t care whether she has one share of 
6
Berkshire or a hundred thousand shares of Berkshire. She will probably just put it all in the foundation. Not a share needs to be sold. In the first year or two, while they were ramping up on other things, if they just matched what the Gateses did and gave them two billion instead of one billion a year, that¡¯d be perfectly appropriate. Don¡¯t get proprietary about it. I¡¯m perfectly willing to let other people do all the work at Berkshire. But they would hate that at the Buffett Foundation. It seems so lacking in imagination and innovativeness. Even though it¡¯s terribly logical. 
¡°Now, that isn¡¯t what people want to do. I mean, the normal human institution reacts enormously against that. But that is not a crazy system. It¡¯s like doubling your position on a stock. 
¡°He¡¯s got people in place. And if we gave some money to him, the last half of the money would be used as intelligently as the first half. There would be very little falloff in utility of the last dollar versus the first dollar. Giving money to other foundations, it¡¯s just not what foundations like to do. But there¡¯s nothing wrong with copying good people.¡± 
Coattailingby givingsome of the money to the Gates Foundation while the Buffett Foundation was ramping up to give away its tens of billions might be completely logical. What wasn¡¯t completely logical, given the current circumstances, was for Warren to assume that Susie would be the one makingthese decisions, rather than himself or his daughter¡ªand to operate under this scenario without a backup plan. Although maybe he was startingto have the embryo of a backup plan. 
Over the holidays, Susie grew despondent again about her radiation. She threatened to discontinue it. Buffett went through another stretch of spendinghours and hours convincingher that she had gone this far and it didn¡¯t make sense to stop. No matter what Susie decided, however, the radiation schedule would have two interruptions¡ªat Christmas and New Year¡¯s. Warren steamed. ¡°It bothers me that they take off for the holidays as well as weekends. She¡¯s had eight radiation treatments. It just doesn¡¯t seem right. And the radiologist acknowledged to me that dropping the schedule to four days a week is somewhat marginal.¡± 
Susie was stillnot wellenough to receive any new visitors. Neither of her sons had even seen their mother 
since the surgery. But Howie, his wife, Devon, and their son, Howie B., finally joined Warren in San Francisco for a couple of days. Howie, still a one-man chorus line of Rockettes when it came to energy, saw Susie ¡°just a touch.¡± But the family was stillnot allowingother people to visit. 
¡°She¡¯d just as soon conserve her strength as see anybody. Frankly, there¡¯s a number of people that are just dying to get at her. Some of them she¡¯s a huge crutch for, and all they¡¯ll do is drain her if they get close, because she can¡¯t stop being their resident psychiatrist or professor or whatever. She feels a little safer when I¡¯m there, but she knows that if she starts seeing other people, they¡¯ll basically try to draw energy from her. With me or with Little Sooz she doesn¡¯t feel that way. But even with my sister or her best friend, Bella, she can¡¯t help but go back into the mode where she¡¯s giving and they¡¯re receiving.¡± 
Susie Jr. had instructed everyone around her mother to keep things upbeat. There were things that her mother was unaware of, that had to be kept fromher, and which Susie Jr. monitored the fax machine to make sure her mother didn¡¯t see. Susie didn¡¯t know that Larry Tisch had died of cancer or that Bill Ruane had called Warren to say that he had been diagnosed with lungcancer. 
Ruane was doingchemo at Sloan-Kettering, where Susie had gotten her second opinion. Warren got tears in his eyes every time Ruane¡¯s name was mentioned. The combination of this and Susie was too much. He had some time ago abandoned the thousand-calorie-a-day diet. 
¡°Susie¡¯s weight has been quite stable for the past two weeks. We keep a chart of it. I eat a chocolate sundae, she eats a little bit of the chocolate sundae. And since my diet is naturally fattening, it helps her. I¡¯m gaining weight, and she¡¯s stayed stable. She¡¯s in no danger of becoming anorexic.¡± 
On New Year¡¯s Eve, Nancy Munger was throwingCharlie a bigeightieth-birthday party. Buffett flew down to Los Angeles for the celebration. He desperately needed the distraction, though it obviously bothered him that he would be attendingthe party alone, just as it had bothered himto show up at the Buffett Group meetingalone. 
He had ordered an oversize cardboard cutout of Benjamin Franklin for a stand-up routine satirizingMunger¡¯s fascination with Franklin. Buffett had to ship the cardboard cutout to California in advance. Although he obsessed about whether it would arrive on time, it did, and he put on a classic performance, which included his singing ¡°What a Friend I Have in Charlie.¡± 
Munger closed the festivities with a speech. He began by givingadvice to the audience, in the latest iteration of various commencement and other speeches he had given elsewhere. Charlie¡¯s friends and relatives and members of the Buffett Group allhad copies of these speeches, now collected into a book, Poor Charlie¡¯s 
Almanack.7 Munger¡¯s favorite construct was to invoke CarlJacobi: ¡°Invert, always invert.¡± Turn a situation or problem upside down. Look at it backward. What¡¯s in it for the other guy? What happens if all our plans go wrong? Where don¡¯t we want to go, and how do you get there?Instead of lookingfor success, make a list of how to failinstead¡ªthrough sloth, envy, resentment, self-pity, entitlement, allthe mental habits of self-defeat. Avoid these qualities and you will succeed. Tellme where I¡¯mgoingto die, that is, so I don¡¯t go there. 
Munger¡¯s other favorite theoremaccused every academic discipline¡ªbiology, physics, economics, psychology, and so forth¡ªof developingcertain usefulmodels, then applyingthemindiscriminately, wearing blinders. He advocated a ¡°multidisciplinary modelapproach¡± to avoid the proverbial ¡°man with a hammer syndrome¡±¡ªthe man who thinks everythingis a nail. Munger collected models and laid themout as useful tools for life. He had a devoted followingwho appreciated the way he sliced through the Gordian knot of difficult problems, often by sayingthe unspeakable. They found his synthesis enlightening; some in this camp felt that Munger¡¯s genius was underrecognized because he was swallowed up in the showman Buffett¡¯s shadow. In recent years, however, Munger had become a more visible advocate for his views. He was always comingup with mind-bogglingarcana as illustrations. Right now, he was fascinated with the lay magistrate system of England as a model for properly incentivizingethical behavior, and various aspects of that system were invoked in his birthday speech. Munger wandered off on a brief detour to praise his wife for her many wonderful qualities, then returned to givingadvice to the audience about the models of life that led to success and happiness. He seemed convinced, however, that he (and Buffett) now lived on some elevated plane. He invoked his independence, and Buffett¡¯s, as reasons for their success, but then said it would probably be unwise for others¡ªincludinghis own children¡ªto try to emulate the two of them. 
Nancy Munger, who was standingnext to Buffett, asked, ¡°How do I get himto stop?¡± 
Charlie started goinginto his windup. ¡°In the end,¡± he said, ¡°I¡¯mlike old Valiant-for-Truth in The Pilgrim¡¯s Progress, who said, ¡®My sword I leave to himwho can wear it.¡¯¡± Good Lord, thought some of the Buffett Group members. 
Eventually Nancy went out onto the stage and gently led Charlie away. 
Buffett went straight back fromCharlie¡¯s party to San Francisco to see Susie, who had just finished her twelfth treatment. The radiation schedule drew out his protective instincts. 
¡°Four and a half weeks left. Martin Luther King Day is in January. Those radiology technicians¡ªoh, believe me, they take every holiday there is. But, anyway, I would say so far so good. They¡¯re saying that this week is when it starts hitting her hard, but it hasn¡¯t hit her hard yet. She drinks what she calls this motor oil, and that¡¯s protecting her throat.¡± 
Nonetheless, Susie was spendingmost of her time in bed. ¡°It¡¯s just amazing how little she is up. She¡¯s either asleep, or getting ready to go to sleep, or getting up from being asleep, I would say seventeen or so hours out of twenty-four. We make it a point, no matter what¡ªwe walk for six blocks or so every day. The rest of the time, I just hold her, basically.¡± 
The man who had always been on the receivingend was now learningto give. Rather than beingtaken care of by his wife, he was takingcare of her. Buffett, of course, had not become some other person. But by actingout his values¡ªloyalty, stewardship¡ªhe seemed, in his own way, to have incorporated some of the lessons of Susie¡¯s life into his own. 
60 
FrozenCoke 
Omaha and Wilmington, Delaware . Spring 2004 
Toward the end of her radiation, Susie¡¯s mouth was so burned and dry that some days she could not eat or drink. The doctors put her back on the feedingtube because her throat was choked with a thick, dry mucus. She spent most of the time sleeping. But every day, she and her daughter or Kathleen walked a few blocks on Sacramento Street. As springstole over San Francisco, Susie stayed bundled in a coat, gloves, scarf, and earmuffs to stay warm. 
She hated to be alone. ¡°Can¡¯t you just sit on the couch and look at magazines while I¡¯mawake?¡± she asked Susie Jr. Then she scribbled, ¡°WHT,¡± her father¡¯s initials, on a piece of paper, a wry reference to the family trait of becominganxious when alone. 
She was cared for by her nurses, Kathleen, her daughter, and John McCabe, her former tennis coach, who after many years of lookingafter her once they had both moved to San Francisco, was well-schooled in actingin a one-hundred-percent supportive role. Anyone else, however, was likely to trigger her ¡°giving¡± 
impulses and to drain her of energy. 1 On the weekends, when Warren came, he sat with Susie in the TVroom watchingold episodes of Frasier, or simply hungaround in his bathrobe, readingthe paper. Susie was comfortable with himthere; he made her feel secure¡ªbut decades of her ¡°giving¡± and his receivingdidn¡¯t disappear overnight. Sometimes Susie was so sick from the radiation that even Warren had to leave. But he was doinghis best to immerse himself in the day-to-day needs of his family in a way that he had never done before. To give his daughter a break fromendless days in Susie¡¯s apartment, Warren would take her to Johnny Rockets for a burger. The rest of the time he spent with Sharon. 
He had even gotten involved in the minutiae of Susie¡¯s radiation treatment, however. ¡°Her taste buds aren¡¯t gone yet. I talked to the radiation oncologist, and it¡¯s conceivable that some of the tongue won¡¯t get hit by what they¡¯re doing, which could presumably mean a fair number of taste buds would stick around.¡± 
Warren Buffett¡ªthe man who ducked the subject of a common cold and used terms like ¡°not feelingup to par¡± as euphemisms for illness; the man who changed the subject uneasily whenever anyone spoke of physical complaints and who professed ignorance of the most basic points of anatomy¡ªwas usingterms like ¡°radiation oncologist¡± and doingmedical homework for his wife. 
But as he grew more optimistic about Susie¡¯s recovery, he started to become more irritable and needy. The business events of the year 2004 began to consume him, in between the trips he made back and forth to San Francisco every weekend. Unlike the ascendingjourney to glory of 2003, this would be a very different kind of year. Moreover, early in 2004 he was deprived of his regular source of support. Sharon Osberghad gone on a lengthy trip to Antarctica with his sister Bertie. On a ship cuttingthrough the ice, she was reachable only by occasionale-mails. He filled the hours by scribblingaway at his letter to shareholders, e-mailingit back and forth to CarolLoomis, and by servingas teacher and unpaid father confessor to corporate America. He had become the elder statesman of the business world. Buffett always said, Be long-termgreedy, not short-term greedy. People turned to himbecause they trusted his direct way of gettingto the heart of things and his sense of right and wrong. Although rich beyond even his own wildest dreams, he had passed up a lot of opportunities to make more money or to make it faster. This had brought himpower and respect of a different sort. He was not feared like so many businessmen. He was admired. 
Prominent people made the pilgrimage to Omaha or sought him out at events to ask for his influence and help. Sports figures like Michael Jordan, LeBron James, Cal Ripken Jr., and Alex Rodriguezcame for advice. Bill Clinton stopped by for lunch to get advice on fund-raisingfor his new charity. Buffett was also pals with Mike Bloomberg, got alongwith John McCain, and maintained a good relationship with the senior Bushes and other Republicans like Chris Shays. He endorsed Senator John Kerry for president, but Kerry was not The Candidate, and unlike the entertainingtriumph of the Schwarzenegger campaign for governor of California¡ªSchwarzenegger most definitely was The Candidate¡ªBuffett found himself associated with a respected senator who had no charisma. 
The less-than-electrifyingKerry campaign meant that Buffett focused far more on his business relationships 
during2004. CEOs like Jeffrey Immelt of General Electric, Anne Mulcahy of Xerox, and Jamie Dimon of JP Morgan showed up in Omaha to pick his brain.2 The Internet-search firmGoogle was goingpublic that summer, and its cofounders, Sergey Brin and Larry Page, were stoppingin to see himbecause they admired his shareholder letters. The previous fall, after her indictment for lyingto the government in connection with allegations of insider trading¡ªfor which she was never charged¡ªMartha Stewart and her CEO Sharon Patrick had come out to Omaha to visit him. Buffett bought Stewart and Patrick a steak dinner, but couldn¡¯t solve Stewart¡¯s legalproblems. 
The environment for prosecution of white-collar fraud was changingrapidly, partly because there was just so much white-collar fraud to prosecute these days. New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer, who had launched a merciless attack on corruption in business and on WallStreet, now led the SEC and the Department of Justice in a three-legged race to see which agency could prosecute most zealously. The others hopped alongdesperately tryingto keep up with Spitzer¡¯s pace; all their charges got bundled into one trial or settlement in the end. Spitzer was diabolically inventive at usingthe new electronic tools of the Internet ¡ªespecially e-mail¡ªas evidence, at harnessingan accommodatingpress as a weapon, and at wieldingan arcane New York statute, the Martin Act, that gave him virtually unlimited powers, checked only by his personal¡ªand virtually nonexistent¡ªsense of prosecutorial discretion. 
With these tools, he had forced two prominent CEOs to resign¡ªBuffett¡¯s business colleague Hank Greenberg, who was now the former CEO of AIG, and his son, Jeffrey Greenberg, the former CEO of insurance broker Marsh & McLennan. A pall of fear hungover corporate America; Spitzer was so successful at execution-by-media that the bitter joke had become that he was savingthe government the cost of indictment and trial. Juries that formerly treated white-collar malefactors with deference were now routinely sendingthemto prison like any other criminal; under new mandatory sentencingguidelines, judges were imposingharsh sentences on them. Some of this mayhem was well-deserved. Greed, hubris, and lack of enforcement had given many people in business the impression that the rules did not apply to them. Just as stock options and the Internet bubble had engorged the senior echelons of business¡¯s wallets at an exponentialspeed, so had the backlash arrived in gargantuan proportions. Buffett¡ªlike most of corporate America¡ªhad not fully adjusted to this new environment; his view of proportion was shaped by the earlier era: defined by the carefulprosecutorialcalibrations of former SEC Enforcement Chief Stanley Sporkin and 
U.S. Attorney Otto Obermaier; by the travails of Salomon, when even Paul Mozer, who nearly brought down the whole financial systemafter Gutfreund failed to report his crime, had only served four months in prison. His viewpoint would eventually be revised, however, by the outcome of events that had occurred at Berkshire Hathaway itself. 
Buffett usually arrived at the airport to pick up his guests personally. He took themon a nerve-rackingride to the office (if, that is, they were not too dazzled by him to notice), spent a couple of hours listeningto their issues and throwingout ideas, then usually escorted them to Gorat¡¯s and treated themto a T-bone and hash-brown meal. He told themto be plainspoken with shareholders in annual reports, to pay employees in alignment with shareholders, not to run their business accordingto the whims of WallStreet analysts, to deal with problems forthrightly, not to engage in accountingshenanigans, and to choose good pension-plan advisers. Sometimes people asked how to manage their own money, but while he gave themsome basic ideas, he didn¡¯t hand out stock tips. 
To all those who felt the life of a CEO under scrutiny was not what it used to be, Buffett talked about ¡°the ninety-eighth floor¡± in terms a CEO could understand. People who were lookingdown fromthe top at everybody else had to keep things in perspective. So what if they got knocked down a few pegs or lost some of their money? Those who stillhad their family, their health, and a chance to do somethingusefulfor the world should try to count their blessings, not their curses. 
¡°If you go from the first floor to the hundredth floor of a building and then go back to the ninety-eighth, you¡¯ll feel worse than if you¡¯ve just gone from the first to the second, you know. But you¡¯ve got to fight that feeling, because you¡¯re still on the ninety-eighth floor.¡± 
He considered himself on the hundredth floor most of the time. However, duringthe spring, 2004 was definitely shapingup to be a ninety-eighth-floor kind of year. He waited with impatience as Susie suffered through her radiation until the moment later in the springwhen her doctors would perform an MRI to determine whether the treatment had knocked out the cancer cells. Business was also problematic on various fronts: Buffett felt that he had ¡°struck out¡± when it came to bringinghome the gingersnaps:new acquisitions and new stocks to buy. Berkshire had around $40 billion in cash or the equivalent, which was ¡°not a happy 
position.¡±3 
Most of the companies within Berkshire Hathaway were doingwell¡ªeven the beleaguered General Re had finally but truly reversed course and posted an underwritingprofit in 2003. But GEICO had just emerged from a bitter price war and was locked in a battle for customers with its archrival, Progressive. GEICO had run a commercial in 1999 featuringa popular new character, the GEICO gecko. But GEICO¡¯s Internet presence was laggingbehind Progressive¡¯s Web page, which let customers comparison-shop. Buffett had been thinkingabout the Internet and auto insurance for a decade now; he went to meetings at the company¡¯s headquarters near Washington and repeated one statement over and over: ¡°He who wins the Internet, wins the war.¡± He waited impatiently for the Internet business to reach its potential. Berkshire had appointed a new board member, Charlotte Guyman, a former Microsoft executive. The board now had its first woman, who also lowered the average age. Buffett said, however, that he did not seek board members for their demographics. He wanted ¡°owner-oriented, business-savvy, interested, and truly independent¡± board 
members.4 Now Buffett sent Sharon Osbergand Guyman to Washington to help GEICO speed up its Web site improvement. ¡°I have totalconfidence in GEICO,¡± he said, all the while invokinghis new Internet mantra, He who wins the Internet, wins the war. 
Buffett paid more attention to GEICO than almost any other business he owned, simply because he loved it. He was also a great fan of both Tony Nicely and his co-CEO Lou Simpson, whose investingtrack record he now trumpeted to shareholders in his annualnewsletter for the first time. For the past twenty-five years, Simpson had averaged 20.3 percent, beatingthe market by an average of 6.8 percent a year. The stocks he bought were different fromBuffett¡¯s, but the method was the same, and his record was almost as good as Buffett¡¯s own. Now it was obvious why Buffett granted him so much autonomy and paid himso well. Simpson qualified as another of the Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville. Admittedly, however, as competition increased, the Superinvestors¡¯ job was gettingharder allthe time. 
Still, the challenge of findingnew investments wasn¡¯t nearly as severe as bird-doggingthe ones that Berkshire already had. Coca-Cola was again evolvinginto a nightmarish preoccupation. Since the death of Goizueta, quarter by quarter, month by month, its business had grown steadily worse. New evidence of accounting manipulation appeared like barnacles on Coca-Cola¡¯s earnings; the stock had sunk below $50, froma high in the $80s. In percentage terms it was hoveringsomewhere around the sixtieth floor. 
DougDaft had earned a reputation for volatile moods and byzantine politicking; a number of senior members of management had departed duringhis tenure.5 His subtle tweakingof the four main Coke brands had produced unspectacular results, alongwith column after column of copy meowingat inept ads.6 Pepsi had 
pulled off a huge success with Gatorade after Coca-Cola failed to make that dealwith Quaker Oats back in 2000. Then, a whistle-blower declared that Coca-Cola rigged a marketingtest for a fountain product called Frozen Coke to impress a longtime customer, Burger King. The whistle-blower had also accused Coke of accountingfraud, and the SEC, the FBI, and the U.S. Attorney¡¯s office started investigating. The company¡¯s stock price shrank to $43. Buffett had had enough of the ¡°managed earnings¡± that underlay these problems, in which the Wall Street analysts¡¯ predictions of what a company would earn enticed managers to digbehind the sofa cushions in order to ¡°make the numbers,¡± thereby meetingor beating ¡°consensus¡± expectations to please investors. Because the vast majority of companies had tried to set, then surpass WallStreet¡¯s expectations instead of simply reportingwhat they earned¡ªmakingthe practice uniform¡ªeven a penny-per-share shortfallmade themlook as though they were havingproblems and often led to precipitous declines in stock prices. Thus, companies claimed they ¡°must¡± manage earnings, in a vicious, self-fulfillinggame. But ¡°earnings management¡± was a sort of Ponzi-ing. If carried on longenough, a petty formof cheating snowballed into larceny. 
¡°I can¡¯t tell you how much I hate managed earnings in terms of what they do to people. The nature of managed earnings is that you start out small. It¡¯s like stealing five bucks from the cash register and promising yourself you¡¯ll pay it back. You never do. You end up the next time stealing ten bucks. Once you start that kind of game, it draws everybody in. The organization picks up on it, people get cute and clever, and it snowballs. I gave these speeches after we discovered it. I told them, ¡®Now the monkey¡¯s off our back. We don¡¯t have to predict anything to the analysts. Let¡¯s just give the damn handout showing the results 
7 
every year, and whatever we earn, we earn.¡¯¡± 
Buffett wanted out of the game. If asked off the record what his worst business mistake was, he no longer listed ¡°sins of omission¡± instead, he said, ¡°Serving on boards.¡± He was weary most of allof the way it tied his hands. Coca-Cola had changed its policy of requiringdirectors to retire at age seventy-four to one that merely required directors at that age to submit a letter of resignation for the board to consider. Leavingthe Coke board would have let himtap-dance off into the sunset. But for the savior of Salomon to snub a company in trouble would be like stickinga dagger in the stock. ¡°I wouldn¡¯t stay on the board, except I don¡¯t feel like leaving the other guys¡± to dealwith the mess at Coca-Cola, Buffett said. His pro forma letter was, of course, rejected. This was seen externally as a power play to maintain the coziness of a board of cronies. Buffett had no idea what a plateful of misery he had just ordered. 
As soon as the proxy statement was filed with Buffett¡¯s name listed for election as a director, Institutional Shareholder Services, a powerfulorganization that consulted on shareholder votingand voted proxies on 
behalf of institutional investors, told its clients to withhold their votes for him. ISSsaid that Buffett¡¯s independence as a member of the audit committee could be affected by the fact that Berkshire Hathaway companies like Dairy Queen and McLane bought $102 million of Coca-Cola products. At a time when scandals involvingconflicts of interest had shaken confidence in institutions rangingfromthe church to the military, the government, and business and nonprofit organizations, accusations of conflicts of interest and questions of governance were taken with a new seriousness. The cronyism of Coca-Cola¡¯s board could have been attacked on other grounds, but ISSlacked any sense of proportion in applyingits principles regarding conflict of interest. Its lack of proportion was in keepingwith the lack of proportion shown by most who were attackingbusiness at the time (which, to be fair, some in the business world had more than earned)¡ªbut nonetheless, disproportionate it was. Since Berkshire¡¯s purchases of Coke for its businesses were trivial when compared to Berkshire¡¯s ownership stake in Coke, which was huge, how could Buffett¡¯s behavior as a 
member of the audit committee or the board of Coca-Cola be said to be compromised?8 
The rules of ISS, however, were based on a checklist, with no leeway whatsoever for common sense. CalPERS, the powerful California Public Employees¡¯ Retirement System, also decided to withhold support for half of Coke¡¯s directors, amongthemBuffett, in his case because the audit committee on which he sat 
had approved the auditors to do nonaudit work.9 While CalPERSwas takinga principled stance on auditors, this recommendation was sort of like puttingout the candles on a birthday cake with a fire extinguisher. 
Buffett made a quasi-joke of it in public, sayingthat he was payingCalPERSand ISSto rally votes against him as an excuse to get off the board. But in fact he was mad, especially at ISS. It seemed obvious to him that the billions of dollars¡¯ worth of Coca-Cola stock that Berkshire owned grossly outweighed the Coke products that Berkshire Hathaway bought. 
¡°If I were a wino off the street, those amounts they¡¯re talking about might be significant. But I own eight percent of Coca-Cola. We¡¯ve got so many more dollars in Coke than anything else. How would I possibly favor Dairy Queen¡¯s interests over Coke¡¯s when I own so much more of Coke¡¯s stock?¡± 
Herbert Allen sent an emotional letter to the Wall Street Journal, citingthe Salemwitch trials, when ¡°reasonably stupid people accused reasonably smart and gifted people of beingwitches and castingspells. Then they burned them¡­. Up untilthe geniuses at ISSsaid it, nobody knew that Warren was really a 
witch.¡±10 
When corporate board members were surveyed, they unanimously thought Buffett was their dreamdirector. ¡°We would come and wash Buffett¡¯s car to have him on our board¡­. There¡¯s not a person in the world who wouldn¡¯t take himon their board¡­. CalPERS¡¯s action shows the stupidity of corporate governance run amok¡­analogous to an NFL coach preferringan unknown quarterback from a Division II college instead of a Super Bowlquarterback¡­. If you were a shareholder, given the choice to have Warren Buffett on that 
board or not, you¡¯d want him.¡±11 The Financial Times referred to ISSas the Darth Vader of corporate governance, citinga position that ¡°smacked of dogma.¡±12 With inkwells of backlash spillingall over them, 
CalPERSand ISSbegan to look foolish, ¡°somewhere between hideous and self-promotingpopulists,¡± as one retired CEO put it on the survey. ¡°How could you bringyourself to a position where you would vote against him as a director and think that was a pro-shareholder thingto do? What a ridiculous piece of advice.¡±13 
ThrowingBuffett off the board to improve the audit committee was like firingyour doctor because you were still sick. What Coca-Cola needed was more Buffett, not less. ISSresponded by sayingthat it was not advocatinga vote against Buffett. Rather, it was sayingto ¡°withhold¡± votes fromhimbecause of his position 
on the audit committee.14 But withholdinga vote was not votingfor Buffett, no matter how you parsed the words or why you said you did it. The more ISSexplained, the less anyone was convinced. 
The bigger problemwas that ISSwas not just givingadvice. Because so many investors had simply delegated their votingrights to it, ISSwas more like a single behemoth shareholder that controlled as much as twenty percent of all the board votes for major corporations in the United States. The securities laws had not anticipated that a situation could arise in which one unregulated, magisterial ¡°shareholder¡± held so much power over American businesses. But there it was. 
Buffett had a passionate view of corporate board responsibilities, founded in his partnership and based on alignment of interests. ¡°I think owners should behave like owners, and I think they should care about independence. And so those guys are right on two out of three. It¡¯s just that they don¡¯t have the faintest notion of what independence is about or how boards actually work. This checklist approach is totally crazy. If we¡¯d gone out and found somebody in the unemployment line and paid them $125,000 to be a Coke director, they¡¯d be considered ¡®independent.¡¯ And CalPERS and ISS would have no problem voting for him, even though he depended completely for his income on that paycheck from Coke.¡± 
Studies, however, had shown either no correlation or negative correlation between board independence and a firm¡¯s performance.15 But for the Coke board to railagainst ISSalso lacked a certain credibility and seemliness. Now that Coke¡¯s stock was barbecue, its board members could convincingly summon no more than low to middlingdudgeon. The accusations of a ¡°crony board¡± neared the mark. Although it had factions, one faction ruled; or rather misruled; Buffett admitted that he should have done more to try to steer things right at Coke. Indeed, if Coca-Cola had been run by him, assisted only by a six-pack of Cherry Coke, perhaps many of its woes could have been avoided. 
Instead, a brew of important people¡ªseveral of themtitanic personalities, and all of themaccustomed to beingin charge¡ªcould not sit back and simply allow themselves to be led by a weak CEO; they had spun into a vortex. That Daft had improved Coca-Cola¡¯s profits, sales, and cash flows and had mended poisonous relations with the bottlers were not enough to turn things around for him. In February, Daft suddenly told the board he was resigning. 
Daft was unpopular in many quarters, but his announcement set off dismay at the prospect of more bad publicity for Coca-Cola. This time the next guy in line could not be simply plugged into the job. Some board members viewed that as the chance to finally do the job right. In a move that had instantly attracted controversy, however, concurrent with the announcement of Daft¡¯s resignation, seventy-seven-year-old Don Keough had joined the board; Keough, who had been sometimes referred to as the ¡°shadow¡± CEO, became chairman of the search committee. He and Buffett now spent hours on the phone tryingto find a leader for Coca-Cola. 
The search for a fourth CEO in eight years quickly turned into a spectacle. The board looked at Coca-Cola¡¯s president, Steve Heyer, once considered a shoo-in, but the board members split over him, and once outside candidates were proposed, his chances began to fade. Various celebrity CEOs considered then turned down the job. Each rejection fed the media another bit of Schadenfreudenfodder. Slit-eyed rumors gathered for a chat. Maybe Coke would buy another company. Maybe it would sell itself to Nestl¨¦. 
Buffett flew to the April20 board meetingin Wilmington, Delaware, the eveningbefore the Coca-Cola shareholder meeting, prepared for two days of intense work. He was not lookingforward to the readingof the results of the director election, which would show a significant percentage of the vote withheld fromhim. 
In the faded grandeur of the old Hoteldu Pont, Buffett began with the meetingof the audit committee, which was still conductingthe inquisition and preparingto do corporate penance over the SEC investigation of earnings management.16 
¡°If you don¡¯t come clean the first time you discover it, you¡¯re stuck. And that may mean giving up your job too. I can see how it happened. Roberto was a wonderful guy. He did a good job of running the company. And the rest of them were decent people, pretty much. But if Roberto told them, ¡®I want you to ship some extra cases,¡¯ it would have been unquestioned at the Coca-Cola Company.¡± 
The audit committee felt all this had been concealed from them. Buffett, sentenced to remain on the Coke board for another year, knew of no realsolution except: Clean up the damned mess and never do it again. He moved on to the finance committee, then the executive committee. The board had various thorny issues to address. At last the eveningended. 
The next morning, as he was gettingdressed before headingdown to the meeting, he reflected on the coming day¡¯s events. The Teamsters would already be cloggingthe street in front of the hotelwith their blue tractor-trailer truck parked amongthe students wavingsigns that said ¡°Coca-Cola Destroys Lives, Livelihoods, and Communities¡± and ¡°Killer Cola, Toxic Cola, Racist Cola.¡± He couldn¡¯t see fromthe window, however, whether the Teamsters had brought their twelve-foot-high inflatable rat. The Coke shareholder meetingwas becominga rite of brand-buildingwithin the activist community. 
Then the phone in his hotelroomrang. He picked it up and found the last person he was expectingon the other end of the line¡ªJesse Jackson. Jackson merely said that he wanted to express his admiration for Buffett. They talked for a minute or two of things of no consequence, and hungup. That¡¯s odd, thought Buffett. In fact, it was the first sign that this was goingto be the Coca-Cola shareholder meetingto end all shareholder meetings. 
Downstairs, protesters in the lobby outnumbered the shareholders. The glassblowers¡¯ union handed out bumper stickers to protest the company¡¯s purchases of bottles fromMexico.17 Protesters handed out leaflets accusingCoca-Cola of conspiringwith paramilitary groups in Colombia to assassinate labor leaders. College students protested Coke¡¯s presence on their campuses. Buffett quick-stepped across the lobby to the ballroom, where he was recognized and let inside, alongwith the rest of the directors. He sat down in the front row. The other attendees picked up credentials, then passed through security, their packages scanned by metaldetectors as they surrendered cellphones, cameras, recorders. The security check amid the gilded moldingand crystal chandeliers gave the place the feelof a crowded and unpleasant government palace in some former colonial outpost that had suffered through one too many dictatorships. The travelers seemed to have arrived at some dreary but dangerous destination. Coca-Cola put little brochures around the lobby highlightingits community projects and offered a cooler of Coke and Dasaniwater for people to grab on their way to the stiff-backed shoulder-to-shoulder seats into which the shareholders wedged themselves for the two-hour journey through the Kafka novel that a modern annual meetinghad become. 
DougDaft made some brief introductory remarks fromthe podiumbetween the two long, funereal, white-covered tables behind which the other executives had barricaded themselves. He asked if there was any discussion of the proposal to elect directors. Buffett, seated up front with the rest, turned around when Ray Rogers, president of Corporate Campaign, Inc., an agitator-for-hire group that worked mainly for labor unions, stood up and yanked the microphone fromthe floater who was workingthe aisles. Rogers started yellingthat he had withheld votes ¡°untila number of terrible wrongs are righted by this board.¡± Coca-Cola, he said, was ¡°rife with immorality, corruption, and complicity in gross human rights violations, including murder and torture.¡± Daft was a liar, he screamed, the company¡¯s leadership operated with ¡°unrestrained greed,¡± and the company was an ¡°utter pariah¡± in the United States that made its money ¡°on the destruction of a lot of communities.¡± As Daft tried to reassert controlof the meetingwith all the success of a substitute teacher, Rogers continued shouting, shufflingthrough what appeared to be many pages of text. Daft told him his time was up and asked himto stop speaking, but Rogers carried on. The audio people turned off the microphone¡¯s sound, but Rogers¡¯s vocalcords were far too well-exercised to be daunted by the mere absence of amplification. Finally, a group of six security guards wrestled himto the floor and carried himaway as the audience stared in shock and Daft stood by helplessly, tryingto restore order, pleading, ¡°Be gentle, please,¡± 
to the security guards. Then he muttered audibly to a colleague, ¡°We shouldn¡¯t have done that.¡±18 
After this steer-wrestlingsession ended, the roomsettled into a jittery hush. Sister Vicky Bergkemp of the Adorers of the Blood of Christ took the microphone next. She gave a short speech about AIDSand asked the management of Coke to informthe stockholders of the business effect of the AIDSpandemic on Coca-Cola. Since AIDShad nothingto do with Coca-Cola¡¯s business, management agreeably supported this proposal. Then shareholders introduced other proposals havingto do with their view of excessive compensation given to management. The company recommended votes against allof these. 
At last, the results of the election of directors were reported. This was the moment Buffett had been dreading. ¡°Each of the nominees for election of director have received over ninety-six percent of the votes,¡± said the generalcounsel, ¡°with the exception of Mr. Buffett. Mr. Buffett received over eighty-four percent of the 
vote.¡±19 
Beingsingled out in public as the least-wanted director at Coca-Cola was humiliating. Never before had a group of shareholders rejected him. Even though CalPERSand ISSaccounted for virtually allof the sixteen percent of the votes against him, and institutional investors had for the most part ignored CalPERSand ISS and championed him, it didn¡¯t feel like a triumph. Rarely had Buffett regretted servingon boards as much as he did at this moment. However, there was little time for himto dwell on it, because Daft opened the microphone to shareholder questions, and the Reverend Jesse Jackson promptly stood up and hijacked the meeting. 
¡°Mr. Daft, and members of the board,¡± he began in rollingtones, ¡°let me say at the outset¡­that while many disagreed with the first person makinga comment¡­his violent removal¡­was beneath¡­the dignity¡­of this company. It was¡­an overreaction¡­. It was¡­an excessive use of power¡­. I¡­would like to know,¡± Jackson asked rhetorically, ¡°if there is a person of color¡­in the mix under consideration for the job¡± of CEO. The college students¡¯ complaints about Coke on campus and accusations that the company had murdered union leaders in Colombia now seemed anticlimactic. Daft struggled to conclude the most disastrous shareholder meetingin Coca-Cola¡¯s history, as board members vowed to themselves that the way this meetinghad escaped the CEO¡¯s controlmust never be repeated. 
After the fiasco, the search for a CEO took on the feelingof an emergency. Steve Heyer, the internal candidate, had been ruled out at the last board meetingand was headingoff to pursue other business interests at Starwood Hotels, complete with a huge and controversialseverance package that would, once again, embarrass Coca-Cola. Finally, the board reached out to another candidate they had been discussing, sixty-year-old Neville Isdell, who had retired after beingclotheslined years before by DougIvester. A tall, charismatic Irishman who had been raised in South Africa, Isdell was popular with the board. By then, however, Coca-Cola could do nothingto please its audience. ¡°Bringingin the old guys¡± was the reaction. 
¡°They hired another Daft.¡±20 Isdellwas already presumed a future victimof the board¡¯s ax, for the board had earned a fearsome reputation for irksomeness and whimsical behavior.21 
Yet this was the same board that had sat primly for years as if it were Goizueta¡¯s footstool. It was only after Goizueta¡¯s untimely death left the leadership in shambles that the board, which for the most part consisted of the same people who had served under Goizueta, had split in two. Duringthe six-year interregnum, a small group of directors had grabbed for the reins of the RealThing¡¯s runaway stagecoach. All the while, the company missed consumer trends and made strategic mistakes. To catch up and correct the problems, Coca-Cola needed a determined and tough CEO who could tame the faction on the board that became overbearingwhen deprived of a dominant leader to keep themin line. How longIsdell would survive would depend on how stronga leader he turned out to be. 
Buffett gave his speech about managingearnings; Keough started to help Isdell, as he helped every new CEO. Isdellaccepted the help, but as it turned out, he wouldn¡¯t need allthat much. 
61 
TheSeventhFire 
New York City, Sun Valley, Cody . March¨CJuly 2004 
Buffett had spent twenty-six weekends in San Francisco. He and Susie had watched almost a hundred episodes of Frasier together. The family remained protective. She stillsaw almost no one else. 
She was startingto eat fresh food. Her friend TomNewman, a caterer and chef, tried to interest her in somethinghealthier than ice creamand chocolate malteds, and made her pureed carrots, creamed spinach, 
mashed potatoes, eggsalad, and ¡°anythingwhere I could get her some proper nutrition.¡±1 
In March, she went for her first MRI scan since the surgery. Buffett knew the stakes associated with this event. Susie had said she would have no more surgery. 
¡°She won¡¯t go back into the hospital. She won¡¯t. I think the odds are reasonably good, but¡­¡± 
The MRI came back clean. Buffett was overjoyed; he said that Susie¡¯s doctors told her that this meant she had the same odds of a recurrence as if she had never had cancer. Susie may have put it this way to Warren because she thought that this was what he needed to believe, but what Dr. Schmidt had actually told her was 
that she could probably count on one good year. After that, the future was uncertain.2 
Months of beingtrapped inside by illness, just as in her childhood, affected Susie predictably. As weak as she was, her pent-up urge to live her life again exploded. ¡°I¡¯m goingto see my family,¡± she said. ¡°I want to see everybody. I¡¯m goingto do everythingI want to do until Dr. Schmidt tells me not to.¡±3 
The first thingshe wanted to do was go to the Laguna house and have the grandchildren come visit. For Warren¡¯s sake, she wanted to attend the Berkshire shareholder meeting. She wanted to be strongenough to attend the premiere of Peter¡¯s multimedia show, Spirit¡ªThe Seventh Fire, which was to take place in Omaha in July. She had a longlist of other goals as well. 
Susie¡¯s hair, which had been light-colored for the last few years, was close-cropped now; her youthful face looked a little slimmer but otherwise no different than before. She spoke with a slight lisp, but it was easy to forget what had happened and not notice how little energy she had. 
Buffett¡¯s preoccupation was whether she would be able to attend the shareholder meetingin May. The meetinghad taken on such symbolismto himthat a measure of how much people cared about himwas their willingness to travelto Omaha for this event. Susie¡¯s presence reassured him; she was not a spectator but part of the show. If she could not attend, it was as though his leadinglady would be missingfrom the stage. 
*** 
The Buffetts had triangulated the shareholder weekend so that Astrid (who considered the whole thinga bore and was pleased to be excused) accompanied Warren only to the backstage social events, just as she did in real life, while Susie attended the ¡°official¡± public social events in the role of ¡°wife.¡± She sat in the directors¡¯ section at the meetingand sangonstage with Al Oehrle¡¯s band in the mall at Borsheim¡¯s on Sunday afternoon. Buffett¡¯s supportingcast of loyalDaisy Maes had grown larger over time, and he cared very much that they attend as well. Fromtime to time throughout the weekend, a clankingsound heralded the approach of Carol Loomis wearingher bracelet hungwith a collection of twenty-seven matchbook-size gold and enamelcharms, facsimiles of the Berkshire Hathaway annualreports¡ªone for each year she had edited Buffett¡¯s words. Sharon Osbergbecame part of the show by takingon any shareholder who wanted to play bridge with a champion on Sunday afternoon in the bigwhite tent outside Borsheim¡¯s. Buffett had not yet figured out a way to put his latest Daisy Mae, Devon Spurgeon, to work. Spurgeon, the former Wall Street Journal reporter who had covered Berkshire for a while, was startinglaw schoolin the fall. Buffett had made Spurgeon one of his new people, a great rarity that now occurred only at intervals of years. Buffett had actually suggested that she get married at the meeting, where he would walk her down the long, longcenter aisle to the front and give her away as a bride. ¡°Imagine how many gifts you would get from Borsheim¡¯s,¡± he said. Genuinely touched by his offer¡ªbut warily envisioningnews stories portrayingher nuptials as the Berkshire version of a Moonie wedding¡ªSpurgeon and her fianc¨¦ Kevin Helliker decided to get married in 
Italy instead. Buffett had granted her a seat with the managers in their reserved section;4 Osbergand Loomis, who were de facto family, sat in the section reserved for family and directors. 
Everyone else had to scramble to avoid a place in the rafters. This year, so many requests for passes had 
come in that almost twenty thousand people were expected. 
A black market of scalpers had sprungup on eBay, sellingmeetingcredentials for as much as $250 for four passes. Buffett was mildly awestruck. Who ever heard of tickets scalped to a shareholder meeting? The eBay listingsaid: ¡°Possibly meet in person Warren Buffett or ask hima question at the meeting¡­. Winningbidder also receives the visitor¡¯s guide. The pass also allows you employee pricingat Nebraska Furniture Mart and Borsheim¡¯s Jewelry Store¡­. BBQ party¡­Cocktail party at Borsheim¡¯s¡­Shareholder party at Buffett¡¯s favorite steak house¡­View displays frommany of the Berkshire companies.¡± 
As much as the P. T. Buffett loved it, Howard Buffett¡¯s son wanted the scalpingstopped. He couldn¡¯t allow people to be gouged by scalpers just to attend the shareholder meeting. The man who, a year or two earlier, had professed (for good reason) ignorance of technology set up his own e-tailer on eBay, hawkingmeeting credentials at $5 a pair. People e-mailed anxiously. Would these credentials be ¡°real,¡± or would they look different, stigmatizingthe buyer as not a ¡°real¡± shareholder? The question implied that this would be awful, labelingthemas not a member of the ¡°club.¡± 
But, no, the credentials would be real, however obtained. And with that, Berkshire Hathaway¡ªonce a cozy club made up of rich partners whom Buffett considered friends¡ªsuddenly became a fan club. Buffett had opened up the tent and invited everybody in. 
*** 
Omaha¡¯s brand-new Qwest Center rose like a great silver circus tent near the Missouri River. Its facade reflected like a mirror on the grimy old Civic Auditorium across town, scene of the last four meetings. Kelly Muchemore strode around the floor for days ahead of time with her walkie-talkie, overseeingforklifts filled with bales of hay and crates of flowers, lampposts, and tons of mulch that would be landscaped into garden and seatingareas in the exhibition hall. Construction crews built neighborhoods of booths to display awnings, air compressors, blocks of knives, encyclopedias, vacuum cleaners, and picture frames. Workers installed signage markingthe ¡°Berkyville¡± streets and avenues that snaked in between the furniture showroom, the kitchenware store, the Western boot¨Cfittingarea, the Bookworm book shop, the candy store, the insurance sales counter, and the women¡¯s shoe store. Upstairs in the arena, the stage crew set up the white-covered table with microphones backed by oversize screens where Buffett and Munger would sit, while the lighting crew tested the panel that created the orchestrated light show that would open the event. A ¡°star¡± private dressingroom was outfitted backstage so that Susie would have a place to rest. An armored truck pulled in with a $250,000 pair of jeweled cowboy boots destined for the Justin exhibit. A movie projector and screen and giant pillows waited in a casbah party room, where the hundreds of exhausted Berkshire Hathaway employees who would be workingfree of charge could dragthemselves to collapse after the event. 
Buffett bounced around the office like a teenager. Visitors, includinga group of college students, dropped in to see him. His voice grew hoarser as the week wore on and the number of visitors kept increasing. Everyone nagged at himto save his voice for the presentations, but he ignored them, sprayed his throat, and kept talkinganyway. Requests for more than a thousand tickets had come fromTexas, two thousand from California, and another fifteen hundred from outside the United States. A group of seventy-seven people had chartered a plane to fly fromAustralia. 
By Friday Buffett¡¯s voice sounded like someone recoveringfrom a bad cold. Still, he refused to stop talking. But Buffett never had stopped talking, never once in his life. Since he was a little boy and astonished his parents¡¯ friends with his precocity; since he gave his high school teachers advice on stocks; since the Alpha Sigs gathered around to hear himlecture at fraternity parties; since he and Ben Grahamheld a duet around the conference table at Columbia; since he had sold GEICO as a prescriptionist; since he¡¯d first picked up a stick of chalk and taught investingat night; since he¡¯d bewitched people at cocktailparties in Omaha and dinner parties in New York; fromthe first meetingof the partners to the last; fromthe day he answered Conrad Taff¡¯s questions at the original Berkshire shareholder meetingin Seabury Stanton¡¯s old loft to the latest group of students who had shown up at his door¡ªas longas he could be teachingsomethingto somebody, Buffett had never ceased talking. 
On Friday night, he spoke to a small group at a dress rehearsal,5 then headed to a private dinner hosted by Charlie Munger. Before dawn the next morning, caterers arrived with food for the press box, the backstage area, and the vendors¡¯ Beehive Caf¨¦. People dressed in sport coats and polo shirts and T-shirts and shorts and bigyellow foamhats were already lined up in a scene resemblingMacy¡¯s the morningafter Thanksgiving. When the doors opened at seven a.m., they ran for the arena and marked out the best seats. By eight-thirty, every seat was filled. When the lights dimmed, talkingceased instantly. Nobody whispered, nobody straggled in late. The audience was waiting, rapt. The music began and the movie rolled. 
The filmingof the introductory movie for this year¡¯s meetinghad consumed a large portion of Buffett¡¯s energy in the spring, in between trips to San Francisco and longphone calls about the problems of Coca-Cola. For the first time, it had involved realHollywood scripting, professional studio camerawork, and¡ªto Buffett¡¯s almost orgasmic delight¡ªthe use of a body double. His very own doppelganger! He had been watchingit over and over in the office, anticipatingthe audience¡¯s reaction. 
The new governor of California¡¯s face appeared on the screen. Arnold Schwarzenegger was wearingdrill-sergeant gear and sittingbehind an elaborate desk in a fully stocked workout room. The movie rolled through a parody of An Officer and a Gentleman, in which Arnold, in the Lou Gossett Jr. role, browbeat Bufffett¡¯s body double through a torturous workout, as punishment for havingtalked indiscriminately to the Wall Street Journal about California¡¯s bizarre, inequitable property tax laws duringthe gubernatorialelection. Buffett had feuded with the Journal over its selective use of his words, and won an apparently resoundingvictory in readers¡¯ minds by writinga letter to the editor about his viewpoint and postingit on the Berkshire Web site. Since then, he had been simultaneously playingthe incident up and tryingto live it down. 
¡°You want to quit! Say it! Say you want to quit!¡± roared Arnold. 
¡°No sir! You can¡¯t make me say it! No sir! I¡¯ve got nowhere else to go!¡± shouted Buffett. But then he started cruisingthrough the workout as easily as if he were sittingin his chair at home, readingthe Journal. 
The scene dissolved to the governor¡¯s office, Arnold sleeping, head on his desk. 
Aide: ¡°Mr. Governor.¡± 
Arnold: ¡°I got nowhere else to go!¡­Huh?¡± 
Aide: ¡°Power-nap time is over, sir. Time to get to work on some more propositions to fix this mess we¡¯re in.¡± 
Arnold: ¡°What?Oh, okay. Wow. I just had the strangest dream¡­.¡± 
He picked up a magazine on his desk and his face twisted. On the cover of Muscle & Fitness was Buffett¡¯s smirkingface superimposed on the bulked-up, posing, Pumping Iron Schwarzenegger body. Arnold reared back, his expression a strangled mask of fear.6 
Here it was, Buffett¡¯s deliriumdream. To pull it off had taken hangingout with the world¡¯s best bodybuilder and a little camera magic, but he had finally done it. He had made it into the modern-day equivalent of the Big Arms book. Pudgy Stockton would be so impressed. 
The audience roared. Then the movie rolled on, featuringWarren and Charlie, but especially Warren as a superhero, in any number of guises. Most of the skits and cartoons emphasized Buffett and Munger as cheapskates. 
Afterward, the auditoriumwent dark for a moment. Then while the stage lights rose, Susie, in a pink sweater and skirt, lookinga few pounds lighter, walked briskly out onto the floor toward the directors¡¯ section immediately in front of the stage and sat down. Next, Buffett and Munger entered like a couple of graying talk-show hosts and sat down at a white-cloth-covered table. Enormous screens displayingthemhad been positioned all around the arena, so everybody got a close-up look. Buffett was staringout at a dark arena filled with flashinglights and as many people as would show up in Nebraska to see the RollingStones. 
Before takingquestions, Buffett kicked off the meetingwith rapid efficiency to cover a normally perfunctory five-minute business agenda of electingdirectors, ratifyingauditors, and the like. This year, almost immediately, one of the shareholders stood up at a microphone and said in a timid voice that he was withholdinghis vote; he offered a motion fromthe floor. He asked that Buffett consider usingsome of the CEOs of his companies as directors because they were better qualified than Susie and Howie Buffett. 
An audible ripple shuddered across the auditorium. The motion, even though presented in a respectful tone, felllike a bigwet blot to mar the smooth, engraved surface of the shareholder meetingagenda. Most of the audience was shocked. Berkshire was now the fourteenth-largest business in the United States, with over 172,000 employees, $64 billion in revenues, and profits of $8 billion a year. But it remained at heart a family corporation; as the largest shareholder, Buffett had the votes to elect a couple of board seats for family members if he wanted. He saw his family¡¯s role in Berkshire as similar to the Walton family¡¯s at Wal-Mart, a nexus between the Buffett Foundation and the company. Unquestionably, the way he chose his board was purely personal, although some board members happened to be successfulbusinessmen. 
¡°Thank you,¡± said Buffett. ¡°Charlie, do you have any thoughts on that?¡± 
This puntingto Munger¡ªno quick comeback or pithy comment¡ªwas a measure of Buffett¡¯s complete discomfiture. However, it also put Munger on the spot, since anythinghe said might imply that he had some influence on how Buffett chose his board. He had none whatsoever, so Munger simply said, ¡°I think we should go on to the next item.¡± 
Another motion came to the floor. TomStrobhar, on behalf of Human Life International, one of the organizations that had boycotted Berkshire Hathaway and successfully forced the company to end its charitable-contributions program, gave a speech about abortion that was, as he later wrote, ¡°ostensively 
[sic]¡± disguised as a proposalthat Berkshire publish a list of its political donations.7 
Buffett merely said in response that Berkshire hadn¡¯t made any politicaldonations. The motion was voted down. 
The business section of the meetinghad now consumed half an hour instead of its usualfive minutes and for the first time had borne a vaguely unpleasant resemblance to the Coca-Cola meeting. All this time, shareholders holdingwritten-out questions had been patiently lined up at the numbered platforms equipped with microphones stationed all around the arena. Now Buffett opened the questioningby askingto hear from ¡°microphone number one.¡± As the questions began, his wheels churned on the issue that was botheringhim. He used a question on another topic as an opportunity to address the issue of his family as board members. His wife and son, he said, were on the board as ¡°guardians of the culture. They¡¯re not there to profit themselves.¡± 
It was a remarkable moment. For the first time, he had to defend in public the way he ran his company. Afterward, however, nobody else asked anythingrelated to this topic. The shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway were content with things as they were. Buffett had earned the license to run his company any way he damn well pleased, as far as they were concerned; they were a happy lot. How was the investingclimate? they asked. Our capital is underutilized now, he said. It¡¯s a painfulcondition to be in, but not as painful as doingsomethingstupid. 
Somebody asked Buffett about ISSrecommendinga vote against himon the Coca-Cola board. The issue still lingered. ¡°I think it was Bertrand Russell,¡± he said, ¡°who said that most men would rather die than think. Many do.¡± 
¡°The cause of reformis hurt, not helped,¡± Munger added in a tart voice, ¡°when an activist makes an idiotic suggestion like the one that havingWarren on the board of the Coca-Cola Company is counter to the interest of the Coca-Cola Company. Nutty activities do not help the cause for which the person speaks.¡±8 
As happened every year, someone asked what Buffett was doingwith all those warehouses of silver he had bought a few years ago. He paused for a minute, then said he couldn¡¯t comment. Munger made some unintelligible noises in the background and the shareholder sat down, unenlightened. In fact, the silver had been sold. 
Buffett and Munger started eatingpeanut brittle, and people went downstairs to the basement exhibition hall, where thirty-seven Berkshire Hathaway subsidiaries were sellingproducts, and bought out all the peanut brittle in the See¡¯s Candies shop. When Buffett and Munger started eatingDairy Queen Dilly Bars, the Dilly Bars sold out. Many people bought boxes of candy and took themback to the meetingupstairs, where they sat listeningto Buffett and bingeingon sweets. 
In the course of answeringthe many repetitious questions he was asked in between the new and insightful ones, Buffett managed to work many of the items he wanted to discuss into his responses. This year he used the meetingto expound on his ¡°Why I¡¯mDown on the Dollar¡± theme. The U.S., he said, was like a family that spent more than it earned. Americans were buyinghuge amounts of products fromother countries and didn¡¯t have the income to pay for them, because we weren¡¯t sellingas much to other countries as they were sellingto us. To make up the difference, we were borrowingmoney. Those who were lendingit to us might be less willingto do so in the future. 
Now, Buffett said, we were spendingmore than two percent of allour income just to pay the interest on our national debt, and that meant the situation would be hard to turn around. Most likely, he thought, at some point foreign investors would decide they liked our realestate and businesses and other ¡°real assets¡± better than our paper bonds. We would start sellingoff pieces of America, like office buildings and companies. 
¡°We think that over time the U.S. dollar is likely to decline in value against some of the major currencies,¡± he said. Therefore, the economy¡ªwhich had been pretty wonderful over the past twenty years, with both low interest rates and low inflation¡ªcould at some point reverse. Interest rates probably would be higher, as would inflation, which would be an unhappy situation. As always when he made predictions, he couldn¡¯t say when. In the meantime, however, he had bought $12 billion of foreign currency to hedge Berkshire¡¯s dollar risks. 
While Buffett and Munger were talkingabout the perils of debt, people rolled down the ramps and escalators to the shoe department and waited in lines to pull out their credit cards. Fitters from Tony Lama and Justin sold a pair of boots a minute:workaday plain Westerns to fancy lizard models. Over at Borsheim¡¯s, on the west side of town, more than a thousand watches and 187 engagement rings were beingsold. The Furniture Mart was doinga record $17 million of business. 
The convention center had many of the elements of a carnival; a GEICO gecko waved at passersby next to a NASCAR race car. A character dressed as a foamAcme brick hooked up with a foam ice-cream-cone character. A rodeo clown stalked the floor on stilts amongthe air compressors and boat anchor winches. At the south end of the exhibition hall, risingabove the crowd, just as Buffett had pictured it, stood a full-size Clayton Home, clad in beige sidingwith a tidy front porch, sand-colored shutters, and a realgrass lawn and brick foundation bedecked with shrubs. And just as he had foreseen, a queue snaked back and forth behind a 
zigzagrope, as if it were Space Mountain at Disneyland.9 
But it was the Fruit of the Loombooth that epitomized Berkshiredom. The Fruit of the Loombooth never had to hand out key chains or free playingcards. People stood waitingin longlines to buy a five-dollar pack of men¡¯s briefs and have their picture taken with the guys wearinggrape and apple suits. By the end of the day, nearly every pack of underwear would be sold. 
The black-and-white See¡¯s Candies store, conveniently positioned in the middle of the exhibition hall, also had jammed aisles¡ªso jammed that it ran out of lollipops, salted nuts, and peanut brittle in less than three hours. Many of the customers did not bother to pay. Those takingthe five-finger discount hooked huge amounts of candy as well as dozens of pairs of shoes from the shoe store, while, above their heads, Buffett and Munger talked about honesty and the ethical way of life. 
As yet unaware of the thievery takingplace beneath their feet that might force themto consider installinga Berkyville jailby the bookstore next year, Buffett and Munger ambled on, answeringquestions and chompingon sweets as they talked their way through the entire six hours. 
Any normalperson would be exhausted after puttingon a six-hour live, unscripted performance, but when the meetingended, Buffett and Munger went upstairs to a large roomand parked themselves at a desk, signingautographs so that shareholders who had come from foreign countries could get closer to them. This was a recent idea of Buffett¡¯s. Munger sat through it patiently, but he was gettingtired and sometimes talked with bemusement of this circus that Warren had created. He, too, enjoyed beingworshipped, but never would have gone to the trouble to stage-manage and encourage it, the way his partner did. 
*** 
Susie had left to go lie down after the first couple hours of the meeting. She skipped the Sunday brunch, but flew to New York with Warren on Monday. She stayed in bed in her hotelroomuntilone in the afternoon, mashingup pills in room-service ice cream. Susie Jr. watched over her to make sure she didn¡¯t get trapped into overextendingherself. She wanted her mother to limit her outings to one thinga day¡ªone visitor, one 
shoppingtrip, one fifteen-minute visit to the hotel lobby.10 
Susie did attend the traditional dinner party that Sandy and Ruth Gottesman held in their honor every year. Since the mid-1990s, this had become the one time that many of the people in the Buffett Group could count on seeingtheir old friends duringthe annualNew York trip. Now Susie Jr. said to Ruth Gottesman, ¡°She¡¯s goingto try to do more than she should. She¡¯s goingto say she¡¯s fine. She¡¯s goingto lie to you,¡± and she asked for help in protectingher mother. Most of those who gathered at the Gottesmans¡¯ had not seen Susie at all duringthe past year, except perhaps at the shareholder meeting, and then only briefly. She sat in one room and Warren in another, while people came in to greet themand chat. Many people would later recallthe event as emotional. Susie declared that she was glad she had gone. But afterward, she was exhausted. 
Warren also wanted her to do an interview with public-television talk-show host Charlie Rose. Susie said many sentimental and flatteringthings about her husband, and explained that she provided Warren with ¡°unconditional love.¡± She also discussed her move to San Francisco, sayingshe left, as she told Warren, because ¡°I would like to have a place where I can have a roomof my own. It would be nice.¡± On Astrid, ¡°She took care of your man for you?¡± asked Rose. ¡°She did, and she takes great care of him, and he appreciates it and I appreciate it¡­she¡¯s done me a great favor,¡± Susie said. Perhaps because of the set-up question, this exchange made clear that Susie viewed Astrid as the tool through which she managed Warren ¡ªsomethingthat Susie may not have intended to reveal quite so bluntly. Afterward, she said to Susie Jr., 
¡°Let¡¯s go to Bergdorf¡¯s.¡±11 There, she sat on a chair and looked at some things but soon said she was tired and went back to the hotel. 
A couple of days later, on Mother¡¯s Day, her energy rebounded in time to accept an invitation to meet her daughter¡¯s friend Bono at the Tribeca FilmFestival. Bono had been faxingher letters duringher recovery, which Susie Jr. would read to her. The letters, accordingto Susie Jr., ¡°were sort of this giant thingto her.¡± By May, after goingto sleep every night listeningto Bono sing, she had grown passionately interested in meeting the messianic singer. The two had a brief encounter, and ¡°I just can¡¯t even explain to you how excited she was,¡± says Susie Jr. 
Susie went to bed and rested for two days. Then Bono, his wife, Ali, their daughters, and Bobby Shriver (the brother of Arnold Schwarzenegger¡¯s wife, Maria Shriver), who had cofounded the African-aid charity DATA with Bono, came over to the Plaza Hotel to meet Susie for lunch in the diningroom. For three hours, Susie and Bono sat talking. Then he presented her with a portrait that he had painted froma photograph of her, overwritten with some of the lyrics to the U2 song ¡°One.¡± Susie was overcome. Bono invited her to visit him in France with Susie Jr., who was comingfor a meetingof his foundation board. 
When Susie returned to San Francisco, she immediately gave a place of honor to the picture, makingroom for it amongall the other art and masks and decorative items on her walls. Then she made up her mind to go to France. The Africa vacation had been canceled once again, for she was far too weak to make that trip. But she thought she could go to France. She and Susie Jr. started by spendingfour days at the Ritzin Paris, where Susie recovered fromthe trip across six time zones by followingthe get-up-at-one-p.m.-pills-in-ice-cream routine while goingout once a day to do somethingsimple. Then they took the TGVbullet train to Nice, to Bono¡¯s salmon-colored stucco mansion in Eze Bord de Mer. 
This house, where Gandhi was said to have once prayed, sat on a point overlookingthe Mediterranean. Susie¡¯s high-ceilinged bedroomwas warmed by a fireplace and lit by expansive windows framed in gauzy white curtains that opened onto the sea. She spent most of her days sleeping, but one afternoon Susie Jr. called her upstairs to a terrace overlookingthe water while Bono played music from How to Dismantle an Atomic Bomb, U2¡¯s unreleased album. He was singinga songhe had written for his father¡¯s funeral: ¡°Sometimes You Can¡¯t Make It on Your Own.¡± That eveningthey spent four hours talkingover dinner, and Bono stood up and toasted her, saying, ¡°I¡¯ve met my soul mate!¡± 
Her reverence for the charismatic rock star had grown so duringthe course of gettingto know himin person that the next day, on the plane home, Susie stayed awake and played U2 music on her iPod the entire way. ¡°I can¡¯t explain the rest I got there,¡± she would later say about Bono¡¯s house.12 
Roughly a week after the two Susies returned fromFrance, most of the family went to Sun Valley, while Peter and Jennifer stayed in Omaha, settingup for the premiere of his show, Spirit¡ªThe Seventh Fire. After the longyear of pain and isolation, Susie was makingup for lost time by tryingto see everyone and go everywhere. At Sun Valley she spent time with various people, includingBarry Diller and Diane von Furstenberg, an oral-cancer survivor whose faxes and advice had helped to keep up Susie¡¯s morale over the past months. But the feelingof liberation was not unqualified. She was so tired that she had to skip the first morninglecture. At lunch later that day, when she ventured across the restaurant to get some skimmilk, she was suddenly mobbed by people who wanted to wish her well. Susie Jr. sent Howie to rescue their mother, saying, ¡°She can¡¯t do this. She¡¯s goingto keep trying, and she can¡¯t. Go make her sit down.¡± 
On the second day, Susie Jr. got a golf cart to take her mother around. When Susie Jr. walked into the condo to pick her mother up, she was shriveled in a little ball on the couch crying, saying, ¡°I can¡¯t do it.¡±13 Even though she spent much of the trip resting, it drained her tiny store of energy. 
When the family returned to Omaha, with everybody on hand for the upcomingpremiere of Peter¡¯s show, Susie took the opportunity to visit her daughter¡¯s new knittingshop. Susie Jr. had gotten together with a partner to open Stringof Purls in a suburban shoppingcenter. Buffett was genuinely excited at his daughter¡¯s entrepreneurialism. He could relate to a knittingshop. He had analyzed its prospects and thought it might gross as much as half a million dollars a year. Once again he could bond with his daughter in a special way. He was as enthused over the knittingbusiness as any other business:It attracted himfor the same reason he pored over GEICO¡¯s reports and tracked the growth of their Internet sales week by week; monitored the See¡¯s Candies sales at every single retail store every single day duringthe holiday season; read the daily sales figures by fax from Shaw Carpets; reviewed the daily reports from Borsheim¡¯s before Christmas; memorized real estate listingstatistics fromHome Services of America (the real-estate company that MidAmerican Energy owned); recited jet-fuelcosts and ownership statistics for NetJets; and knew ad lineage fromthe Buffalo News by heart. 
Peter¡¯s multimedia event was nothinglike the knittingshop; it was harder for Buffett to comprehend. Based on the PBSspecial Peter had done earlier, it had consumed four years of effort, duringwhich he focused on improvingthe execution and experience of the live performances while refiningthe music and story line. And all of this work would have no certain result¡ªexcept the satisfaction of the creative act. 
Buffett had seen the earlier live performances and knew the show involved Peter on keyboards with a band; a special theater shaped like a tent; lasers, drums, video, and Native American singers and dancers. Warren always gave students advice to pursue their passion, but the examples of passion he used, like becoming backgammon champion of the world, were competitive at their core. Someone driven by an inner fire of artistry, irrespective of the world¡¯s rewards, was simply off the map of his reality. That was Susie¡¯s territory, the realmof spirit and souland heart, of the poet in her lonely room, of the painter strivingfor self-expression on canvas for years with no public recognition of his work. Nonetheless, his own passion and patience and creativity as he worked with capitalresembled Peter¡¯s passion and patience and artistic vision with music. Thus, Buffett¡¯s genuine wish for Peter¡¯s success found its expression in the best and only way he knew¡ªin the marriage between art and commerce. The show¡¯s potential for commercial success preoccupied him. 
¡°I¡¯ve seen it several times, and I¡¯ve seen different iterations of it almost every time. It gets enthusiastic responses, but what I don¡¯t know is just how big the market is. It¡¯s not like a Broadway musical, in terms of the depth of the market, so we will find out.¡± 
The Buffett name had worked heavily against Peter when it came to raisingmoney, because people assumed that he had easy access to unlimited funds. People did not take himseriously about not havingmoney untilhe actually mortgaged his house to fund the show. Warren, typically, offered to pay the last ten percent of the cost if Peter could raise the rest. When he had raised two million of the total, his father went ahead and gave him $200,000 of the $300,000 he had promised. Peter then raised the rest of the money himself, much of it through a grant fromthe Rudolph Steiner Foundation. From start to finish he struggled against heavy odds to raise funds while tryingto stage and produce the show at the same time. His parents, duringthe same months, waived their ¡°no donations¡± rule and wrote a $10 million check to TomMurphy¡¯s Save the Children as a gesture of friendship and support. 
It seemed a little chilly¡ªeven in the name of cultivatingself-reliance¡ªto support their son¡¯s cause with only two percent of what they gave a family friend. With hindsight, however, Peter was grateful that his show did not become a vanity project funded by his father¡ªwhich no one would have taken seriously. He felt that the way his father handled it was one of his typically brilliant solutions to complex problems. It gave Peter his family¡¯s endorsement, for which he was grateful, while stillallowinghimthe struggle and pride of raising most of the three million needed by himself¡ªalthough he could have used that last hundred thousand dollars. 
Warren did not quite understand his son¡¯s fascination with Native Americans. He (and much of the rest of the family) thought of it as ¡°the Indian show.¡± Warren had never been self-reflective, and the show¡¯s symbolic exploration of stolen identity, and the triumph of man¡¯s willin reclaimingwhat was lost, escaped him. 
Spirit¡ªThe Seventh Fire was a dazzlingstory acted by a Native American who told the story of his return from the modern world to reclaim his cultural heritage. The self-enclosed stage resembled a tent, spacious and intimate, contemporary yet historic. Peter¡¯s music, exotic yet familiar, flowed and pulsed around the audience while Native American performers in wildly feathered costumes danced and sangagainst a background of epic film. 
Susie had been angry at Peter all springover his obsession with the show. Peter had a much different personality fromhis father, but Susie felt that he risked turninginto a musical version of Warren, of jeopardizinghis marriage to Jennifer. She could take in all of the effects and feelings in the show, however, and let the music intensify her other senses. She appreciated Peter¡¯s artistic accomplishment. Warren loved music and was proud of his son, but, sittingat the premiere, the show¡¯s multilayered kaleidoscope of visual impressions overwhelmed him, leavinghimuncertain what to make of it. He looked at others in the audience and saw people clappingand cheering, which told him that the show was good. And when the Omaha World-Herald called it ¡°poignant, sad, uplifting, thrilling, and powerful,¡± he was delighted. He had been internally holdinghis breath in anticipation of this moment for more than a year, and his relief that Peter had succeeded on such a large scale was obvious. But he also feared, with reason, a hometown bias and waited to see if the show would be well-received elsewhere. 
As Spirit continued to play in Omaha, Susie went to Laguna with a group of her grandchildren. They were used to Susie indulgingtheir wishes and givingherself to their needs, goinghere and there with them, the perfect grandmother; she didn¡¯t disappoint themnow. She took themshoppingat the mall, like old times, sittingin a chair and pointingat things around the store, saying, ¡°I¡¯lltake one of those, and two of these, and 
one of those.¡±14 After this visit, she was exhausted, but began to prepare herself for the annual trip to Herbert Allen¡¯s post¨CSun Valley gathering. 
The wisdom of spendinganother longweekend with a crowd of people at the high altitude of Cody, Wyoming, so soon after Sun Valley, seemed questionable. Some in the family were strongly against her makingthis trip. But Susie was doingcartwheels at the sheer joy of living, and Warren wanted to feel that everythingwas back to normal. Thus, the last week of July, Warren and Susie reunited for a longweekend at Herbert Allen¡¯s J¡ª9 ranch. 
Susie struck people as exuberant, elated to be there.15 At dinner in the great room, where an oversize 
fireplace took the chilloff the high mountain air, she was chatty and outspoken, proposingthat the guests take a straw pollabout the upcomingelection.16 Afterward, when the table had been cleared and everyone was thinkingabout dessert and coffee, she stood in the kitchen, tellingpeople how much closer her illness 
had brought her to her daughter.17 Suddenly, she blinked and said there was somethingfunny goingon inside her head.18 For a split second, Herbert Allen thought she was doinga silly dance step. Then he realized she was goingdown. As her legs buckled, he and Barbara Oehrle caught her before she hit the floor.19 
They carried her to a nearby couch, where the yoga teacher Herbert Allen had brought in for the weekend held her. They sent Warren off to their cabin to get her pills. Susie¡¯s health had always been so uncertain, and she had pulled through so many other crises, that nobody thought it was that serious. Still, they put through a call for paramedics. Warren called Susie Jr., who was at the Democratic Convention in Boston with Bobby Shriver and BillClinton, watchingJohn Edwards speak. He said somethingabout a headache and asked for Dr. Isley¡¯s phone number. She gave it to him and he hungup. She wondered briefly if somethingwas wrong, 
then thought, My mother could have broken her toe and he would be callingfor Dr. Isley¡¯s number.20 
Lyingon the sofa, Susie was havingtrouble liftingher arm. She vomited a couple of times and said she was very cold and her head hurt terribly. They wrapped her in blankets. She began driftingin and out of consciousness, at times strugglingto speak. Warren had managed to get the information about her prescriptions that the paramedics would need. As he observed Susie¡¯s condition, he grew more and more distressed; it was becomingapparent that she had probably had a stroke. The other guests waited, helpless, for the ambulance to arrive. The time passed slowly. After a while they allgrew more hopefulwhen Susie commented that her head felt better and started respondingwhen asked to move her arms and feet. Then the paramedics arrived and did a few tests. They placed her onto the ambulance cot and wheeled her outside, as Warren followed. After liftingher into the back of the ambulance, they climbed inside and shut the door. Warren got into the front seat and the driver began the thirty-four-mile journey through the windingmountain 
roads to West Park Hospital in Cody.21 
As soon as they were in the ambulance, Warren called Susie Jr. ¡°You need to come here,¡± he said. ¡°Somethinghas happened to Mom. I think she¡¯s had a stroke.¡± A few minutes later he called again and said, ¡°You need to find your brothers and bringthemwith you.¡± 
Susie Jr. reached Peter in Omaha, where he was in his hotelroompreparingfor the show. She found Devon in a Wal-Mart in Indiana. ¡°Where¡¯s Howie?¡± she asked. ¡°In Africa,¡± said Devon. ¡°He¡¯s landingin about half an hour.¡± Susie Jr. tried to hurry the NetJets plane that was comingfirst to Boston to pick her up and then to 
collect Peter in Omaha before continuingon to Cody.22 By then, Howie had landed in Africa and gotten word to callhis sister right away. His first thought was, Something¡¯s happened to my dad. His second thought was, Something¡¯s happened to Peter. ¡°I absolutely did not think it was my mom,¡± he says. He was horrified 
to be stranded with no way to get a return flight untilthe next day.23 
While Susie Jr. worked on logistics, Herbert Allen and a friend, Western sculptor T. D. Kelsey, followed the ambulance in Allen¡¯s car. They grew frustrated at how slowly the ambulance was proceeding; it upset them that Buffett was trapped inside and subjected to the interminable ride. At one point they pulled up alongside the ambulance and Allen shouted at the driver, askingwhat on earth was goingon, but no one answered. 
When they finally reached the hospital, the CATscan revealed that Susie had had a massive cerebral hemorrhage. Warren paced back and forth in the emergency room, and eventually the doctor came out and told himthat Susie had little chance of lastingthrough the night. Tearfuland distraught, he went out to the lobby and told this to Kelsey and Allen.24 Then he walked back upstairs and sat in the roomwith Susie, waiting. They were alone. 
At around four-thirty a.m., the plane carryingSusie Jr. and Peter arrived. After their car pulled into the hospitalparkinglot, its mountain backdrop much like that at Sun Valley, the first person they saw inside the lobby was Herbert Allen. Susie Jr.¡¯s first thought was ¡°Oh, my God, this feels just like Mrs. Graham.¡± 
Upstairs, they found their father sittingnext to their mother, holdingher hand. A Cherry Coke sat untouched on the table nearby. ¡°I¡¯ve been here for five hours,¡± he said. Susie was so quiet, you couldn¡¯t see her breathingunderneath the little oxygen mask. 
Warren went to lie down on the bed in the adjoiningroom. Peter lay down on the floor, and both fellasleep. Susie Jr. sat down in a chair next to her mother on the bed, touchingher. 
A little while later, she realized that Susie wasn¡¯t breathing. She went and found a nurse. Then she braced herself and woke her father up to tell him.25 
Warren wept while his children spent the next few hours doingwhat had to be done. They worked with Herbert Allen to draft a press release, signed off on the papers required for the release of the body and the organ-donation procedures, took care of the arrangements for their arrivalin Omaha, and made calls to Astrid, Kathleen, and others who were close to Susie and Warren so they wouldn¡¯t get the news on the CNN crawl. By noon allof themwere on the G-IVfor the worst flight any of themhad ever taken. 
After some time in the air, Warren took a deep breath and asked, ¡°Is there a bathroomin the front?¡± There wasn¡¯t. ¡°Walk with your back to the couch,¡± Susie Jr. told him. He inched his way to the back of the plane, his eyes averted fromthe plane¡¯s sofa, where the zippered bagthat contained Susie¡¯s body lay.26 
When they landed in Omaha, the family had another surreal experience as the plane taxied straight into the hangar, where a hearse was waiting, rather than stoppingon the tarmac, so that they could deboard without havingtheir grief invaded by a band of paparazzi. Warren went straight home, walked upstairs into his bedroom, shut the door, turned off the lights, and got under the covers. 
Astrid knew what to do, which was nothing. She made sure he had his sleepingpills and left himalone. Now and then she went over to Susie Jr.¡¯s and cried herself. The rest of the time she stayed at home to take care of Warren. 
The next day, Friday, he was stillunder the covers. Ron Olson, who had some legalobligations under Susie¡¯s will and was a close friend and stronginfluence within the family, particularly with the children, arrived from Los Angeles with his wife, Jane. Warren came downstairs, and the Olsons sat with himfor a while. Within an hour, the phone rang. It was Don Graham. ¡°Where are you?¡± asked Susie Jr. ¡°At the Hilton downtown,¡± he said. He had known to come without beingtold. Then Susie Jr. drafted a couple of her own friends to join them at the house. Over the next several days, they all sat in the livingroomto help distract Warren and make sure that he was never alone. At nine-thirty each night, he went up to bed and took his sleepingpill. 
A day or two later Warren tried to call a couple of people. When they answered, no words came out; his throat had closed. He gave up tryingto talk and heaved with sobs for a few minutes. Then, when the storm of tears passed, he choked out, ¡°I¡¯msorry,¡± and hungup the phone. They would never have known who it was, except that the sound of Warren sendingout an SOSwas so unmistakable. 
Susie Jr. had already sent for the people who were needed. The followingweek, Bill Ruane and Carol Loomis arrived to visit for a few hours. Sharon Osbergcame. BillGates arrived. Kathleen Cole flew in. And Howie finally returned from Africa after ¡°the longest trip home,¡± one that he never wanted to think about again.27 
Bill and Sharon went ahead with a bridge tournament they had been scheduled to play in¡ªwith Warren¡ªthat week. He managed to join themfor dinner one night at the hotelwhere the tournament was 
beingheld, and he did watch themplay for a while, which helped to distract him. Another night they were over at the house, where Warren wanted themto sit with him to watch the Charlie Rose video of Susie¡¯s interview. Astrid didn¡¯t want to see it, which was just as well, and he was afraid to watch it alone. They put it on the DVD player and it began to play. After a while, Warren was weeping. Billleft the room while Sharon 
crawled into his lap and rocked himas he cried.28 
The mere mention of Susie¡¯s name sent Warren into tears. As the funeral approached, it became apparent to Susie Jr., who was planningthe event, that somethingelse was botheringher father. It dawned on her what this must be. ¡°You don¡¯t have to go,¡± she told him. 
Warren was overcome with relief. ¡°I can¡¯t,¡± he said. To sit there, overwhelmed with thoughts of Susie, in front of everyone, was too much. ¡°I can¡¯t go.¡±29 
Unlike Warren, hundreds of others did want to grieve for Susan Buffett in person, at some sort of memorial service. None was ever held. Only the family, a couple of Susie¡¯s closest friends, Bono and his wife, Ali, and Bobby Shriver were invited to the funeral. Susie¡¯s musician friend Dave Stryker played the guitar, and the Reverend Cecil Williams fromGlide Memorial Church conducted the service. Bono sang ¡°Sometimes You Can¡¯t Make It on Your Own.¡± The grandchildren wept. 
And for several weeks more, that was all. Warren faced the emptiness. Many people, includingSusie herself, had questioned how wellhe could survive without her. He had never recovered fromthe death of his father and stillcould not face the unfinished business of Howard¡¯s boxes of papers in the basement. As Sharon put it, he had a tendency to think in the third person. But he suffered this time in the first person, grievingfully, livingin the now, even though the now terrified him. 
Susie¡¯s death carried with it deep intimations of his own mortality. His seventy-fourth birthday was approachingwith its metronomic tick of doom. He wanted cheeringup badly and talked to a couple of friends who then made plans, as he wished, to visit himin Omaha on his birthday. A few days later, Susie Jr. called 
them and said, Don¡¯t come. 30 Warren wasn¡¯t ready. Indeed, distraction was not the best thingfor him. The process of mourningcould not be shortened; it could only be endured. 
He could not escape fromgrief, even in sleep. The nightmares haunted him, every night the same. The separation fromSusie, the split that he had never been able to contemplate duringall the years of their living apart, was happeningright before his eyes. He was captive on the endless ride to the hospital in Cody, locked inside the ambulance, helpless to help her, unable to stop the momentumof the wheels. The silent mountains stood silhouetted against the July stardrift in the thin eveningair. Silently the driver picked his way through the windinghills. The road unreeled before them, mile after mile, rows of trees passinglike pilgrims up to the foothills above. In the back, Susie lay on the cot, pale and still. The sounds in the ambulance faded as the miles went by. Strands of juniper hunglike dim moss from the mountainsides while the road ahead stretched thinner in the distance. The stars fell still in the vast black overhead. Time slowed to eternity. 
Allhe had ever asked of her was not to leave him, and she had promised that she never would. No matter how many other people she had cared for and supported, no matter which way her heart had tugged her, through all her travels, no matter how many different directions she had run, Susie had always come back to him. She had never let himdown. 
Now there was no response. He needed her so much that it was impossible that she would leave him. He would hold on, he would not let go; therefore she must stay with him. 
The ambulance crept onward through the darkened mountains. The quiet humof the oxygen tank mingled with his tears. In the back there was only calm, a bare whisper of breath, no obvious sound of pain. 
It was Warren¡¯s chest that burned, it was his heart that exploded with each revolution of the wheels. You can¡¯t leave me, you can¡¯t leave me, please don¡¯t leave me. 
But Susie was already passingbeyond his reach; she was now in other hands. And the force of her withdrawal from his world to the next was tearinghim apart. 
62 
ClaimChecks 
Omaha and New York City . 2004¨C2008 
The first aftershocks of Susie¡¯s death occurred at the readingof her will, even though most of its provisions were not unexpected. She left nearly allof her Berkshire stock, worth almost $3 billion, to the newly renamed Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation, now headed by her daughter. Another six hundred shares, worth $50 million at the time, went to each of her children¡¯s foundations. 
She had been generous to people she cared about, although her husband¡¯s influence doubtless dampened her generosity. Her children each received $10 million. A longlist of other people, headed by Kathleen Cole and her husband, received smaller amounts. She had amended her willin the year before her death through a codicil executed by a new lawyer; the codicil gave John McCabe $8 million. It also left $1 million to Ron 
Parks, the friend who had spent so many years as the de facto chief financialofficer of ¡°STB Enterprises.¡±1 
The secret codicil shocked nearly everyone. Susie had never reconciled the divisions within her world and in the end chose to leave themunexplained. The life she lived for others was her legacy; her inner truth would remain forever unspoken. Thus it would be left to others to form their own interpretations. 
Warren had longloved his wife as an ideal. She had been the ¡°groundingperson who was his connection to the outside world¡± as well as the ¡°glue that held the family together.¡±2 After her death, he was never able to look at Susie¡¯s photograph without crying. But he did not lapse into a years-longdepression, or commit suicide, as Susie had suggested he might. Instead he mourned. For about two months, he seemed deeply depressed. And then, as most people do, he gradually returned to livinghis life. The bathtub memory went to work and his love for Susie overcame the rest. 
¡°That was the most important relationship he had personally,¡± says Howie. ¡°No question about it. And he depended on it heavily. But my dad is a survivor. Anybody who thought he was goingto fall apart because my mom died, I think didn¡¯t know him. Because he is not goingto fallapart over anything. He¡¯s got his own toughness, even though people may not see himthat way. He didn¡¯t get to where he is because he¡¯s some 
kind of wimp.¡±3 
That toughness helped himnot just to survive but to adapt and even to grow. When the dreamlike assumption that ¡°Susie will take care of everything¡± popped like a soap bubble, Warren began to show a newfound realism. As each month passed, he began to dealmore acceptingly with endings and mortality and to connect with his children in a new way. As his sister Bertie would say, Susie seemed to have willed himsome of her strength, a little of her emotional fluency, and a lot of her generosity. Warren seemed to be acquiring unexpected dimensions to his inner life. He reclaimed some of the responsibility for the emotionalterritory that he had always left to his wife. He became more aware of his children¡¯s feelings, of what they were doing and of what mattered to them. 
Susie Jr. quickly stepped into the leadership role that her mother had played, especially when it came to philanthropy, a job for which she had been preparingmuch of her life. She began to hire and to enlarge the foundation¡¯s offices to plan for the much larger sums of money it would now be givingaway. Runningtwo foundations seemed to her a wonderful opportunity, not a burden. 
Peter was taking Spirit¡ªThe Seventh Fire to the National Mallin Washington as part of the celebration for the grand openingof the NationalMuseumof the American Indian. One day he called his father to say, Dad, we¡¯re settingup the tent! Afterward he realized that, in the past, he would have called his mother, who would 
have told his father. It felt good to have a direct connection.4 Warren gathered a group of friends and flew to Washington to attend the cocktail party and openingnight. By the time Spirit opened, Peter had released or contributed to thirteen albums and soundtracks. But with the show, Warren felt a different connection with his son¡ªnot just because of Peter¡¯s success, but through the effort they were makingto be part of each other¡¯s lives. 
When Spirit arrived in Philadelphia, it got the kind of recognition that Buffett understood: It was compared 
to ¡°a Native American version of Philip Glass¡¯s dance performance/opera 1,000 Airplanes on the Roof¡± with ¡°guitar rolls that would put U2¡¯s The Edge to shame.¡±5 Its costly production, however, meant that even with high ticket prices, Spirit was losingmoney as a touringshow. Peter put it on hiatus and while workingon a new CD, Gold Star, the first in which he would performas a singer, began to consider what to do about Spirit¡¯s longer-termfuture. 
Howie had published On the Edge and Tapestry of Life, books of his photographs, and had given exhibitions and lectures on his photography and work in the Third World. His foundation office still looked like a teenage boy¡¯s bedroom, with toy jeeps and backhoes and equipment reminiscent of his old teenage CB radio. But his business experience had ripened; he now served on the board of Lindsay Manufacturingand ConAgra and had faced the task of firingtwo CEOs. Savvy about money, he had kept his CCE stock and had invested in Berkshire Hathaway stock. This latter gesture bonded him to his father as nothingelse could. Warren observed how much his son had settled down and matured in the past ten years. Howie, a ¡°marshmallow¡± emotionally who had always been so close to his mother and had yearned for a warmconnection to his father all his life, now saw an opportunity to have a different sort of relationship with him. He and Devon bought a house in Omaha so they could be nearby. 
The events followingSusie¡¯s death affected Astrid deeply. She had lost someone she considered a dear friend, then found out that Susie¡¯s life had run on paralleltracks¡ªone of which had always been invisible to her. Years of stayingbehind the scenes out of deference to Susie and to a marriage that, however unconventional, had been held up to allas some kind of idealsuddenly was revealed as based on a falsehood. She knew Susie¡¯s mesmerizingpower over Warren and had seen Warren¡¯s bathtub memory at work many times, but she was furious that Warren had allowed this to happen and felt betrayed and used. Belatedly, he recognized how high a price Astrid had paid for the arrangement he and Susie had worked out, the realities of which they had both avoided facingall these years. He took the blame and went to work settingthings right. Gradually, as he passed through the stages of mourning, he brought Astrid more and more into his public life. 
In December, Warren sent all of his grandchildren large checks as a Christmas gift. He had always paid for their college tuition, but he had never before given them money without any strings attached. He wrote each of them a letter offeringadvice on how to spend it. Do a little somethingfun, he said, and also pay down your 
mortgage. But I won¡¯t judge you if you blow it. You¡¯ll get another check next year.6 
Buffett made two exceptions to the checks. He did not include Nicole and Erica Buffett, Peter¡¯s adopted daughters. BigSusie had loved Erica and Nicole. They had shown up at her funeraldressed in longflowing outfits and wailed like a pair of brunette banshees. Susie had left each of her ¡°adored grandchildren,¡± includingNicole and Erica, $100,000 ¡°as a hug¡± in her will. But ten days after Susie¡¯s funeral, Warren had told Peter, ¡°By the way, I don¡¯t consider the girls my grandchildren. I don¡¯t want themto expect anything from me in my will.¡± Peter found this inexplicable. ¡°Are you sure you want to do this?¡± he asked. His father was undeterred. That Susie had given the girls money and specified that they had the same status as her other grandchildren in her willseemed to have roused Warren¡¯s feelings of possessiveness about money. Peter let it go, however. He figured that if his father cut the girls out of his will, they would never find out the reason. 
And indeed, when Christmas came and they did not receive checks, they never found out.7 
Warren spent New Year¡¯s with Astrid at the home of Sharon Osbergand her husband, David Smith, in 
California¡¯s Marin County. He, Osberg, Gates, and the rest held one of their bridge orgies while Astrid shopped at Trader Joe¡¯s. At the beginningof November, Buffett had overcome some earlier reservations that Gates¡¯s powerful personality might dominate the Berkshire board, and had invited himto join it. Sharon and Bill had been talkingfor some time about the challenges that the Buffett Foundation faced. To give away severalbillion dollars a year after Warren was gone, it would have to change dramatically. No foundation in history had ever succeeded in such a transformation, because no foundation had ever tried. With one exception¡ªthe Gates Foundation¡ªno other philanthropic organization had ever worked with such large sums. 
Warren had also been thinkingabout the problem. In the fall, he had videotaped a question-and-answer session with his foundation trustees, makingsure they understood his wishes and that these were memorialized. Like Walter Annenberg, he wanted to reduce the chance of beingdouble-crossed after he was dead. After all, Boys Town had eventually double-crossed Father Flanagan. If even Father Flanagan wasn¡¯t sacred, then how to handicap the odds on Warren Buffett? 
Early in 2005, Osberg ¡°trumped up some pretense¡± and made a trip to Omaha to speak to Buffett. Given his 
admiration for Gates, she said, shouldn¡¯t he consider leavinghis money to the Gates Foundation after he died?Though Buffett reacted noncommittally,8 he had in fact been consideringleavingat least some of the money to the Gateses since well before Susie died. 
Charlie Munger had already been encouragingthe idea. ¡°It wouldn¡¯t surprise me if they had Gates runningit eventually,¡± he said shortly after Susie died. ¡°It wouldn¡¯t surprise me at all. Warren doesn¡¯t like conventional pomposity. Gates is unconventionalin the way he thinks, and he¡¯s fifty instead of seventy-four.¡±9 
For a longtime Buffett had felt that society was best served if he carried on compoundingthe money, rather than givingit away, so that there would be more to give away. But delayingthe gift until his death also amounted to the White Queen¡¯s ¡°jamtomorrow¡±¡ªa postponement in his struggle with endings, with loss, with death, with lettinggo. Over the years he had gradually evolved froma boy who stole his sister¡¯s bicycle and got other people to buy his barbells, froma father who said no to every request for money fromhis children, to a man who gave them a million dollars every five years on their birthday, a man who bought a pink heart-shaped diamond ringfor his daughter. But he still had some issues with money, which, for example, seemed to have been triggered by Susie¡¯s will. Nonetheless, in a profound shift, he was workinghis way through the problem of whether to serve some of tomorrow¡¯s jam today. 
That did not mean, however, that the encroachments of time would become easier for him. A year after Susie died, Buffett found himself shocked once again by the impendingarrivalof another birthday. Could he actually be three-quarters of a century old? He spoke of it with disbelief. Then he seized on examples of health and vitality lastingwell into old age: his mother, who had lived to ninety-two; his aunt Katie, who had lived to age ninety-seven; Walter Schloss, who was still playingtennis at almost ninety. And of course, there was his icon, Rose Blumkin. 
His seventy-fifth birthday party took place at Sharon and David¡¯s, with Astrid, BillGates, and his sister Bertie in attendance. His birthday cake was a white-chocolate replica of a $100 bill. On Saturday morning, Smith had arranged for Buffett to take on Ariel Hsing, a nine-year-old Chinese-American Ping-Pong champion. With the video camera rolling, the little girl crushed him. After a fierce bridge tournament the followingmorning, an artist whomOsbergand Smith had hired came over to amuse Buffett and Gates by tryingto teach themthe art of landscape painting. Buffett gamely swiped away with a brush at acrylics, but painting, unlike Ping-Pong, was not rhythmic and repetitious, and the results were hilarious. He produced a canvas adorned with trees that resembled brown lollipops. Meanwhile, the previous day¡¯s Ping-Ponggame was fermentingan idea. Why not add the video of him gettingtrounced by Ariel Hsingto the ever-expanding movie at the shareholders¡¯ meeting? 
Before 2003, Buffett¡¯s need for attention had been satisfied by a few interviews a year and the shareholder meeting. He had always been careful and strategic in his cooperation with the media (if not always forthcomingabout just how cooperative he had been). But startingaround the time of Susie¡¯s illness, for whatever reason, he had begun to need the mirror of media attention, television cameras especially, almost like a drug. The intervals he could tolerate without publicity were growingshorter. He cooperated with documentaries, spent hours talkingto Charlie Rose, and became such a regular on CNBC that it started to prompt puzzled queries fromhis friends. 
The Buffett who so craved attention contrasted markedly with the Buffett who focused with unaltered intensity on Berkshire Hathaway. To see himflip from one mode into the other in half a second was head-spinning. In addition to addingBillGates to the board, he now set up a ¡°whistleblower line¡± so that employees could report wrongdoing. And¡ªin a major step toward the day when Berkshire¡¯s board would have to make decisions without him¡ªhe initiated separate meetings of the board without his presence. Yet he remained as focused on investingas he had been as a younger man. 
Since the Federal Reserve¡¯s dramatic interest rate cuts in the wake of 9/11, the market had steadily recouped its losses untilit was nearingbubble-era levels. Buffett wrote in his 2004 letters to shareholders: ¡°My hope was to make several multibillion dollar acquisitions that would add new and significant streams of earnings to the many we already have. But I struck out. Additionally, I found very few attractive securities to buy. Berkshire therefore ended the year with $43 billion of cash equivalents, not a happy position.¡± The followingyear, Berkshire used part of this money to make four small acquisitions¡ªMedicalProtective Company and Applied Underwriters, two insurance businesses; Forest River, a recreational-vehicle manufacturer; and Business Wire, which distributed public-relations materialfor corporations¡ªand one larger acquisition, PacifiCorp, a major electric utility, for MidAmerican Energy. While MidAmerican had not yet spawned a series of huge acquisitions as Buffett had hoped, the wisdomof buyingit had grown clearer. Oilprices had continued to rise. MidAmerican had a significant toehold in alternative energy. Its relationships with consumers and regulators were excellent. Its CEO, David Sokol, was often mentioned as a potential successor to Buffett, although Buffett himself was keepinghis cards very close to the vest. 
Buffett also used this report to reiterate that he was still down on the dollar, and thought it would decline. The dollar had strengthened since his first article, and now his view was beingwidely criticized in the financial press. He had reduced his currency bets in favor of buyingforeign stocks, but nothingchanged his view. And once again, he decried excessive executive compensation. On derivatives, a topic he now covered every year, Buffett wrote: 
¡°Long ago Mark Twain said: ¡®A man who tries to carry a cat home by its tail will learn a lesson that can be learned in no other way.¡¯¡­I dwell on our experiences in derivatives each year for two reasons. One is personal and unpleasant. Both Charlie and I knew at the time of the Gen Re purchase that it was a problem and told its management that we wanted to exit the business. It was my responsibility to make sure that happened. Rather than address the situation head-on, however, I wasted several years while we attempted to sell the operation. That was a doomed endeavor, because no realistic solution could have extracted us from the maze of liabilities that was going to exist for decades. Our obligations were particularly worrisome because their potential to explode could not be measured. Moreover, if severe trouble occurred, we knew it was likely to correlate with problems elsewhere in financial markets. 
¡°So I failed in my attempt to exit painlessly, and in the meantime more trades were put on the books.¡± 
Buffett was referringto a period duringwhich he had hired a new manager, and briefly allowed himto expand the business. Some of these trades later proved costly to unwind. ¡°Fault me for dithering. (Charlie calls it thumb-sucking.) When a problem exists, whether in personnel or in business operations, the time to act is now. 
¡°The second reason I regularly describe our problems in this area lies in the hope that our experiences may prove instructive for managers, auditors, and regulators. In a sense, we are a canary in this business coal mine and should sing a song of warning as we expire¡­General Re was a relatively minor operator in the derivatives field. It has had the good sense to unwind its supposedly liquid positions in a benign market, all the while free of financial or other pressures that might have forced it to conduct the liquidation in a less than efficient manner. Our accounting in the past was conventional and thought to be conservative. Additionally, we know of no bad behavior by anyone involved. 
¡°It could be a different story for others in the future. Imagine, if you will, one or more firms (troubles often 
spread) with positions that are many multiples of ours attempting to liquidate in chaotic markets and under extreme, and well-publicized pressures. The time to have considered¡ªand improved¡ªthe reliability of New 
10 
Orleans¡¯s levees was before [Hurricane] Katrina.¡± 
The generalbelief, however, continued to be that derivatives spread and reduced risk. In a market shoved upward by cheap debt and derivatives nearly day by day, low interest rates and the ¡°securitization¡± of mortgages into derivatives were pumpinga housingboom that would peak in 2006. By one estimate, total 
global leverage (debt) had quadrupled in less than a decade.11 Buffett fretted occasionally that he might never again see the kind of home-run climate for investingthat had blessed him in the 1970s. But he never stopped searching, he never stopped delvingfor ideas. 
*** 
One day in 2004 he obtained fromhis broker a thick book, the size of several telephone directories stapled together. Its pages contained listings of Korean stocks. He had been scouringthe globaleconomy, lookingfor a country, a market, that was overlooked and undervalued. He had found it in Korea. Night after night, he leafed through the tome, studyingcolumn after column of numbers, page by page by page. But the numbers and their nomenclature puzzled him. He realized that he needed to learn a whole new language of business that described a different culture of commerce. So he got another book and figured out everythingimportant there was to know about Korean accounting. That would reduce the odds of gettinghornswoggled by the numbers. 
Once he¡¯d mastered the listings, he began siftingand sorting. It felt somethinglike the old days back at Graham-Newman, when he sat next to the ticker machine clad in his cherished gray cotton jacket. Staringat hundreds of pages of numbers, he could pick out which were important and how they fellinto a coherent pattern. Workingfroma list of several thousand Korean stocks, he quickly pared it down to a workable number; after makingsome notes on a yellow legalpad he kept going, just as he had when he¡¯d paged through the Moody¡¯s Manual, lookingfor the gems amid the dreck¡ªuntil finally he arrived at a much shorter list. 
This winnowed-down list was so short that it could be contained on a single piece of legal-size paper. Sitting down with a visitor, he held out the list, which consisted of at most a couple of dozen companies. A few were large¡ªamongthe largest in the world¡ªbut most were very small. 
¡°Lookit,¡± he said, ¡°this is how I do it. They are quoted in won. If you go to the Internet and look them up on the Korean stock exchange, they have numbers instead of ticker symbols, and they all end in zero unless it¡¯s a preferred stock, in which case you click in five. If they have a second class of preferred, you don¡¯t click in six, you click in seven. Every night you can go on the Internet at a certain time and look up some issues and it¡¯ll show you the five brokerage firms that would have been the largest buyers and the five that would have been the largest sellers that day. You have to set up a special account with a bank in Korea. That¡¯s not easy to do. I¡¯m learning it as I go along. 
¡°It¡¯s like finding a new girl to me. 
¡°These are good companies, and yet they¡¯re cheap. The stocks have gotten cheaper than five years ago, and yet the businesses are more valuable. Half of the companies have names that sound like a porno movie. They make basic products, like steel and cement and flour and electricity, which people will still be buying in ten years. They have a big market share in Korea, which isn¡¯t going to change, and some of these companies are exporting to China and Japan too. Yet for some reason, they haven¡¯t been noticed. Look, this flour company has more than its market value in cash, and it sells at three times earnings. I couldn¡¯t buy very much, but I got a few shares. Here¡¯s another one, a dairy. I could end up with nothing but a bunch of Korean securities in my personal portfolio. 
¡°Now, I¡¯m no expert on foreign currencies. But I¡¯m comfortable owning these securities denominated in the 
won right now. 
¡°The main risk, and part of why the stocks are cheap, is North Korea. And North Korea is a real threat. If North Korea invaded South Korea, the whole world could go to hell. China, Japan, all of Asia would be drawn into a war. The consequences are almost unimaginable. North Korea is very close to having nuclear weapons. I regard it as one of the world¡¯s most dangerous countries. But I would make the bet that the rest of the world, including China and Japan, are simply not going to let the situation get to the point that North Korea makes a nuclear attack on South Korea anytime soon. 
¡°When you invest, you have to take some risk. The future is always uncertain. I think a group of these stocks will do very well for several years. Some of them may not do well, but as a group, they should do very well. I could end up owning them for several years.¡± 
He had found a new game, a new puzzle to figure out. He wanted more of them and kept lookingfor opportunities with the same eagerness he¡¯d once shown stoopingfor winningtickets at the racetrack. 
*** 
In December 2005, in a talk at the Harvard Business School, he was asked about his hopes for the Buffett Foundation¡¯s impact on society, since it would someday become the best-funded philanthropy in the world. Buffett responded that his guess was that he was not doingsociety as great a favor by compoundingany more. So he was thinkingmore these days about givingthe money away. 
Nobody said anything. Nobody seemed to realize that Buffett had just signaled a totalshift in direction. 
Later, in the same speech, he talked about the Gates Foundation. He admired Bill and Melinda Gates more than any other philanthropists, he said. Theirs was the most rationaland best executed of any foundation policy he had ever seen. And he liked that they didn¡¯t want publicity for their philanthropy, did not want their name on any buildings. 
By early 2006, his thoughts had begun to crystallize. While he was pleased with the job his kids were doing with their own foundations, the sense of safety and security that BigSusie had given himwas not duplicable. This emotional force operated beyond a conscious level. His decision to leave her in charge of the money had never been based on a rational or calculated assessment of her qualifications as a philanthropist. With the accretion of a decades-longrelationship, he had simply built up layers of personal trust and comfort in his wife¡¯s judgment and wisdom. Now that she was gone, everythingwas different. He mentioned his change of heart to TomMurphy at Murphy¡¯s daughter¡¯s wedding. Out of the blue, he told Sharon Osberg. He was going to give the money away early. But he had only an idea, not a plan. 
The plan, which was complicated, took months to work out in detail. The followingspring, he started telling the people who were directly affected. ¡°Brace yourself,¡± he said when he sat down with Carol Loomis, one of the Buffett Foundation trustees. ¡°The news was indeed stunning,¡± she wrote.12 
¡°I got lots of questions,¡± he said about the conversations in which he made this startlingannouncement, ¡°and 
some people had qualms about the plan initially because it was such an abrupt change fromwhat they had been anticipating.¡±13 His sisters, on the other hand, were instantly enthusiastic when they found out. ¡°This is the best idea you¡¯ve had,¡± wrote Bertie afterward, ¡°since you pretended to have asthma to get sent home 
from Fredericksburg.¡±14 Doris¡ªwho knew from her Sunshine Lady Foundation how much work it was to give away even a few million dollars intelligently¡ªthought it was a brilliant decision.15 
On June 26, 2006, Buffett announced that he would give away eighty-five percent of his Berkshire Hathaway stock¡ªworth $37 billion at the time¡ªto a group of foundations over a number of years. No gift of this size had ever been made in the history of philanthropy. Five out of every six shares would go to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, already the largest charity in the world, in a historic marriage of two fortunes for the betterment of the world.16 He was requiringthat the money be spent as it was given, so that the foundations could not perpetuate themselves. To cushion the shock of losingthe money that would someday have made their family foundation the largest in the world, Buffett divided the remainingshares, worth about $6 billion, amonghis children¡¯s individualfoundations, each of which would receive shares worth $1 billion, and the Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation, which would receive shares worth $3 billion. None of the children had ever expected their personal foundations to reach such an enormous size, especially not while he was alive. At the date of the gift, the shares handed over in the first year¡¯s installment were worth $1.5 billion 
to the Gates Foundation, $50 million to each of his children¡¯s foundations, and $150 million to the Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation. Dependingon Berkshire¡¯s stock price, those values could vary. As it turned out, they would increase. They would increase a lot.17 
The man who was, at the time, the second richest person on earth was givingaway his money without leaving a trace of himself behind. He had spent allhis life rollingup the snowball as if it were an extension of himself; yet he would establish no Warren Buffett Foundation, no Buffett hospital wing, no college or university endowment or buildingwith his name on it. To donate the money without namingsomethingafter himself, without controllingpersonally how it would be spent¡ªto put the money in the coffers of another foundation that he had selected for its competence and efficiency, rather than creatinga whole new empire ¡ªupended every convention of giving. No major donor had ever done such a thingbefore. ¡°It was a historic moment in the field of philanthropy globally,¡± said DougBauer of Rockefeller Philanthropy Advisors. ¡°It¡¯s 
set a bar, a touchstone, for others.¡±18 
That Warren Buffett had done this was both surprisingand predictable. An unconventional thinker and problem-solver, he was makinga gesture against philanthropic waste and grandiosity. The Gates Foundation got its money, but had to spend each installment¡ªand fast. The decision was unusual, highly personal, a form of teachingby example, and¡ªnaturally¡ªenormously attention-getting. Meanwhile, in another sense, this was a classic Buffett no-lose deal. He had stunned the world by givingaway almost all of his money by earmarkingit, yet got to keep most of it until he actually transferred the shares. Nonetheless, in one stroke he had transformed a lifetime of graspingat money by committingto lettinggo¡ªand had started to disburse it by the billions. The boy who would not let his family touch the chifforobe where he kept his hoarded coins had finally become a man who could entrust his tens of billions to someone else¡¯s hands. 
In the announcement speech, Buffett said, ¡°Just over fifty years ago last month, I sat down with seven people who gave me one hundred and five thousand dollars to manage in a little partnership. And those people made the judgment that I could do a better job in amassing wealth for them than they could do themselves. 
¡°Fifty years after that, I sat down and thought about who could do a better job dispensing the wealth than myself. It¡¯s really quite logical. People don¡¯t often have that second sit-down. They are always saying, Who should handle my money? and they quite willingly turn their money over to people with a certain expertise. But they don¡¯t seem to think about doing that very often in the philanthropic world. They pick their old business cronies or whomever to administer wealth after they¡¯re gone, at a time when they won¡¯t even be able to observe what¡¯s happening. 
¡°So I got very lucky, because philanthropy is harder than business. You are tackling important problems that people with intellect and money have tackled in the past and had a tough time solving. So the search for talent in philanthropy should be even more important than the search for talent in investments, where the game is not as tough.¡± 
Buffett then spoke of the Ovarian Lottery. ¡°I have been very lucky. I was born in the United States in 1930 and won the lottery the day I was born. I had terrific parents, a good education, and I was wired in a way that paid off disproportionately in this particular society. If I had been born long ago or in some other country, my particular wiring would not have paid off the way it has. But in a market system, where capital-allocation wiring is important, it pays off like no other place. 
¡°All along, I¡¯ve felt the money was just claim checks that should go back to society. I am not an enthusiast for dynastic wealth, particularly when the alternative is six billion people who¡¯ve got much poorer hands in life than we have, getting a chance to benefit from the money. And my wife agreed with me. 
¡°It was clear that Bill Gates had an outstanding mind with the right goals, focusing intensely with passion and heart on improving the lot of mankind around the world without any regard to gender, religion, color, or geography. He was just doing the most good for the most people. So when the time came to make a decision on where the money would go, it was a simple decision.¡± 
The Gates Foundation followed a basic creed that Buffett shared: ¡°Guided by the belief that every life has equalvalue,¡± it worked to ¡°reduce inequities and improve lives around the world¡± in the areas of global health and education. The Gateses saw themselves as ¡°convenors,¡± who brought together the best minds as 
advisers to work on permanent solutions to enormous problems.19 
However much Buffett had changed and grown since Susie¡¯s death, he was still very much the same in certain ways. Allen Greenberg, who ran the Buffett Foundation, found out that the foundation he would be runningwould be a $6 billion foundation, not the $45 billion foundation for which he had been preparing, not from Buffett, but by proxy through Allen¡¯s new boss and ex-wife, Susie Jr. Warren had been unable to bring himself to confront Greenbergto tell himthat allhis plans and thinkingabout how to run the foundation in the future must be downsized. Susie Jr. had to convince Allen that this was in no way a grade on his performance. After his initialexplosion over the fact that he hadn¡¯t heard the news fromthe source, he conceded that he would still be administeringone of the world¡¯s ten largest charitable coffers, and peace ultimately reigned. 
Allinvolved had ample reason to behave well. Even though Buffett was givingaway a vast sum, the money would be paid out over some years. And the stock he had not yet earmarked as a gift was estimated as worth more than $6 billion at the time. He stillhad plenty to give away. 
The effects of Buffett¡¯s announcement were immediate and sizable. Jackie Chan, the HongKongactor, announced that he would give away half his wealth. LiKa-shing, Asia¡¯s richest man, pledged a third of his $19 billion to his own charitable foundation. Carlos Slim, the Mexican communications monopolist, ridiculed Buffett and Gates for their philanthropy but, some months later, did a turnabout and announced that he, too, would begin givingmoney away. And the Gateses set up a new division within their foundation simply to handle people who wanted to make donations to them¡ªsuch as a seven-year-old girlwho sent the Gates Foundation her life savings of $35. 
The newly enriched Gates Foundation was havinga tectonic impact on the philanthropic world. Its ¡°all-asset approach,¡± which greatly resembled Buffett¡¯s ideas about concentration¡ªand, indeed, his investingstyle¡ª focused resources toward a short, carefully selected list of serious problems. That differed markedly from many other major foundations and community funds, at which a headquarters staff of philanthropoids circled around a series of supplicants, playing¡°eeny, meeny, miney, moe¡± as they doled out fragmentary sums. By the end of 2006, certain organizations such as the Rockefeller Foundation had begun modifyingtheir policies 
to align themmore closely with the Gates approach.20 
Three thousand letters fromneedy people poured into Buffett¡¯s office after the Gates announcement, with more comingevery day. They had no insurance and were overwhelmed by medicalbills, or they had gotten injured on the job and their homes were beingrepossessed. Their children had cataclysmic health problems that required specialcare, which prevented themfrom makingenough money to pay their mortgage. Or their boyfriends had gotten them pregnant, cheated themout of money, tricked them into assumingthe boyfriend¡¯s debt, and then run off without payingchild support. They were the losers in the Ovarian Lottery. Warren forwarded the letters to his sister Doris. Over the past ten years her Sunshine Lady Foundation, funded with the proceeds fromHoward Buffett¡¯s trust, had helped thousands of victims of domestic violence, the severely disadvantaged, and families in crisis. He enclosed $5 million with the letters to help fund Doris¡¯s work. 
She hired a group of women over age fifty to help sort out the letters where ¡°bad luck rather than bad choices¡± had played a part, and relatively small amounts of money could give someone a hand up. They often 
gave advice to the gamblers and credit-card addicts and people who just didn¡¯t want to work, but they never bailed out people who had other ways to solve their problems. And Doris never paid for everything. ¡°I don¡¯t want to be their mommy,¡± she said. She also made them write thank-you letters. Her type of philanthropy 
taught gratitude and self-respect.21 
Buffett kept handingout more of his billions. He was already giving$5 million a year to Ted Turner¡¯s Nuclear Threat Initiative (NTI), which he considered the most important of the U.S. organizations focused on dealingwith the world¡¯s nuclear threat, and he was willingto give more. Former Senator SamNunn, who ran NTI, had proposed a nuclear-fuelreserve to which countries could turn rather than developingtheir own nuclear enrichment programs, thereby reducingthe likelihood of nuclear proliferation. Buffett felt that this idea had considerable merit, and he pledged $50 million as a matchinggift if other funds could be raised. He would make huge amounts of money available to any antinuclear causes that seemed to himable to come up with realistic solutions to the problem. 
Buffett also gave a donation to former President Jimmy Carter for the work of the Carter Center. After leavingoffice an unpopular president, Carter had become an example of someone fallen to the ninety-eighth floor who had looked forward, not back, risingto win the NobelPeace Prize for his work in globalhealth, democracy, and human rights. ¡°Would love to have you join us in Ghana on Feb. 6¨C8, 2007,¡± Carter wrote 
him back warmly after the gift, ¡°to see our guinea worm work.¡±22 Buffett considered Carter a friend, but nobody¡ªnot Howie, not BigSusie, not even BillGates¡ªcould have gotten himon a plane to go see a guinea 
23 
worm. 
Thus, for a third time he avoided a trip to Africa. Some things did not change. But time moved on, and other things did change. 
Astrid was now Warren¡¯s officialcompanion at events outside Omaha. She remained virtually unchanged¡ªthe same plainspoken, unpretentious person¡ªbut her world had expanded at stunningspeed. She now socialized routinely with Billand Melinda Gates. In the fallof 2005, she and Warren had flown to Tahiti to attend Bill Gates¡¯s fiftieth-birthday party, which took place on PaulAllen¡¯s sleek blue-and-white Octopus, one of the world¡¯s largest yachts. A billionaire¡¯s little-boy fantasy that belonged to the world¡¯s sixth-richest man, the Octopus had a movie theater, a recordingstudio, two helicopters, a sixty-three-foot tender, and a small submarine that could sleep eight people for two weeks on the ocean floor. She and Warren stayed in PaulAllen¡¯s mother¡¯s stateroom, a large suite with a walk-in closet and a library in the sittingroom. ¡°Oh, my God,¡± says Astrid, ¡°it was unbelievable. I have never experienced and will probably never experience a time like that again.¡± 
¡°It beats home¡± was Warren¡¯s reaction. He returned from the trip talkingof the onboard bridge games. 24 
Two years after Susie¡¯s death, on his seventy-sixth birthday, Warren married Astrid in an unfussy civil ceremony at Susie Jr.¡¯s house with no guests other than family. Astrid wore a simple turquoise blouse and white pants, and Warren wore a business suit. Tears welled fromher eyes as he placed a huge diamond solitaire ringon her finger. Afterward, they went to the Bonefish Grillnext to Borsheim¡¯s for dinner. Then they flew out to San Francisco for a weddingparty and a traditionalweddingcake at Sharon Osbergand David Smith¡¯s. The Gateses joined themfor the celebration. 
Warren Buffett, the not-simple man of simple tastes, now had the simple life of the man that he had always believed himself to be. He had one wife, drove one car, occupied one house that hadn¡¯t been redecorated in years, ran one business, and spent more and more time with his family.25 
*** 
Buffett always said that trees don¡¯t grow to the sky. But new saplings form. 
The question of who would succeed him had longvexed his shareholders. 
He sometimes quipped that Berkshire could be run by someone workingfive hours a week, or by Charlie¡¯s bust of Ben Franklin, or by a cardboard cutout. He¡¯d also joked about controllingit after his death: ¡°Well, my backup plan is that I¡¯ve figured out how to manage the company by seance.¡± No one was fooled by his banter. On other occasions he was just as likely to tell his listeners: ¡°My psyche is allwrapped up in Berkshire.¡± And those who worked for and invested in Berkshire were all wrapped up in Buffett. He was not replaceable. And what would happen to all that capital? The question of either a dividend or a huge share repurchase would arise instantly when he was gone. His successor would have to change some things¡ªfor while parts of the Berkshire model should be preserved, other parts should not. The headquarters staff¡ª famously minuscule¡ªwould probably grow as outsourced functions were reclaimed. Meanwhile, the presumption continued to be that all of the succession candidates already worked at Berkshire. But that wasn¡¯t necessarily true. In fact, the board would be obliged to consider outside candidates when the time came. 
Buffett once said that he would be happy if Berkshire was still servinghis shareholders thirty years after his death. That was his design. The elegant machine that he had created was built to last more than a generation beyond him. Yet to maintain it would be a remarkable accomplishment; he was the soulof that machine, and without himthere would be a vacuumat the center, no matter what. For Buffett was the best there would ever be at the thingthat only he could do perfectly, which was to be himself. 
No group of shareholders in history had ever missed their CEO as much as Berkshire¡¯s shareholders would miss Buffett when he was finally gone. None had ever thought of their CEO as a teacher and a friend the way Buffett¡¯s shareholders had thought of him. The man who had made billions had touched thousands of people and had a relationship that felt personalto countless others whom he¡¯d never even met or seen. But oddly enough, no matter how many fan letters Buffett got or how many autographs he signed, he never fully grasped how loved and admired he was. He got as excited about every letter and request for an autograph as though it were the first. 
*** 
In July 2007, the Dow hit a new high of 14,000. Then it began to fall. House prices had already peaked, the way every great bubble peaks, partly because the FederalReserve had finally started raisinginterest rates, and house prices had been slidingfor some time. Unable to refinance, homeowners were defaultingon their mortgages at historically high rates. 
The global margin callbegan in August. Over a period of eight months, the financial world imploded in a credit crisis of historic proportions. Not since the Great Depression had such a severe credit seizure occurred. Not since the Panic of 1907, when old J. P. Morgan himself had personally intervened to orchestrate a solution to the panic, had such extraordinary informal intervention in financial markets taken place as would occur in 2008. 
The crisis progressed in fits and starts, with weeks and even months of apparent calmfollowed by convulsions that left victims scattered like broken shells on a beach. As it turned out, derivatives had indeed spread risk¡ªbanks reported tens of billions in losses; a hospital-management company in Australia lost a quarter of its investment portfolio; eight Norwegian towns lost millions on supposedly safe mortgages securities; estimates of total losses ranged fromhundreds of billions to as high as $1 trillion fromall sources combined. Like Long-TermCapital, the underlyingbets were all made in the wrongdirection. They had assumed a rational ¡°efficient¡± market in which a decline in prices would be halted by cool-tempered, calculatingbuyers. 
¡°They said all these derivatives made the world safer and spread the risk out. But it didn¡¯t spread the risk in terms of how people reacted to a given stimulus. Now, you could argue that it might be way better to have that credit with just five banks, who could all work, than to have it with thousands around the globe, all of whom are going to rush out of it at the same time.¡± 
The FederalReserve cut interest rates once again, and worked with other centralbanks to activate other emergency sources of financing,26 yet the credit crisis continued to spread. 
The reluctance to lend began to show signs of contagion. The Dow fell seventeen percent, to 11,740, from its October high. With each new announcement of a fire sale, bankruptcy, or collapse, the low rumblingpanic grew louder. More people tried to sellassets behind the scenes and found no buyers; more lenders began to call in loans. 
On Thursday, March 13, 2008, a run began, this time on Bear Stearns, the weakest of the investment banks, as its lenders started refusingto rollover its loans. In a near re-creation of the Salomon crisis seventeen years earlier, the followingday, Friday, Bear nearly collapsed from lack of financing. But this time the Federal Reserve took the unprecedented step of guaranteeing$30 billion of Bear Stearns debt¡ªthe first time the FederalReserve had ever bailed out an investment bank. Bear closed at $30 per share on Friday afternoon. Buffett pondered the situation that evening. Long-Term CapitalManagement¡¯s bailout had been a dress rehearsal¡ªon a much smaller scale¡ªfor this moment. 
¡°The speed with which fear can spread¡ªnobody has to have an account at Bear Stearns, nobody has to lend them money. It¡¯s a version of what I went through at Salomon, where you were just inches away all the time from, in effect, an electronic run on the bank. Banks can¡¯t stand runs. The Federal Reserve hasn¡¯t bailed out investment banks before, and that was what I was sort of pleading back there in 1991 with Salomon. If Salomon went, who knows what kind of dominoes would set off. I don¡¯t have good answers to what the Fed should do. Some parts of the market are pretty close to paralyzed. They don¡¯t want contagion to spread to what they would regard as otherwise sound institutions; if Bear fails and two minutes later, people worry that Lehman fails, and two minutes after that they worry that Merrill will fail, and it spreads from there.¡± 
The rationalBuffett tried to unlock the puzzle embedded in the risky choices facingthe Federal Reserve. It had no really good options. Either it allowed a financial meltdown or it took actions that would promote inflation by addingto downward pressure on the dollar. ¡°It could all end on a dime if they flooded the system with enough liquidity, but there are consequences to doing that. If dramatic enough, the consequences would be the immediate expectation of huge inflation. A lot of things would happen that you might not like. The economy is definitely tanking. It¡¯s not my game, but if I had to bet one way or another ¡ªeverybody else says a recession will be short and shallow, but I would say long and deep. 
¡°You absolutely never want to be in a position where tomorrow morning you have to depend on the kindness of strangers in the financial world. I spent a lot of time thinking about that. I never want to have to come up with a billion dollars tomorrow morning. Well, a billion I could. But any significant amount. Because you just cannot be sure of anything. You have to think about things that have never happened before. You always want to have plenty of money around.¡± 
Allweekend the regulators and bankers toiled, much as they had years earlier on Salomon. This time, however, it was with the almost certain knowledge that the bank¡¯s failure would have catastrophic consequences to the globalfinancial system. Whether Bear Stearns deserved its fate was not at issue. Just before the Tokyo markets opened on Sunday, the FederalReserve announced that it had orchestrated a sale of Bear to investment bank JP Morgan Chase for a pittance. Buffett had been offered the deal, but thought it contained too much open-ended risk. 
The same day that the Bear bailout was announced, the FederalReserve, attemptingto calm panic and prevent a run on Lehman Brothers, did indeed begin to flood the systemwith liquidity: It offered to let the largest investment banks borrow up to $200 billion at its ¡°discount window,¡± usingmortgage-backed securities as collateral. Use of the discount window, formerly a privilege restricted to commercial banks, had never before been extended to investment banks, which are not subject to the reportingand capital regulations that are a quid pro quo for such borrowing. The move didn¡¯t calm the panic; then the government made the offer open-ended. The government was goingto accept bad loans as collateral; it began to take a variety of once again unprecedented steps to try to unfreeze the mortgage markets and help struggling lenders. Market pundits praised the Fed¡¯s rescue of Bear and pump-primingof the investment banks as the only way to prevent contagion, but argued whether these actions would hasten an economic recovery or only prolongthe pain and plant the seeds of the next bubble. And for seven months, while these financialdisasters were unfolding, the value of the dollar¡ªwhich had been decliningfor some time¡ªhad continued to slide. Meanwhile, oil prices spiked:By July 2008, spot oil traded at $144 per barrel. 
*** 
¡°It¡¯s a weird time. We¡¯ve gone into a different world, and nobody knows what will happen to the world, but Charlie and I looked at the downside, and nobody else did, very much.¡± Deleveragingcould be a painful process in which banks, hedge funds, financial-services companies, municipalities, the construction and travel industries, consumers, and indeed the whole economy withdrew¡ªfast and painfully or slow and painfully¡ªfromthe intoxicant of cheap debt. Asset returns could wellstay subpar for a longtime¡ªwhat Charlie Munger called a ¡°4% return world.¡± Beware of scams and charlatans, said Munger; they might proliferate because the easiest way to turn four percent into sixteen percent is thievery. 
In the midst of all the chaos of the springof 2008, there sat Buffett, whose thinkingabout value and risk had not changed in the nearly sixty years of his career. There are always people who say that the rules have changed. But it only looks that way, he said, if the time horizon is too short. 
There was Buffett, stoopingfor cigar butts as if he were a child again. He took no joy fromothers¡¯ pain, but in the business of life, everyone chooses a side to play. Times like these brought out his sharpest skills, the joy of doingwhat he loved most, true to himself. ¡°We¡¯re selling some credit default swaps [insurance against firms going bankrupt] in situations where it is underpriced. I¡¯m sitting here with my newest daily paper that I read, the Bond Buyer, on my lap. Who the hell would have thought that I¡¯d be reading the Bond Buyer every day? The Bond Buyer costs $2,400 a year. I felt like asking for a daily subscription rate. We get these bid lists on failed auctions of tax-exempt money-market funds and other auction rate bonds and have been just picking them off. The same fund will trade at the same time on the same day from the same dealer at interest rates of 5.4 percent and 8.2 percent. Which is crazy, they¡¯re the exact same thing, and the underlying loans are perfectly good. There is no reason why it should trade at 820, but we bid 820 and we may get one, while concurrently someone else buys exactly the same issue at 540. If you¡¯d told me ten weeks ago I¡¯d be doing this, I¡¯d have said that¡¯s about as likely as me becoming a male stripper. We¡¯ve put $4 billion into this stuff. It¡¯s the most dramatic thing I¡¯ve seen in my life. If this is an efficient market, dictionaries will have to redefine ¡®efficient.¡¯¡± 
Who would think that tax-exempt money-market funds could become cigar butts? 
¡°But the most immediate and doable opportunity is weird things in the credit market. And the biggest opportunity is in mortgages. But I don¡¯t understand them well enough, although I¡¯m learning them so that I can understand them. And if I think I¡¯ve got enough margin of safety, I¡¯ll do it.¡± But the average person should not do it. 
¡°No. Stocks are the things to own over time. Productivity will increase and stocks will increase with it. There are only a few things you can do wrong. One is to buy or sell at the wrong time. Paying high fees is the other way to get killed. The best way to avoid both of these is to buy a low-cost index fund, and buy it over time. Be greedy when others are fearful, and fearful when others are greedy, but don¡¯t think you can outsmart the market. 
¡°If a cross-section of American industry is going to do well over time, then why try to pick the little beauties and think you can do better? Very few people should be active investors.¡± 
If there is any lesson the life of Warren Buffett has shown, it is the truth of that. 
*** 
Trees don¡¯t grow to the sky, but Buffett felt he could help new saplings take root. He never lost his focus on business, but as he contemplated the idealway to spend the rest of his life, once again he was roused by the urge to preach. For some time he had been givingtalks to college students around the United States, traveling to their schools, welcomingthemto Omaha. He liked talkingto students because they were not hardened in their habits, stillyoungenough to take fulladvantage of what he said. 
¡°I packed my little snowball very early, and if I had packed it ten years later, it would have been way different than where it stands on the hill right now. So I recommend to students that if you start out a little ahead of the game¡ªit doesn¡¯t have to be a lot, but it¡¯s so much better than starting out behind the game. And credit cards really get you behind the game.¡± 
As early as 2002, feelinga sense of urgency, he had begun to pick up speed with his talks to the students. They came fromMIT. Northwestern. The University of Iowa. The University of Nebraska. Wesleyan. The University of Chicago. Wayne State. Dartmouth. The University of Indiana. The University of Michigan. Notre Dame. Columbia. Yale. The University of Houston. Harvard/ Radcliffe. The University of Missouri. The University of Tennessee. UC Berkeley. Rice. Stanford. Iowa State. The University of Utah. Texas A&M University. Much of his message was that gettingrich quick wasn¡¯t the worthiest goalin life. Ironically, it was his own competitiveness and the urge of humankind to worship the rich and famous that made his audience seek him out to hear these words. Like everythingelse in his life, the visits fromstudents started to snowball. 
In 2008, he was crowned the richest man on earth for the first time. By then, the students were comingfrom Asia, from Latin America, arrivingin Omaha in groups of two or three schools at a time, in packs sometimes of more than two hundred, sometimes on severaldays a month. 
The students who made the pilgrimage to visit the Sage of Omaha got the fulltreatment (exceptingonly that Buffett did not go to their hotels in person and leave bound volumes of his annual reports for themat the front desk at four-thirty a.m. The Internet now did that job for him). They toured Rose Blumkin¡¯s Nebraska Furniture Mart and roamed the aisles of Borsheim¡¯s. Buffett met themin the office. Some days now, he abandoned his gray suits and tight collars, and looked relaxed in casual dress. Their questions often ventured far afield from business. What is the purpose of life? some of themwanted to know. He answered this question the same way he answered the business ones¡ªin mathematicalterms. 
As he had told the students at Georgia Tech when Susie was in the hospital, recoveringfrom her surgery: 
¡°The purpose of life is to be loved by as many people as possible among those you want to have love you.¡± 
How should society be ordered? He told themabout the Ovarian Lottery. How do I find the right spouse? Marry up, he said. (He wasn¡¯t talkingabout money.) How do I know what is right? Follow your Inner Scorecard. What should I do about a career?Find somethingyou are passionate about. I only work with people I like. If you go to work every morningwith your stomach churning, you¡¯re in the wrongbusiness. 
He told themabout the genie. Treat your body like the only car you¡¯llever own: Baby that car, garage it every night, buff every dent, and change its oilevery week. Then he took themout to lunch or dinner at Gorat¡¯s and everyone scarfed down salty T-bones and double hash browns at the scuffed linoleumtables as if the genie had exempted themtemporarily from his rules. As they ate, they would leap up, one after another, and jockey to have a picture taken with Warren Buffett. Someday, maybe in forty years, their grandchildren would believe themwhen they claimed to have talked and sat and dined with the Oracle of Omaha. 
What he was teachingwere the lessons that had emerged from the unfoldingof his own life. 
In that unfolding, he admits to ambition, but he denies that there was ever a plan. He finds it hard to acknowledge his own powerfulhand as the creator of the sweepingcanvas that is his masterpiece. As he tells the story, a series of happy accidents built Berkshire Hathaway; a moneymakingmachine sprangup without design. Its elegant structure of true partnership with like-minded shareholders built on what Munger called a ¡°seamless web of deserved trust,¡± with an investment portfolio buried inside an interlocked set of businesses whose capitalcould be moved at will, all of them turbocharged with ¡°float¡±¡ªallthis had come about, he claims, simply as a reflection of his personality. The finalproduct was a modelthat could be analyzed and understood, yet few did and, for the most part, nobody coattailed it. What people paid attention to was simply how rich he was. Indeed, as much as he wanted them to study his model, Buffett sometimes inadvertently discouraged it; he also wanted people to believe that he just tap-danced into work every day and had fun. 
But that would be the less flatteringversion. 
The truth is this. 
When Warren was a little boy fingerprintingnuns and collectingbottle caps, he had no knowledge of what he would someday become. Yet as he rode his bike through SpringValley, flingingpapers day after day, and raced through the halls of The Westchester, pulse pounding, tryingto make his deliveries on time, if you had asked him if he wanted to be the richest man on earth¡ªwith his whole heart, he would have said, Yes. 
That passion had led himto study a universe of thousands of stocks. It made himburrow into libraries and basements for records nobody else troubled to get. He sat up nights studyinghundreds of thousands of numbers that would glaze anyone else¡¯s eyes. He read every word of severalnewspapers each morningand sucked down the Wall Street Journal like his morningPepsi, then Coke. He dropped in on companies, spendinghours talkingabout barrels with the woman who ran an outpost of Greif Bros. Cooperage or auto insurance with Lorimer Davidson. He read magazines like the Progressive Grocer to learn how to stock a meat department. He stuffed the backseat of his car with Moody¡¯s Manuals and ledgers on his honeymoon. He spent months readingold newspapers datingback a century to learn the cycles of business, the history of WallStreet, the history of capitalism, the history of the modern corporation. He followed the world of politics intensely and recognized how it affected business. He analyzed economic statistics untilhe had a deep understandingof what they signified. Since childhood, he had read every biography he could find of people he admired, lookingfor the lessons he could learn from their lives. He attached himself to everyone who could help himand coattailed anyone he could find who was smart. He ruled out payingattention to almost anythingbut business¡ªart, literature, science, travel, architecture¡ªso that he could focus on his passion. He defined a circle of competence to avoid makingmistakes. To limit risk he never used any significant amount of debt. He never stopped thinkingabout business:what made a good business, what made a bad business, how they competed, what made customers loyalto one versus another. He had an unusual way of turning problems around in his head, which gave himinsights nobody else had. He developed a network of people who¡ªfor the sake of his friendship as well as his sagacity¡ªnot only helped himbut also stayed out of his way when he wanted themto. In hard times or easy, he never stopped thinkingabout ways to make money. And allof this energy and intensity became the motor that powered his innate intelligence, temperament, and skills. 
Warren Buffett was a man who loved money, a man for whom the game of collectingit ran in his veins as his lifeblood. That love kept himgoing:buyinglittle stocks like National American, sellingGEICO to have the money to buy somethingcheaper, pushingat the boards of companies like Sanborn Map to do the right thing for shareholders. It had made himindependent and competitive enough to want his own partnership and say no to the chance to be a junior partner runningBen Graham¡¯s old firm. It made himtough enough to shut down Dempster¡¯s distribution center and fire Lee Dimon; it gave himthe determination to break Seabury Stanton. It had tamed his impatience and made him listen when Charlie Munger insisted that they buy great businesses, even though listeningto other people went against his very grain. It stiffened his willto survive the SEC investigation of Blue Chip and to break the strike at the Buffalo News. It made himan implacable acquirer. It also led himto lower his standards from time to time when his turf dried up. Yet it saved him from serious losses by keepinghimfrom abandoninghis margin of safety. 
Warren Buffett was a timid man who shied fromconfrontation and needed people to cushion himfromlife¡¯s rougher edges. His fears were personal, not financial; he was never timid when it came to money. His passionate yearningto be rich gave himthe courage to ride his bicycle past the house with the awfuldogand throw those last few newspapers in SpringValley. It sent himto Columbia, seekingBen Graham, after Harvard turned himdown. It made himput one foot in front of the other, callingon people as a prescriptionist, while they rejected himover and over. It gave himthe strength to return to Dale Carnegie after losinghis courage the first time. It forced him through the decisions in the Salomon crisis to make his great withdrawal fromthe Bank of Reputation. It lent him the dignity to face years of almost intolerable criticismwithout counterattackingduringthe Internet bubble. He had spent his life contemplating, limiting, and avoidingrisk, but in the end he was braver than he realized himself. 
Warren Buffett would never call himself courageous; he would cite his energy, focus, and rational temperament. Above all, he would describe himself as a teacher. Allhis adult life he had sought to live up to the values instilled in him by his father: He said that Howard taught himthat the ¡°how¡± mattered more than the ¡°how much.¡± To hold his ruthlessness in check wasn¡¯t an easy lesson for him. It helped that he was fundamentally honest¡ªand that he was possessed by the urge to preach. ¡°He deliberately limited his money,¡± says Munger. ¡°Warren would have made a lot more money if he hadn¡¯t been carryingallthose shareholders and had maintained the partnership longer, takingan override.¡± Compounded over thirty-three 
years, the extra money would have been worth many billions¡ªtens of billions¡ªto him.27 He could have bought and sold the businesses inside Berkshire Hathaway with a cold calculation of their financial return without consideringhow he felt about the people involved. He could have become a buyout king. He could have promoted and lent his name to all sorts of ventures. ¡°In the end,¡± says Munger, ¡°he didn¡¯t want to do it. He was competitive, but he was never just rawly competitive with no ethics. He wanted to live life a certain way, and it gave hima public record and a public platform. And I would argue that Warren¡¯s life has worked 
out better this way.¡±28 
It was the willto share what he knew in an act of sheer generosity that made himspend months writinghis annual letter to the shareholders; his joy in showmanship that made himwant a mobile home at his shareholder meeting; his pixieish sense of fun that led himto endorse a mattress. It was his Inner Scorecard that made himclingto his margin of safety. It was pure love that turned himinto what Munger called ¡°a learningmachine.¡± It was his handicappingskill that let himuse that knowledge to figure out what the future might bring. It was his urge to preach that made him want to warn the world of dangers to come. 
*** 
When Warren reached his seventy-seventh birthday, he mused that he had lived one-third of the lifespan of the United States. His age weighed on him; it was gettingharder for himto read all day longthe way he used to, since one of his eyes was gettinga little weak. So he read more efficiently. He had finally given in and agreed to wear hearingaids. His voice turned gravelly faster than it once did. He tired more easily. But his business judgment was stillquick and sharp. 
He wished he could have the next ten years¡¯ worth of newspapers delivered to his doorstep right now. The years ahead weren¡¯t endless, but with luck they could be long. Trees don¡¯t grow to the sky, but he wasn¡¯t scrapingthe horizon yet. Another new person, another investment, another idea always waited for him. The things left to learn far exceeded what he already knew. 
¡°The snowball just happens if you¡¯re in the right kind of snow, and that¡¯s what happened with me. I don¡¯t just mean compounding money either. It¡¯s in terms of understanding the world and what kind of friends you accumulate. You get to select over time, and you¡¯ve got to be the kind of person that the snow wants to attach itself to. You¡¯ve got to be your own wet snow, in effect. You¡¯d better be picking up snow as you go along, because you¡¯re not going to be getting back up to the top of the hill again. That¡¯s the way life works.¡± 
The snowball he had created so carefully was enormous by now. Yet his attitude toward it remained the same. However many birthdays lay ahead, he would always be astonished each time the calendar turned, and as longas he lived, he would never stop feelinglike a sprout. For he wasn¡¯t lookingbackward to the top of the hill. It was a bigworld, and he was just startingout. 
Afterword 
On October 23, 2006, Berkshire Hathaway became the first American stock to trade above $100,000 per share. By the end of 2007, BRK traded above $140,000 per share, which valued Berkshire as a company at more than $200 billion. Berkshire was the world¡¯s most respected company, accordingto a Barron¡¯s survey. 1 Buffett¡¯s personalfortune exceeded $60 billion. 
For a decade, BRK stock had compounded at slightly over twelve percent¡ªa rate that some might compare unfavorably to Buffett¡¯s early years, when he achieved an average twenty-seven percent return. Trees don¡¯t grow to the sky, he always said; as Berkshire¡¯s capital grew, the climb would get steeper. But investors in Berkshire had only gratitude for the ¡°lower¡± returns. Those who bought an index of the market had just suffered through what the Wall Street Journal called a ¡°lost decade¡± in which the S&P 500 index had gone 
exactly nowhere, fallingbelow its level of April 1999.2 Buffett¡¯s talk at Sun Valley was unfoldingalongthe lines he had discussed; the period after the 1999 stock market bubble had burst was now the third-longest stretch in the past hundred years when the market made no progress. Buffett stillsaid that stocks are the best long-time investment¡ªas longas they were bought at the right price, and for a low fee. As of early 2008, he was buyingstocks, but not with great enthusiasm. Sooner or later the market¡¯s weighingmachine would catch up with its votingmachine. In the meantime, he continued to mostly buy businesses. 
Buffett had added several new directors to the Berkshire board since Bill Gates and Charlotte Guyman. In the 2002 chairman¡¯s letter he had invited shareholders to nominate themselves for the director position. The letters had come pouringin, and Buffett¡ªof course¡ªcollected them; he was amused, entertained, and in a few instances impressed by the people who¡¯d nominated themselves. Still, in the end, he had added Don Keough and Tom Murphy that year instead of a self-nominated candidate. The process had revealed, however, the highly personal¡ªto say the least¡ªcorporate governance at Berkshire. Berkshire had agreed, in response to an SEC request, to adopt a formalized process for shareholders to nominate directors. In 2007, Berkshire added another woman, Yahoo! chief financial officer Susan Decker, to his board, again tiltingthe board demographic to a younger age. 
Alongthe way, Buffett had found that he liked the idea of advertisingfor people to nominate themselves for jobs. He had always preferred that people ask himfor things, rather than the other way around. In his 2006 letter to shareholders, prodded by BillGates, he had pointed out that Lou Simpson¡¯s ¡°top-notch¡± record was at risk if anythinghappened to both Simpson and himself, and advertised for a successor to Simpson. Send in your r¨¦sum¨¦, Buffett said. The number one thinghe and Munger were lookingfor was somebody who understood risk. Seven hundred proposals arrived from all over the world. One person explained, ¡°I am said to be selfish and also ruthless¡± various people went on at length¡ªgreat length¡ªabout why they felt they were cut fromthe same cloth as Buffett¡ªwithout givingany real qualifications for the job; and many, many people wrote sayingthey had no requisite experience, but wanted to be Buffett¡¯s apprentice, understudy, or prot¨¦g¨¦. He collected allthese letters in huge boxes in the boardroombefore eventually filingthem away. In the end he chose four candidates who were already successful and managingmoney; they now waited in the wings. 
*** 
After the awkward 2004 shareholder meeting, Buffett moved the business section of the meetingto late in the afternoon in 2005. That year, and in 2006, no activists had shown up. But just before the 2007 meeting, a billboard appeared hoveringover a major freeway in Omaha that said ¡°Will your conscience let you off on a technicality?¡± The question referred to a proposed resolution to force Berkshire to sell its PetroChina investment; PetroChina¡¯s parent company, Chinese National PetroleumCompany (CNPC), was implicated in fundingChinese sponsorship of genocide in Darfur. While not required to put the resolution on the ballot, Buffett did so, and allowed a vigorous airingof the Darfur issue at the shareholder meeting. 
The supervotingprovisions of the A shares meant that the resolution could never pass, but Buffett cared deeply what his shareholders thought of himand the company. The question was mooted when, by the end of 2007, for reasons that he said were unrelated to the Darfur question, Buffett sold the PetroChina investment. It had cost Berkshire just under $500 million; the company netted a profit of $3.5 billion. Energy prices continued to soar afterward, and he was accused of sellingtoo soon. Meanwhile, the shareholder meetings remained a modelof decorum; more protestors had begun to arrive at the microphone, where they were greeted respectfully. Then the festivalwent on. 
*** 
Berkshire had bought a number of other new businesses. The most significant included Iscar, a highly automated Israeli maker of metalcuttingtools, in 2006, Berkshire¡¯s first acquisition of a non-U.S. company. For Fruit of the Loom, he bought Russell Athletics. He took controlof Equitas, assumingthe old claims of Lloyd¡¯s of London in exchange for $7 billion worth of insurance float. Berkshire also bought electronics distributor TTI. In 2007, Buffett invested in the stock of BNSF (Burlington Northern Santa Fe) railroad, settingoff a minor frenzy for railroad stocks. One investment that Buffett did not make was in the Wall Street Journal. He had never owned stock in his favorite newspaper by 2007 when press lord Rupert Murdoch offered to buy it. Some Journal editors and staffers hoped that Buffett would save the paper in the cause of quality journalism. But he would not pay a premiumprice for a rich man¡¯s trophy, even to become the savior of quality journalism. Longago, in the days of the Washington Monthly, the unsentimental side of Buffett had divorced his fondness for journalismfrom his wallet. Nothinghad changed that. 
In 2008, candymaker Mars, Inc. announced that it was buyingWm. Wrigley Jr. Company for $23 billion. Buffett had agreed, through Berkshire, to lend $6.5 billion as part of the deal, in an arrangement facilitated by Byron Trott, his investment banker at Goldman Sachs. Trott had been responsible for several of Berkshire¡¯s acquisitions. He understood how Buffett thought, and Buffett said that he had Berkshire¡¯s interests at heart. ¡°I¡¯ve been conductinga seventy-year taste test,¡± Buffett said about Wrigley¡¯s. The Wrigley deal harkened back to the old days when he had refused to sella single stick of gumto Virginia Macoubrie. 
Buffett¡¯s first thought after agreeingto make the loan¡ªof course¡ªhad been to call Kelly Muchemore Broz and ask her to set aside a little space at the Berkshire meeting, in case Mars and Wrigley wanted to sellsome products to his shareholders. The shareholder meetingturned into a mini-festivalof candy and chewinggum. Attendance set a new record; 31,000 people came. 
Also in 2008, Berkshire had acquired Marmon, a smallindustrial conglomerate that made electrical components, railroad tank cars and containers, truck flatbeds, industrial equipment and materials, and the like, with revenues of $7 billion. The seller was the Pritzker family, which had decided to break up its conglomerate to settle family squabblingthat had broken out after the death of Buffett¡¯s old coattailinghero Jay Pritzker in 1999. 
*** 
Buffett had seen many examples of family squabbles amongthe rich when the patriarch died; he was comfortable that his own arrangements would prevent that. Little squabblingwas goingon within the Buffett family in the wake of Susie¡¯s willand the gift to the Gates Foundation. Howie and Susie Jr. were doingwhat they loved: farmingand givingmoney away. Peter was in discussions with Robert Redford to bring Spirit: The Seventh Fire to Redford¡¯s Sundance resort as an annual summer event. He was also in talks with sponsors in Germany and in China about overseas tours of the show, and was about to release his latest CD, 
Imaginary Kingdom. 
The one exception to the harmony was Buffett¡¯s adopted granddaughter Nicole Buffett. In 2006 Nicole had 
participated in Jamie Johnson and Nick Kurzon¡¯s documentary The One Percent, a story about the children of the rich. In the documentary, Nicole unwisely positioned herself as a spokesman for the unspoiled Buffett way of life. The documentary, which appeared shortly before Buffett¡¯s donation to the Gates Foundation, resulted in follow-up appearances on CNN, NationalPublic Radio, and an invitation to appear on an Oprah episode about socialclass in America. Buffett¡¯s reaction was harsh; he had sent word to Nicole that he didn¡¯t consider her his granddaughter, and if asked, would say so. Nicole told Oprah, ¡°It¡¯s a weird thingto be workingfor a very wealthy family consideringI do come fromone of the wealthiest families in America.¡± She said she was ¡°at peace with¡± not havinginherited wealth¡ªapparently a reference to the smallamounts that Susie had left her grandchildren¡ªbut added, ¡°I do feelthat it would be nice to be involved with creating things for others with that money and to be involved in it. I feelcompletely excluded from it.¡± The ¡°poor little me¡± aspect of her interview was her second mistake. 
Afterward, she sent Buffett a letter askingwhy he had disavowed her. In August 2006, he wrote back3 offeringher good wishes, told her that she had reason to be proud of her accomplishments, and gave her some worthwhile advice. Positioningherself with people as a member of the Buffett family was a mistake, he wrote. ¡°If you do so, it will become your primary identity with them. People will react to you based on that ¡®fact¡¯ rather than to who you are or what you have accomplished.¡± He also wrote, ¡°I have not legally or emotionally adopted you as a grandchild, nor have the rest of my family adopted you as a niece or cousin¡­. It is simply a fact that just as [your mother] is in no respect my daughter-in-law, her children are not my grandchildren.¡± 
Despite the controlled tone of the letter, Nicole had wounded him in his most tender spot¡ªhis identity and that of his family. Otherwise, he might have thought twice about sendingthe letter, which backfired badly on him. Nicole may have been wrong, but she seemed sincere. Instead of reiningher in, the rejection letter set her off on another round of interviews that made Buffett look like Ebenezer Scrooge; one result was a Page 
Six story in the New York Post (¡°Buffett to Kin: You¡¯re Fired!¡±)4 portrayinghimas takingvengeance on her for participatingin the documentary. To the man who had worked so hard for a lifetime never to alienate anyone, it was a painful irony¡ªbut perhaps the story would have a happier endingsomeday. Buffett had been able to make up with Mrs. B; he could make up with anybody who wanted to make up with him, given enough time. 
*** 
By 2008, Coca-Cola¡¯s stock was up forty-five percent from its low, to $58. Profits had risen steadily under CEO Neville Isdell. He had settled the Department of Justice investigation and closed a $200 million discrimination lawsuit over racialbias. Buffett left the board in February 2006. His last Coca-Cola shareholder meetinghad been another carnival of activists, but nobody had to be wrestled to the floor, and the tension was set to a lower thermostat. In 2007, Isdell had announced that he was retiring. The new CEO, Muhtar Kent, was responsible for the company¡¯s successfulpush into non-cola drinks, where Coca-Cola had been laggingand was strategically off course. 
¡°I always used to tell Gates that a ham sandwich could run Coca-Cola. And it was a damn good thing, too, because we had a period there a couple of years ago where, if it hadn¡¯t been that great of a business, it might not have survived.¡± 
*** 
General Re, Berkshire¡¯s other problem-child investment, had benefited fromfavorable insurance markets 
after September 11. It reported the most profitable results in its history in 2007, with $2.2 billion of pretax operatingearnings.5 By then Gen Re had earned back the losses and restored its balance sheet to a better condition than when Buffett bought it. From$14 billion of float at the end of 1998, a decade later General Re had $23 billion of float and $12.5 billion of capital. It was operatingwith nearly one-third fewer employees and the company had been transformed.6 Since 2001, General Re had produced a 13.4 percent annualized 
return on capital; a number that would be higher, CEO Joe Brandon noted in a letter to Buffett, were it not for ¡°a number of infamous legacy issues.¡±7 These included $2.3 billion of losses related to insurance and reinsurance sold in prior years, and $412 million of charges for the run-off of Gen Re Securities, the company¡¯s derivatives unit. Nevertheless, GeneralRe had escaped the fate of Salomon and overcome the stigma of its Scarlet Letter. Buffett was finally able to praise it and its senior managers in some depth in his 2007 shareholder letter, saying ¡°the luster of the company has been restored¡± by ¡°doingfirst-class business in 
a first-class way.¡±8 
One large and lingeringtrace of GeneralRe¡¯s former problems remained. Its last act of ignominy before the change of management in 2001 had been to create a Salomon-type scandalof its own in which it broke Buffett¡¯s rule of not ¡°losingreputation for the firm.¡± This was the event that would, as it unfolded, adjust Buffett¡¯s perception to the new legal enforcement environment, in which showingextreme contrition and cooperation produced no advantage in how a company was treated by prosecutors. Extreme contrition and cooperation were now the expected minimumstandard¡ªin part because of Salomon. Anythingshort of that¡ªfor a company to defend itself or its employees, for example¡ªcould be considered grounds for indictment. 
General Re had become entangled in legaland regulatory problems when New York Attorney GeneralEliot Spitzer started investigatingthe insurance industry over ¡°finite¡± reinsurance in 2004. ¡°Finite¡± reinsurance has been defined in many ways, but, put simply, it is a type of reinsurance used by the client mainly for financial or accountingreasons¡ªeither to bolster its capitalor to improve the amount or timingof its earnings. While usually legal and sometimes legitimate, finite reinsurance had been subject to such widespread abuse that accountingrulemakers have spent decades tryingto rein it in. 
Before workingon Wall Street, I was one of those tryingto rein it in, as a project manager at the Financial AccountingStandards Board, the primary accountingrulemaker. I helped to draft rules that specify how to account for finite reinsurance. After leavingthe FASB, I became a financial analyst. While workingat PaineWebber, I covered the stock of General Re at the time it was acquired by Berkshire Hathaway. I first met Warren in connection with the acquisition, and subsequently began to cover Berkshire. Warren had not previously spoken with WallStreet analysts, but he made an exception for me. He told the New York Times that he liked the way I thought and wrote. 
In 2003, after I started workingon this book, both General Re and Ajit Jain¡¯s Berkshire Re were condemned 
in a special investigation for sellingfinite reinsurance that allegedly contributed to the collapse of an Australian insurer, HIH.9 Two years later, GeneralRe was accused of fraud by insurance regulators and policyholders in connection with the failure of a Virginia medical malpractice insurer, the Reciprocalof America. While the Department of Justice investigated the allegations extensively, no charges were brought 
against Gen Re or any of its employees.10 That same year, Eliot Spitzer¡¯s investigation of the insurance industry prompted an investigation by Berkshire¡¯s law firm, Munger, Tolles & Olson, which discovered that six employees, includingGeneralRe¡¯s former CEO, Ron Ferguson, and its former chief financial officer, Elizabeth Monrad, had allegedly conspired with a customer, AIG, to aid and abet an accountingfraud. The alleged fraud was executed through a reinsurance transaction designed to deceive investors and Wall Street analysts (includingme) by transferring$500 million in reserves to AIG to window-dress AIG¡¯s balance sheet. In June 2005, two of the alleged conspirators, Richard Napier and John Houldsworth, plea-bargained and testified for the prosecution, while five others¡ªfour senior managers fromGen Re and one from AIG¡ªwere indicted on conspiracy and fraud charges. 
The trial, conducted in federal court in Hartford, Connecticut, in January and February 2008, was noteworthy for the prosecution¡¯s use of taped telephone conversations in which several of the defendants had repeatedly discussed the transaction in colorfulterms. The defendants invoked the ¡°Buffett defense,¡± sayingthat Buffett had approved the outlines of the structured transaction and was involved in settingthe fee. Buffett was not charged with any wrongdoing, and prosecutors said he was not involved. GeneralRe¡¯s CEO Joseph Brandon, who was listed amongvarious unindicted co-conspirators in the case, was repeatedly cited by the defendants¡¯ lawyers as havingknowledge of the deal. He had cooperated with federal prosecutors without askingfor immunity. General Re chief operatingofficer Tad Montross was also named by the defendants as having knowledge of the transaction. Neither he nor Buffett, however, was listed amongthe unindicted co-conspirators. None of the three men testified in the case. 
I was subpoenaed by the prosecution as both a fact witness and expert and testified that I would ¡°almost certainly¡± have not upgraded AIG to a ¡°strongbuy¡± in early 2000 had I known the company¡¯s true financial position. Under cross-examination I testified about my acquaintance with allof the defendants. I know some of them better than others, but have always had high regard for allof them. I also testified about my relationship with Warren, that I was writingthis book, and that Joe Brandon has been a close friend since 1992. I wasn¡¯t asked about Tad, but I¡¯malso acquainted with him. 
In February 2008, all five defendants were convicted on allcounts in the indictment. They face sentencingas this book goes to print; the potential sentences range up to life imprisonment, although the odds seemto be that the terms willbe much lower than that. The convicted defendants have said that they willappeal. 
Currently I amalso under subpoena fromformer AIG CEO Hank Greenbergin a related case brought against him by the New York Attorney General¡¯s office. At this writing, Berkshire Hathaway has settled with neither the SEC nor the Department of Justice. In April 2008, General Re¡¯s CEO Joe Brandon resigned to help facilitate a settlement between the company and government authorities. 
Accordingly, I cannot comment further on the case at this time. Warren Buffett¡¯s personality, however, is laid out in this book; readers should be able to form their own opinion about whether he would participate in or condone the aidingand abettingof a fraud committed by a customer of Berkshire Hathaway. 
Finally, New York Governor Eliot Spitzer, who launched the investigation, resigned only a month after the defendants in the AIG trialwere convicted, followingrevelations that he patronized the prostitutes of an escort service called the Emperor¡¯s Club. 


