1 
The Allianz Concern and Its Leaders, 1918每1933 
One of the most extraordinary aspects of modern Germany is that so many of its greatest enterprises have managed to survive the misadventures of its polit-ical history. Of the fve political systems that have held sway on German soil since 1870, four have suffered an ignominious demise, and a goodly number of the street names that were identifed with those regimes have disappeared with them. Not so with a host of German companies and corporations founded in the nineteenth century. Siemens, Krupp, Thyssen, Bosch, Degussa, Deutsche Bank, Dresdner Bank, and the MAN are still with us; though changing modes of production and globalization are creating fusions of and transformations in these companies that may more profoundly affect their futures than two world wars, they still have kept their identifcation as German companies with a con-tinuous tradition for a remarkably long period of time. This also holds true for many of the leading enterprises in the German insurance feld, one of the most neglected areas of German business history despite its lengthy development over time and extraordinary importance to the German economy. It holds true also for the largest among the leading insurance companies and the subject of this book, the Allianz.1 
As indicated in the Preface, this study cannot and is not intended to remedy the absence of full historical accounts that might do justice to Allianz and the im-portant branch of the German economy in which it is embedded, although one may hope that other historians will be encouraged to address happier periods in the growth and development of Allianz and the German insurance business. Here the concentration must be on those elements in the history of Allianz 每 and those problems in the private German insurance industry 每 that are relevant for understanding the policies and practices of their leaders between 1933 and 1945 and their efforts to cope with the legacy of National Socialism after 1945.The most important of these elements were shaped and formed during the years fol-lowing Germany＊s defeat in 1918, and it is necessary to begin this study with a 
1 Allianz＊s name has changed often over the years. Founded in 1890 as the Allianz Versicherungs-Aktien-Gesellschaft (Allianz Insurance Corporation), it was renamed the Allianz und Stuttgarter Verein Versicherungs-Aktien-Gesellschaft (Allianz and Stuttgart Association Insurance Corpora-tion) in 1927;in 1940 it returned to the old name Allianz Versicherungs-Aktiengesellschaft. In this study, the short designation ※Allianz§ will be employed. 
1 
brief survey of the key relevant developments in Allianz＊s history that make in-telligible its mode of adaptation to the Third Reich and subsequent recovery. 
building the concern 
The Allianz Insurance Corporation was founded in 1890 in Berlin as a joint stock company with a capital of 4 million marks. It was initially licensed to pro-vide transportation and accident insurance, as well as reinsurance in the felds of life, accident, fre, and transportation. In reality, it was a daughter company of the Munich Reinsurance Co. (Munich Re, founded in 1880), whose driving personalities 每 General Director Carl Thieme (1844每1924) and banker Wilhelm Finck (1848每1924), the chairman of the supervisory board 每 decided to enter the direct insurance business in Berlin in order to gain speedy approval of a concession from the Prussian government and access to the North German and national markets. Another Munich Re director, Paul von der Nahmer (1858每 1921), joined the board of directors of Allianz in 1894, thus intensifying the union between the two companies and providing Allianz with excellent banking connections and the benefts of von der Nahmer＊s international experience. He became sole chairman of the board of directors in 1904. The choice of the Reich eagle as Allianz＊s logo, with the Munich Kindl and the Berlin Bear in the left and right bottom corners, pointed to the original and new location of the enter-prise, although the specifcity of these particularist elements was eliminated in 1923 when the logo was transformed to refect at once the unity and the multi-plicity of an expanded company. The new logo showed a single mother eagle encompassing three smaller eagles, and while the contours of the logo were to become ※softer§ and more appealing by the mid-1970s, the basic symbolism was 
2
retained after 1923. 
Initially concentrating on accident and transport insurance, particularly of valuables and gold, Allianz rapidly expanded its felds of endeavor. It pioneered machine insurance, took up break-in and theft insurance, and entered the li-ability insurance feld. By the end of the 1890s, Allianz was also engaged in a considerable amount of foreign business 每 primarily in France, but also in Switzerland and Belgium, whose large banks took their insurance from Allianz. At the same time, Allianz participated in a variety of risk-sharing agreements 
2 For the logo as well as other important information on the history of the concern, see Peter Borscheid, 100 Jahre Allianz (Munich, 1990), esp. pp. 96, 410. Much can also be learned from the extremely informative unpublished study by Director Rudolf Hensel, written in 1930,※40 Jahre Allianz. Ein Stk deutscher Versicherungsgeschichte,§ FHA, AZ 1.3/1. See also Wilhelm Kisch, Ffzig Jahre Allianz. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der Deutschen Privatversicherung (Munich, 1940) and Ludwig Arps, Wechselvolle Zeiten. 75 Jahre Allianz Versicherung 1890每1965 (Munich, 1965). The best general study of the German insurance business is Ludwig Arps, Auf sicheren Pfeilern; see also Arps, Durch unruhige Zeiten. The background details presented here are based on these works. See also the brief and not very satisfactory treatment in Wandel, Banken und Versicherungen, Ch. 4. 
with other direct insurers and also further developed its reinsurance activities. This was accompanied by the onset of what was to be a long history of expan-sion through the acquisition of other companies which either could no longer afford to stay in operation or found it advantageous to come under Allianz＊s wings. In 1905, for example, it took over Fides Insurance Company, which had pioneered break-in insurance. In the same year, the Allianz entered the fre in-surance feld just in time to sustain 300,000 marks in losses in the San Francisco earthquake of 1906, which was a small amount compared to the losses of 46 mil-lion marks suffered by German insurers as a whole and of more than 14 million marks lost by Munich Re. The San Francisco earthquake was an important test of the strength of the German insurance business, and it was one from which Munich Re (which was especially hard hit) and Allianz emerged very success-fully and learned important lessons about premium levels and risk sharing. By 1914, Allianz was collecting 50 million marks in premiums, 30 million of it from transport insurance, and ranked frst among Germany＊s direct insurers in prop-erty insurance. It accounted for 2.3% of the German insurance industry＊s 2 billion marks in premiums in 1913 and collected 2% of the industry＊s 500 mil-lion marks in premiums from foreign business. The First World War disrupted these promising prospects, causing a signifcant reduction in both domestic and foreign business. On the one hand, the company＊s international business suf-fered a severe setback, for obvious reasons. On the other, military call-ups and other wartime problems limited advertising and insurance sales activities. As the war went on and morale and physical plant deteriorated, claims increased de-spite rising premiums, especially for burglary and theft and also in the relatively lucrative transportation insurance feld. Infation at once increased personnel and other costs and reduced returns on long-term policies. Allianz did, however, enter some important new felds during the war, one of which was fight insur-ance. The most signifcant feld was automobile insurance, when Allianz joined with Munich Re and Imperial Automobile Club to found Kraft Insurance Cor-poration in April 1918. However, one could have mixed feelings at best about the newest form of insurance introduced after the Revolution of 1918: civil com-motion insurance. It did, to be sure, yield 35 million marks in premiums in 1920, but it also involved claims in the millions for burned-down breweries and plun-dered warehouses. Nevertheless, the rising star at Allianz, Director Kurt Schmitt (1886每1950), had entered into the new branch with considerable enthusiasm and optimism, albeit with an insistence on high premiums and an unwillingness to remain in the cartel of civil commotion insurance providers when he came to the conclusion that their premiums were too low.3 
Calculated expansionism and genuine business creativity and energy were to be the hallmarks of Schmitt＊s leadership of Allianz after he assumed the general directorship upon von der Nahmer＊s death in April 1921, a position he retained 
3 See his correspondence with Kisskalt in 1919每1920 and the Aktennote of Nov. 10, 1920,MR, G 1/17. 
until his resignation to become Reich Economics Minister in June 1933. 4 These qualitieswere to continue to characterize his subsequent leadership of Munich Re so long as one could fnd some room for their expression between 1935 and 1945. Schmitt, whose father was a family doctor and whose mother came of prosper-ous peasant stock, grew up in the Rhenish Palatinate before his family moved to Munich when he was 16. Despite a somewhat indifferent education in the rural schools of the Palatinate, he managed to make it through the Maxgymnasium in Munich and went on in 1905 to study law at the University of Munich. His chief enthusiasm at the beginning of his study seems to have been his activities in the Corps Franconia, to which his father had belonged, and the repair of damage done tohisnoseinthecourse ofduelling 每which hepursued asasport rather than as a quest for ※satisfaction§ 每 was so successful that it was said to have improved his already quite handsome looks. He remained an enthusiastic corps brother throughout his life, although he was to become highly critical of duelling. Grad-ually, he also became a more serious student, a cause undoubtedly promoted by a year of military service and his marriage to a friend of his sister, Marguerite Wen-gler, in 1909. In that year he fnished his doctorate, writing a dissertation on a subject dealing with commercial law, an interest that refected his decision to pur-sueabusinesscareer. Governmentservicewasagoodsteppingstonetothehigher reaches of the business world, however, and so he went to work in the Bavarian Interior Ministry under Staatsrat Gustav von Kahr, who was later to achieve con-siderable political notoriety as the reactionary State Commissar of Bavaria in the early 1920s and as one whose policies made it possible for extreme right-wing groups, among them the National Socialists, to fnd Bavaria so hospitable. 
Schmitt successfully completed his civil service examination in 1912, did some work for a law frm, and sought a position in a bank or the Foreign Offce in Berlin. A man of modest means, however, he could not afford the low pay and high costs that he found in Berlin and thus returned to Munich, where a friend recommended him to General Director Carl von Thieme of Munich Re. After a successful interview with Thieme＊s right-hand man and later successor, Wilhelm Kisskalt, who was impressed by Schmitt＊s creative energy, Schmitt was hired in June 1913 for 200 marks a month and given the task of working out the con-ditions for machine insurance. This was an underdeveloped feld and also, for Schmitt at least, a very boring one. He was soon rescued when Kisskalt recom-mended him to Gustav Knote, director of the Munich branch of Allianz between 1919 and 1932. The latter needed a jurist, and Schmitt seized upon the opportu-nity, thus ※entering into the service of a corporation in which I was to work and enjoy the most beautiful years of my life.§5 
4 There is a good sketch of Schmitt in Arps, Wechselvolle Zeiten, pp. 73每7, and in Ludwig Arps, 
※Kurt Schmitt und Hans He.§ in Ludwig Arps, Deutsche Versicherungsunternehmer (Karlsruhe, 
1968), pp. 165每79. He also left behind an important collection of personal papers; see FHA, NL 1. 5 This is based on Schmitt＊s own account in a small memoir he wrote about his career prior to 1914, 
kindly placed at my disposal by Hermann Niemler and to be found in FHA, NL 1/163, quota-
tion p. 17. 
Schmitt immediately demonstrated the managerial vision and style that was to bring him such rapid success. Assigned to the liability insurance section, Schmitt had little diffculty performing the immense amount of paperwork con-nected with the incoming claims yet 每 in seeming contrast to the 25 other men working in the offce 每 became thoroughly dissatisfed with the bureaucratic and clumsy manner in which claims were handled and the extent to which they ended up in court. In Schmitt＊s view, another way had to be found based on a broader perspective: ※I confronted the economic, commercial, and social tasks with re-spect to the company, the insured, and those who had suffered damages, in short, the economic signifcance and interconnections involved.§6 On his own initiative, Schmitt decided that personal intervention and the arrangement of acceptable settlements 每 on the basis of a careful study of the materials 每 be-tween the insured and those making claims against them would save time and resources and produce better results. While this irritated his section head no end, the success of Schmitt＊s methods could not be denied, and he was appointed head of the section on August 1, 1913. Schmitt＊s willingness to take the initia-tive, cut through red tape and legalisms, and settle claims through direct and unbureaucratic intervention served him well and was typical of his approach to problems. He was now in a position to implement his method by establishing a staff of regulators to engage in the settlement of liability cases. This brought him into contact with the insurance agents themselves and the company or-ganization, and he soon began to give lectures on the importance of liability insurance as well as on the regulation of cases. The reduction of court cases received grateful recognition in Berlin and led to the prospect of Schmitt＊s ap-pointment as Knote＊s deputy and to his engagement in the settlement of large claims in Norway. 
These promising developments were interrupted by the First World War. A reserve offcer, Schmitt was called up immediately but had the good luck to suf-fer a minor wound that was repeatedly infected so that he could not be sent back. As a result, Allianz, which was laboring under severe personnel short-ages, was able to reclaim him from the front, frst to Munich and then to Berlin, where the death of the head of the accident division led to his appointment as the director in charge and thus to the board of directors. He soon became the right-hand man of von der Nahmer, who was suffering from an incurable can-cer, and his appointment as general director in 1921 was no surprise, despite his young age of 34, and was warmly supported by Kisskalt before the board of supervisors.7 
Schmitt＊s achievements as general director of Allianz, as well as his subsequent engagement in the insurance business, owed much to two men whom he brought into the company at this time, with whom he collaborated intimately, and who were fated to attain the height of their careers in the Third Reich: Hans He. 
6 Ibid., pp. 17f. 7 See Wilhelm Kisskalt＊s unpublished ※Erinnerungen an die Mchener Rk§ (Garmisch, 1953), 
pp. 14每15, FHA. 

Dr. Kurt Schmitt (1886每1950), general director of Allianz 1921每1933, about 1925. 
(1881每1957) and Eduard Hilgard (1884每1982).8 He. was the son of an insur-ance inspector in Leipzig, where he attended both Gymnasium and university and received his law degree in 1909. He followed in the footsteps of his father, frst working for the Accident Association in Magdeburg and then going to work for the Swiss Winterthur frm, frst as their general agent in Thuringia and Sax-ony and then as district director for the same area. He seems to have received his job with Winterthur as the consequence of a dispute with the company involv-ing the accidental death of his father, and it was not the last time that people were to be impressed with his stubborn and forthright personality. Schmitt be-came aware of his talents and brought him into Allianz as a deputy director in 
8 On He., see Arps, Wechselvolle Zeiten, pp. 107每10, as well as He.＊s small collection of papers, 
FHA, NL 3. There is no really satisfactory discussion of Hilgard in the secondary literature, but 
his personal papers and memoirs are quite valuable; see FHA, NL 2. 
1918. He. was above all an organization man, and he was largely responsible for building up the branch organization of Allianz and unifying the company by (among other things) holding regular meetings of its representatives. The frst of these was held in 1919, the same year in which He. founded the company news-paper: Allianz-Zeitung. He. was an ※insurance man§ through and through, and he played a decisive role in defning the company culture by cultivating identif-cation with the company and a sense of ※family.§ An avid sportsman, he was largely responsible for the promotion of sports in the company, the building of an Allianz stadium in Berlin-Mariendorf (which was graced by Karl Moe-bius＊s statue of the Spear Thrower and was the site of company ※Olympics§), and the development of sports facilities at various branches of the concern. At the same time, he promoted a spirit of friendly but rigorous competition to in-crease ※production§ among the company representatives, with a model of the Spear Thrower awarded to the most successful branch of the company each year. ※Papa He.,§ as he became known, was much respected in the company both for his talents and his integrity, and he was precisely the organizational talent needed to give structure and unity to the mass of acquisitions that took place un-der Schmitt＊s restless guidance. He. and Schmitt rapidly became close friends and worked well together in shaping the expanding concern. 
In certain very important respects, however, Schmitt was to be even more de-pendent on Hilgard, who had known Schmitt since his youth as they grew up only a few kilometers from one another. They had only casual contact then but saw one another more regularly in Munich, where Hilgard did his training for state service at the time Schmitt was completing his studies. Hilgard intended to have a civil service career and, after serving in the war, went to work in the peace treaty section of the Reich Finance Ministry and participated in some of the more important immediate postwar diplomatic negotiations. Among them was the Spa Conference of July 1920, where the very diplomatic Hilgard strongly disapproved of the rude and tactless behavior of the German industrialist Hugo Stinnes. Hilgard seemed to have enjoyed everything about his government work but the pay, which was causing him and his wife increasing diffculties in those infationary times. Thus, when unexpectedly called by Schmitt at the end of 1920 and asked if he were willing to make a change of career, Hilgard accepted the invitation to have an interview with Schmitt, He., and von der Nahmer; he subsequently accepted the position of deputy director and the attractive salary that came with it. As Hilgard was well aware, his decision involved something of a social comedown, not only because of the continued high status enjoyed by members of the ministerial bureaucracy but also because, as his in-laws made sure to remind him, the insurance feld had a much lower status than banking at that time. Indeed, von der Nahmer appeared to have shared these attitudes. He tended mainly to the fnancial aspects of the company, continued to think of himself as a banker, and scarcely socialized with colleagues from the insur-ance business. Schmitt was well aware of the low esteem in which the insurance business was held, and it galled him. Hilgard later recalled the impression made on him by a conversation with Schmitt on this subject in which the latter found 

Dr. Hans He. (1881每1957), general director of Allianz 1933每1948, about 1940. 
this attitude ※all the more unjustifed because he was utterly convinced by the high tasks of the insurance feld and the ethic which it expressed. This idea be-came fxed in me at that time and never left me, thank God, during my entire career with the Allianz.§9 They both agreed that it was one of their tasks to change public attitudes toward the signifcance and value of the insurance busi-ness and that, toward this end, the insurance industry needed a much greater public presence. For his part, Hilgard was to stress the importance of becom-ing more active in Berlin society as a means of raising the status of the insurance 
9 Eduard Hilgard, ※Mein Leben in der Allianz§(unpublished ms., ca. 1970), FHA, NL 2 /7, pp. 12每13. 
business. This willingness to engage in social and public activity was to become one of the strong links between the two men; He., who seemed anxious to keep up with Schmitt, likewise demonstrated a willingness to participate in such activ-ities. Not only did Hilgard (who valued external trappings) encourage Schmitt and He. to wear tailor-made suits and thus cut better fgures in public, he also led the way in becoming very active in the Club of Berlin, a gathering place for the city＊s leading businessmen. 
Hilgard＊s preoccupation with such matters became possible only because of the very special position he assumed upon the death of von der Nahmer in March 1921. Initially, he had been assigned to the liability insurance department under Director Clemens Maiholzer, and he found it just as boring as Schmitt had found machine insurance. Schmitt＊s appointment as general director, however, put an end to Hilgard＊s growing nostalgia for the civil service, since Schmitt took him away from Maiholzer, lodged him in an offce next to his own, and turned him into a kind of general secretary 每 with a host of interesting and variegated tasks of great importance for which he was eminently suited. On the one hand, Schmitt increasingly used Hilgard to represent himself in the employers＊ association and in the Reich Association for Private Insurance, so that Hilgard came to play a growing role in the various associations, an activity that promoted his public role but that did not contribute much to his becoming truly versed in the technicalities of the insurance business. On the other hand, Schmitt used Hilgard as a sound-ing board for his ideas, something he apparently needed despite his decisiveness. Hilgard was his right-hand man and negotiator in the stormy expansion of Al-lianz that took place under Schmitt＊s leadership. For Hilgard, of course, this was a rather extraordinary advancement within a matter of a few months, and the fact that Hilgard now accompanied Schmitt to supervisory board meetings (along with He.) and had such a close relationship to the general director was probably rather diffcult for the older directors to swallow. He. was apparently not disturbed by Hilgard＊s position, but it is interesting to note that Schmitt＊s advancement of Hilgard puzzled the latter, whose refections (more than forty years later) provide some interesting insights into the personalities and charac-ters of these three key individuals in the history of Allianz: 
I have often asked myself what was basically the reason for this way of acting on the part of Schmitt. I do not believe that in the short period between my entrance into Allianz and the frst meeting of the supervisory board Schmitt could have formed a reliable im-pression of my abilities. I believe much more that Schmitt, with the good feeling that he often, albeit not always, had for people, very quickly intuited that he could make a true friend and collaborator out of me. Perhaps he already at that time had an unconscious feeling for the fact that his deputy, Dr. He., with whom he would be bound in a strong friendship for decades, was basically a stronger personality than he himself, and he may have therefore wished to have a man at his side upon whom he could depend and with whom he could also discuss especially confdential things at such times as he did not want to turn to his offcial deputy.10 
10 Ibid., p. 21. 
Indeed, even before von der Nahmer＊s death, Schmitt had treated his succession to the General Directorship as a certainty and had revealed to Hilgard a series of bold projects, so that 
it was already at that time completely obvious to Schmitt that he would not only bring Allianz to the leading position among German insurance companies, but that he 每 and this seemed to me in view of the hapless situation of Germany especially noteworthy 每 at that time already had the frm intention of capturing large portions of the world market for the Allianz.11 
Fundamental to the great period of expansion now to begin 每 and, indeed, to the history of Allianz throughout the period discussed in this book 每 is Allianz＊s intimate relationship with Munich Re. On April 15, 1921, Allianz and Munich Re concluded a joint contract aimed at restructuring and deepening the relation-ship between the two companies. It was signed only a few days before von der Nahmer＊s death and was the work of him and Thieme, who was to retire that year and be replaced by Kisskalt. Thus 1921 was an important year of contrac-tual as well as personnel changes. The contract was to run through December 31, 1970, and it was subject to automatic renewal for another half century if nei-ther of the parties objected. Munich Re＊s capital participation in Allianz was set at 25%. The general director of each of the companies was to have a seat on the supervisory board of the other, and at least three of the supervisory board mem-bers of each of the frms were to serve in common on the supervisory board of both companies. Munich Re agreed not to establish any daughter companies in insurance branches in which Allianz was active, and such daughter companies of Munich Re as already existed would be transferred to Allianz in order to pro-mote the concentration of Allianz＊s activities. Allianz agreed to restrict itself to direct business and Munich Re to indirect business; Allianz agreed to give half of its reinsurance business and all of its excess-loss reinsurance business (i.e., coverage for liability and other forms of insurance for damages that exceeded normally anticipated risk or whose risk could not be easily calculated because of the newness of the insurance involved) to Munich Re. The obligation to cede business to Allianz was to extend to any new mergers or participations on the part of Allianz, while Munich Re agreed to pay for half of such cessions. Munich Re also agreed to participate in the amount of 50% in the foundation by Allianz of new companies, capital share participations, and security accounts.12 What all this meant is that Allianz and Munich Re were to work ever more closely in the future, and that the latter was committed to supporting the former in its ef-forts to achieve economies of scope and scale through a policy of expansion, concern building, and organizational rationalization. 
11 Ibid., p. 11. 
12 This is based on the discussion in Martin Herzog, ※Was Dokumente erz.hlen knen 每 Zur 
Geschichte der Mchener Rk,§ VII Bde. (Munich, 1986每1992), unpublished ms., FHA, here 
Bd. IV, pp. 756每9. 
Allianz, of course, was by no means unique in its policies of concentration and concern building, which were general characteristics of the Weimar econ-omy during the infationary period 1918每1923 and then in the period of stabiliza-tion between 1924 and 1929每1930. Finance man that he was, von der Nahmer had provided well for Allianz during the war, investing as little as possible in war bonds while storing up foreign exchange wherever he could. Many smaller frms were not so lucky and had unmanageable debts that were payable only in foreign exchange. These ※Valuta debts,§ as they were called, were a source of much bad blood between the Swiss and the Germans during and after the infation, but Allianz was relatively untouched by the problem; indeed, even at some cost to itself, Allianz cultivated its good relations with Schweizerische National-Versicherungs-Gesellschaft in Basel, in which both Munich Re and Al-lianz held substantial shares. In 1920, Allianz took over the Schweizer National＊s German engagements while the latter took over Allianz＊s Swiss engagements. However, the diffculties experienced by other, less fortunate, German compa-nies encouraged them to surrender their independence or simply sell out to the larger frms in the business. Thus, already by 1921 Allianz had entered two new branches of insurance by acquiring the important Hermes Kreditversicherungs-Bank-AG and Brandenburger Spiegelglas-Versicherungs-AG; it also took over Globus Versicherungs-AG and acquired via fusion two fre insurance companies, Badische Feuerversicherungs-Bank and Securitas Feuer-Versicherungs-AG. 
In the following year, Allianz began calling itself a concern, that is, it had be-come a conglomeration of companies with a central headquarters in Berlin. This was coincident with no less important a development: the entry of Allianz into the life insurance feld. Allianz had initially sought to enter this feld through a working partnership or community of interest with another company, the Friedrich Wilhelm, but this had not worked out. Schmitt and his colleagues in Munich Re decided the time was ripe to make the most of their developing orga-nizational capacities and form their own Allianz Lebensversicherungsbank-AG in Berlin with a capital of 20 million marks.13 Hilgard, whose work in the Fi-nance Ministry had brought him into contact not only with the leading Berlin banks but also with bankers (e.g., Max Warburg) throughout Germany, was especially useful in the task of gathering a formidable collection of banks and bankers for the supervisory board.14 Schmitt successfully appealed to them with the argument that 
the moment is especially favorable for the founding of an Allianz Lebensversicherungs-bank because, in contrast to early times, the competitive capacity of a young corporation 
13 The Allianz Lebensversicherungsbank AG (Allianz Life Insurance Bank Corporation) was re-
named the Allianz und Stuttgarter Lebensversicherungsbank AG (Allianz and Stuttgart Life In-
surance Bank Corporation) in 1927 and in 1940 was renamed the Allianz Lebensversicherungs-AG 
(Allianz Life Insurance Corporation). In this study, the shortened name ※Allianz Leben§ will be 
used. 14 Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2/7, pp. 25每6. 
against older ones is to be deemed extraordinarily favorable. As is known, all German life insurance companies are suffering under the huge costs of their old insurance stock, whose average value, based on prewar circumstances, is much too small in relationship to today＊s costs. To this must be added that it is just the old and large life insurance com-panies which have to bear substantial engagements in foreign currencies because of their international business, especially because of the fact that their reserves for such business were not in the relevant currency but rather in Reich marks.15 
The entry of so potentially powerful a new company into the feld caused understandable fear and resentment, not only because of the competition for customers but also because it was likely to attract agents and representatives away from other companies. The hostility became evident quite early and took on ugly forms. In July 1922, Deputy Director Franz Rinsler of Allianz Leben as-sured Munich Re that it would show special consideration in dealing with the life insurance companies with which Munich Re did business but also asked that the courtesy be returned, since one of the leading managers of the Arminia Insurance Co. was trying to compete by characterizing Allianz Leben ※as a pronouncedly Jewish company.§16 It is possible that this was more a reference to the bankers on the supervisory board of Allianz Leben than to its employees, but it is signif-cant that there was such an undertone in certain circles in the insurance business and that anti-Semitic sentiments could be instrumentalized in this manner at so early a date. The Allianz leadership found such behavior both unfair and inap-propriate, and this seems to have held true for Munich Re as well.17 
Whatever the case, Arminia was shortly to be relieved of the need to ex-ercise itself about such matters when it was swallowed up by Allianz Leben in 1923. In a fnal burst of infation-period concentration that year, Allianz also took over Providentia Frankfurter Versicherungs-Gesellschaft and Deutsche Phix Versicherungs AG, both in Frankfurt am Main, the Wilhelma Allgemeine Versicherungs AG in Magdeburg, and Freia Bremen-Hannoversche Lebensver-sicherungs Bank AG in Berlin. It also acquired Union (Allgemeine Deutsche Hagel-Versicherungs-Gesellschaft) in Weimar. These were all well-known com-panies, and their acquisition required much tactical skill, attention to often 
15 Anlage zum Schreiben Schmitt vom 12. Jan. 1922, MR, A 3.4 /6. 16 Rinsler an Mchener Rk, 5. Juli 1922, MR, A 3.4 /6. 17 It is always diffcult to tell how much anti-Semitic sentiment there was in the business world and 
how effective such propaganda might be with the public at large. That virulent anti-Semitism greatly increased during and after World War I is indisputable. Another interesting illustra-tion in the insurance business was a letter of June 14, 1923, from V. Mittermann of the Austrian Gro.deutsche Volkspartei to Rudolf Schmidt of Munich Re. Mittermann complained that he had taken out a policy with the Austrian Janus company, which he thought had ※an Aryan founda-tion,§ only to fnd that it had a Jew on its administrative board representing Munich Re. Schmidt replied on June 18, assuring Mittermann that Janus (Allgemeine Versicherungsanstalt a. G. in Wien) was indeed an ※Aryan institute§ and that it was the Munich Re alone that was exercising its right to name a member of the board and that Janus had not the ※slightest infuence§ in this regard. For the correspondence, see MR, A 1/30. 
unpredictable market opportunities that suddenly arose, and shrewd negoti-ation on the part of Schmitt. He sometimes failed to attain his goal, as in the case of Colonia Knische Feuer-und Knische Unfall-Versicherungs-AG, whose acquisition Schmitt thought would constitute a ※happy addition§18 but was blocked by Colonia supervisory board members friendly to Aachener und Mchener Feuerversicherungs-Gesellschaft and Vaterl.ndische und Rhenania Vereinigte Versicherungs-Gesellschaften AG. An especially important acquisi-tion, accomplished jointly by Allianz and Munich Re, was Bayerische Versiche-rungsbank AG in Munich, which was sold by Bayerische Hypotheken-und-Wechsel-Bank despite its sound condition and substantial supply of foreign exchange. In the course of this burst of expansionism, Allianz also acquired some very experienced and promising personnel, the most important of whom were Rudolf Schloe.mann (1880每1945) and Maximilian Eichbaum (1881每1958), both extraordinarily intelligent and talented insurance men from the Wilhelma. Eichbaum, a Jew, remained as head of Wilhelma, while Schloe.mann was made general director of Allianz Leben and joined Schmitt, He., and Hilgard to form a quartet of directors that was to dominate the affairs of Allianz in the years to come. Schloe.mann＊s tactical skills and winning ways were to prove instru-mental in settling organizational battles with He. that arose primarily from Schloe.mann＊s singular concentration on life insurance.19 
The security of life insurance assets and investments were matters of great concern in these years. Infation and then hyperinfation led to a combination of increasing policyholder underinsurance and rising costs for insurers. By 1922每 1923, old policies were worthless, and efforts to keep up with infation through the revision of premiums and values on policies proved hopeless. The cost of col-lecting premiums exceeded the value of the premiums themselves. Increasingly, the only secure policy was one denominated or pegged to gold or secure for-eign exchanges 每 above all, the dollar 每 and such policies only were permitted in 1923. With the stabilization in 1923每1924, the value of paper mark assets simply disappeared, and the revaluation laws passed in 1925 provided for up to a 15% revaluation of life insurance policies, depending on the real value of the cover-age available for old policies. This complicated arrangement, which was meant to help ※Old Savers,§ bore fruit only for infation victims in the early 1930s. The entire experience undermined the sense of ※equity and good faith§ in German society and did its share to subvert business morality as well as conjure up a dread of infation that signifcantly infuenced business attitudes.20 
In the infationary struggle for survival, Allianz emerged as one of the small number of insurance groups that came out at the top of the heap 每 along with Aachener und Mchener, Frankfurter Allgemeine Versicherungs-AG (Favag), 
18 See Schmitt to Mosler, April 9, 1923, BAB, 80 Ba 2 /P 5784. 19 On Schloe.mann, see Arps, Wechselvolle Zeiten, pp. 125每7, and Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 
2 /7, pp. 44每5. 20 See Ludwig Arps, Durch unruhige Zeiten, Bd. 1, Kap. 7每8, Bd. 2, Kap. 1. 

Dr. Rudolf Schloe.mann (1880每1945), chairman of the board of Allianz Leben 1923每 1944, about 1940. 
Magdeburger Feuerversicherungs-Gesellschaft, Vaterl.ndische, and Nordstern Allgemeine Versicherungs-AG. The coming years were to show that the Dar-winian struggle was by no means over but that Allianz was a winner in the concentration movement. This certainly was not due to mere luck or clever speculation. Allianz was a remarkably well-run and impressively managed en-terprise. During the infation, for example, the sum of its reserves denominated in paper values grew enormously, but the fnancial management of the frm clev-erly booked its substantial holdings of foreign currencies at prewar exchange rates. Therefore, beneath the paper mark cover was a tidy sum of real values that remained once the paper marks had disappeared. Also, the concern enjoyed the largest holdings in real estate of any German insurance company. Nevertheless, in contrast to its closest competitor (Favag), Allianz resisted the temptation to overcapitalize. Where Favag set its capital at 20 million gold marks but collected only 40 million in premiums in 1924, Allianz, which collected 80 million in pre-miums that year, set its capital worth at a modest 30 million Reichsmark (RM) for Allianz and 6 million for Allianz Leben. At the same time, Allianz managed to increase its income from premiums by 30 million marks over 1913 totals, despite the fact that the competition for business was extraordinarily keen. Indeed, Al-lianz pursued a policy of charging relatively high premiums while counting on its capacity to provide more comprehensive forms of protection and better service. 
The evolution of Schmitt＊s policies with respect to the currency denomination of policies sold by Allianz was characterized by the quest for maximum solid-ity and reliable coverage for the company＊s obligations. Thus, in February 1924, when the success of currency reform was still a matter of uncertainty, Schmitt instructed that agencies working for Allianz concentrate on selling as many poli-cies in foreign currency as possible. As the security of the Reichsmark became more certain a year later, however, Schmitt began to press for policies denom-inated in Reichsmark. This soon became the dominant currency for nearly all branches of insurance, although many life insurance policies continued to be taken out in foreign currencies. In such instances, however, the premiums also had to be paid in foreign currency so that the policies could have genuine backing in the currencies in question. Schmitt was a sharp opponent of issuing policies denominated in gold marks or in fne gold, because suffcient numbers of dollars were not available to provide genuine coverage for them. Nevertheless, many companies continued to draw up such policies, accepting RM premiums and using RM as backing. Schmitt felt very strongly that such practices were danger-ous and urged the bankers on his supervisory board to persuade other insurance companies with whom they were associated to abandon them. It would appear, however, that other companies did not take this advice, with the result that the Allianz concern ended up with many such policies in its portfolio as a result of mergers and acquisitions in the late 1920s.21 
As was the case throughout the fnancial sector after the infation, Allianz engaged in large-scale staff reductions now that the immense amount of paper-work entailed by infation could be reduced. Most important, however, was cost cutting in the effort to increase proftability. Schmitt continuously complained that not enough was being done to reduce costs while increasing production, and both he and He. worked assiduously to make organizational improvements, pro-vide production incentives while avoiding risky engagements, and create better training programs so as to maintain high-level performance and ensure good per-sonnel in the future. In addition to their commitment to solid fnancial practices and organizational strength, Schmitt and He. were anxious to create company loyalty and identifcation 每 what Schmitt called the ※Allianz spirit.§ This ※was to be understood not only as a healthy optimism, but also with respect to the technical aspect as a striving for the best training and constant promotion of our 
21 2. erweiterte Vorstandssitzung am 26./27.Feb. 1924, 5. erweiterte Vorstandssitzung am 17./18. Feb. 1925, FHA, S 17.2 /4; Aktenvermerk Mosler, 11. Dez. 1924, BAB, 80 Ba 2 /P 5784. 
knowledge.... Thegoalmustbethegreatestpossibledevelopmentofouropera-tions, which after a few years must be without competition.§22 The importance attached to the Allianz-Zeitung, to the establishment of a friendly atmosphere, and to sports and social activities were all refections of this desire to induce Al-lianz workers to back Schmitt＊s ambitions. 
Indeed, such mechanisms of integration were of great importance as Allianz braced itself for and then engaged in another wave of expansion. In 1926, the Frankfurter Phix and Providentia, the Wilhelma, and other recent acquisi-tions were fused with Allianz and integrated into the branches of the concern where they were located, although Schmitt allowed continued use of the men-tioned names because of their fne reputations. The way was thus prepared for the greatest fusion in the history of the German insurance business, that between Allianz and Stuttgarter Verein in October 1927. 
The two concerns had almost merged in 1922, when the predecessor company of Stuttgarter Verein (Allgemeiner Deutscher Versicherungsverein) backed out of the already prepared contract, despite its foreign exchange debts, and sought to maintain its independence. Initially a mutual insurance organization of three insurance associations, it took the path of incorporation in 1923, forming two joint stock companies: Stuttgarter Verein Versicherungs-AG, which concentrated on accident and liability insurance, and Stuttgart-Leck Lebens-versicherungs-Aktien-Gesellschaft. The new companies managed to resolve their fnancial dif-fculties, and the projected association with Allianz appeared to be dead. 
However, the idea was revived in the spring of 1927 when Director Schloe.-mann encountered Adolf Kimmel (head of Stuttgart-Lecker) at a conference in London and persuaded the latter to entertain consolidation proposals from Allianz. Schmitt immediately seized upon the opportunity and began discus-sions with the head of the Stuttgarter concern, Max Georgii (1855每1934). The negotiations were extremely diffcult. The Stuttgarter concern was in no way in distress, and there was no immediate reason for fusion. Some of the Stuttgarter directors opposed the move, and the City of Stuttgart was especially hostile to having so important a concern move to Berlin. Thus, all kinds of concessions had to be made. Allianz had to promise that the headquarters of the life in-surance business 每 as well as those of accident and liability insurance 每 would be moved to Stuttgart. The relocation of accident and liability insurance was especially inconvenient. Also, a larger number than desired of Stuttgarter di-rectors had to be taken on board the consolidated company. The name of the new company was a major issue, and the fnal decision was to call it the Allianz und Stuttgarter Verein Versicherungs-AG. Schmitt＊s willingness to make these concessions was crucial to the success of the effort, but Georgii (who was to be-come chairman of the supervisory board of the consolidated companies) later admitted to Hilgard that the most decisive factor was Schmitt＊s persistence and 
22 3. erweiterte Vorstandssitzung am 17./18. Juni 1924, FHA, S 17.2 /4,p. 11. 
persuasive powers. Be that as it may, what the involved companies described as the most ※signifcant§ consolidation in the history of the German insurance in-dustry was approved by the various supervisory boards in early November 1928, thereby creating the Allianz und Stuttgarter Verein Versicherungs-AG, with Al-lianz now doubling its share capital from 30 to 60 million RM, as well as the Allianz und Stuttgarter Lebensversicherungsbank AG, with Allianz Leben in-creasing its share capital from 6 to 20 million RM. The new concern clearly was the largest in Germany. At the end of 1928, Schmitt could boast of 1.6 billion RM in life insurance alone, followed by 17 publicly chartered institutions with 1 billion, Victoria zu Berlin Allgemeine Versicherungs-AG with 950 million, the Gerling concern with 550 million, and Favag with 470 million. At the same time, thanks to the mergers, staffng could be reduced to 90%of 1927 levels. The con-cern was also increasing its foreign business and was especially pleased with the results of Spanish Plus Ultra Company, the majority of whose shares it had ac-quired in 1926. 23 
The consolidation of 1928 must be viewed in the context of the wave of big mergers, fusions, and consolidations that took place in other economic sectors in the second half of the 1920s, among which were the creation of IG Farben in 1925, Vereinigte Stahlwerke in 1926, and Deutsche Bank and Disconto-Gesellschaft in 1929. The last-named banking consolidation bears particularly interesting sim-ilarities to that of the Allianz每Stuttgarter Verein merger of the previous year.24 The period between 1924 and 1933 was characterized not only by a massive con-centration movement but also by ugly fnancial scandals, and one of these 每 the collapse of Favag in 1929 每 brought about the last large acquisition from which Allianz was to proft in this period. Its signifcance for the insurance business paralleled that of the collapse of Darmst.dter und Nationalbank (Danat-Bank) of July 1931, which was a direct consequence of the failure of the Nordwolle tex-tile company due to fnancial irregularities on the part of its management. The deeper causes of these and other business scandals lay in the economic and f-nancial conditions of the Weimar Republic that followed the loss of capital in the war, misdirection of capital during and after the infation, dependence on short-term loans from abroad, and inadequacy of supervision by government agencies and supervisory boards. Socioeconomic issues in the Weimar Republic were highly politicized. Government expenditure at all levels, social insurance, wage levels, and the policies of public and private enterprises were all subjects of bitter debate and controversy. At the same time, the economy was highly depen-dent on short-term foreign loans and vulnerable to shocks, so that scandals like 
23 On the fusion, in addition to the standard studies, see Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7, pp. 61每3. 
See also ※Zusammenschluss,§ prepared for the Aufsichtsrat in October 1928, and Aktenvermerk 
Mosler, 11. Dez. 1928, BAB, 80 Ba 2 /P 5784. 24 See Gerald D. Feldman, ※The Deutsche Bank from the First World War to the World Economic 
Crisis, 1914每1933,§ in Lothar Gall et al., The Deutsche Bank 1870每1995 (London, 1995), pp. 
130每276, here pp. 230每40. 
those mentioned and other untoward economic events threatened to undermine confdence in the economy both at home and abroad. The Favag affair, coming as it did on the cusp of the Great Depression, was not only a trauma for the in-surance industry but also a major national and international event and one of those occurrences that helped to undermine support for and belief in the eco-nomic liberal order during the coming years of depression. Business behavior in the Third Reich must be understood against the background of such occurrences and their underlying causes, and it is necessary therefore to dwell somewhat on the Favag scandal and the role of Allianz in it.25 
Both the rise and fall of Favag had much to do with its general director since 1897, Paul Dumcke, who was regarded as one of the giants of the Ger-man insurance business.26 He had built up the company before the war through communities of interest with various reinsurance companies and then by fusion with Preu.ische Rkversicherungs-AG, which was renamed Helios Allgemeine Rkversicherungs-AG and expanded into multibranch direct insurance as well. War and infation provided Dumcke with the opportunity to expand still fur-ther. Foreign business was particularly important, since Favag＊s engagements in Southeast Europe and in Switzerland and its extensive international transporta-tion insurance activities provided the company with the hard currency needed to take advantage of infation and expand at home. Favag took under its wing the whole (or substantial portions of) Karlsruher Lebensversicherungs-Bank AG, Vereinigte Berlinische und Preu.ische Lebensversicherungs-AG, and the Ham-monia (Allgemeine Versicherungs-AG), Hamburg. Thus, by the end of the 1920s it was second only to Allianz in the German composite insurance business and was a major national and international player in both direct insurance and re-insurance. At its shareholder meeting on June 18, 1929, the directors reported an increase in premiums of 14 million RM over the previous year, assets amount-ing to 73.8 million RM, a net proft just short of 3.1 million RM, and a 12.5% dividend totaling 2.3 million RM.27 
Despite this seemingly happy state of affairs, rumors were rife about peculiar-ities in the fnancial management of the company. The Favag supervisory board and the important bankers who sat on it were aware of these rumors, but they 
25 On these more general aspects and for a fuller treatment, see ibid. and Gerald D. Feldman, 
※Insurance Company Collapses in the World Economic Crisis: The Frankfurter Allgemeine 
Versicherungs-AG (Favag) and the Austrian Phix,§ in Harold James (ed.), The Interwar De-
pression in an International Context (Munich, 2001). 26 The roots of the company go back to 1865, when it concentrated on glass insurance. It then moved 
into transportation insurance and was called Frankfurter Transport-und Glasversicherungs-
Gesellschaft until its takeover of Frankfurter Lebensversicherungs-AG in 1911 led to its change of 
name to Frankfurter Allgemeine Versicherungs AG. See Arps, Durch unruhige Zeiten, Bd. 1, pp. 
424每7. 
27 Bericht der in der General-Versammlung vom 30. Sept. 1929 gew.hlten Revisions-Kommission der Frankfurter Allgemeinen Versicherungs-Aktien-Gesellschaft zu Frankfurt am Main, p. 17, FHA, B 2/601. 
chose to accept the optimistic statements of Dumcke and his directors and to do nothing. It should come as no surprise that Kurt Schmitt considered Favag a potentially promising acquisition; it was a major competitor and had a good or-ganization. He was very aware of its overcapitalization in 1924 and purportedly remarked that ※in fve years we will also have the Frankfurter and, if we want, the ＆Vaterl.ndische＊ also.§28 Schmitt was aware that Favag had been doing business with a considerable amount of borrowed money and had told Dumcke that he considered this a mistaken policy, proftable or not, but he also thought Dumcke hard to replace and thus bided his time. However, Dumcke died unexpectedly from an operation on February 12, 1929, and was laid to rest with songs of praise for his contributions to the insurance business. This freed Schmitt to broach the subject of an Allianz每Favag collaboration in a conversation with Director Sieg-mund Bodenheimer of Danat-Bank, a Favag supervisory board member. This seemed all the more opportune since the leading personage in the concern, Di-rector Philipp Becker, was a ※fnance man§ rather than an ※insurance man,§ and none of the ※insurance men§ were of Dumcke＊s alleged caliber. There were reports of conficts among the directors, and one of the Favag directors had ac-tually approached Director Hans He. of Allianz in 1928 and suggested a merger and the buying out of contracts of some leading Favag directors. There were also rumors going around about the investments of these directors. Schmitt pointed out that a careful audit of Favag＊s fnances would be required before any consol-idation could take place. Bodenheimer thanked Schmitt for the suggestion but responded that ※he knows the situation exactly, and that the fnancial business of the Frankfurter has run proftably. Even if the banks are not in agreement with all the engagements, there is still no doubt that the Frankfurter was a frst-class corporation that is making good earnings and progressing. He saw no place for a collaboration with Allianz at the moment.§29 
This was quite optimistic given the rumors that had been circulating, and the passivity of Bodenheimer and other bankers on the Favag supervisory board is no less remarkable in the face of the newspaper articles that began to appear in the Frankfurter Zeitung in the spring of 1929. These articles were the work of Artur Lauinger, a pioneer in investigative journalism who had a special inter-est in insurance questions. He had good relations with Allianz and Munich Re leaders, although there is not the slightest reason to believe that he was deliber-ately serving their interests. A diligent reader of company reports and balance sheets and a careful observer of shareholder meetings, Lauinger was also a reg-ular visitor at the Frankfurt exchanges and had heard all sorts of rumors about banking activities by Favag through Swestdeutsche Bank AG. Lauinger had 
28 Reported by Hensel in ※40 Jahre Allianz,§ FHA, AZ 1.3/1,p. 298. Hensel＊s is a very sober his-
tory, so that this report of Schmitt＊s long-term ambitions deserves credence. Vaterl.ndische also 
collapsed in 1929, but Hensel points out that Allianz was too preoccupied with Favag to take over 
yet another company. It was acquired by Nordstern. 29 Aktennotiz Schmitt, 26.Nov. 1929,BAB, 80 Ba 2/P 5785. 
been shown discount bills with Dumcke＊s signature that he deemed very dubious. For Lauinger, however, the more important question was whether an insurance company had any business discounting bills of the type shown to him and en-gaging in banking business of this kind. 
Lauinger visited Dumcke shortly before the latter＊s death and insisted on knowing more about Favag＊s activities in the guarantee and lending felds. Dum-cke referred him to Finance Director Becker, whom Lauinger met with sometime in late March or early April 1929. He found Becker as reluctant to provide con-crete information as the late Dumcke, whereupon Lauinger told him that he considered the credit operations of Favag totally inappropriate for an insurance company and, moreover, that he intended to openly attack Favag if he were not provided with accurate balances and if a halt was not put to the credit opera-tions in question. Becker then promised to gather the information and to keep Lauinger abreast of developments, but Lauinger soon launched a press campaign against Favag＊s way of doing business. Also, Lauinger began informing members of the Favag supervisory board and the Reich Supervisory Offce for Insurance of serious problems at Favag. 
It is important to realize that since 1901 the private insurance business had been subject to national government regulation under the Reich Insurance Law (VAG). This law had created the Reich Supervisory Offce for Insurance (RAA), which was charged with the tasks of licensing insurance companies after inves-tigating their trustworthiness, making sure that the coverage for life insurance policies was administered separately from other assets and was securely invested, and making sure that insurance companies complied with the business plan they had regularly to submit in order to receive and retain their business licenses. Only the RAA could permit an insurance company to declare bankruptcy. As was the case in licensing, so in the case of bankruptcy: a courtlike procedure was employed involving the use of experts from outside the RAA. In short, the RAA was there to protect consumer and public interests and prevent abusive prac-tices by insurance companies. In the case of Favag, however, infation-period legislation and RAA inattentiveness played no small role in the collapse. On the one hand, the VAG had been revised in July 1923 to allow investments in real estate and participations in companies, and Favag had made extensive use of the latter. On the other hand, the RAA was understaffed and unduly trust-ful. This manifested itself in a willingness to accept minimal reporting and mere satisfaction of the technical requirements connected with the actual insur-ance business, an inclination to overlook fnancial engagements inappropriate for an insurance company, and a failure to follow up on activities that it did protest.30 
30 On the VAG and RAA, see the useful summary of its history in Andr谷 Botur, Privatversicherung im Dritten Reich. Zur Schadensabwicklung nach der Reichskristallnacht unter dem Einfu. na-tionalsozialistischer Rassen-und Versicherungspolitik [Berliner Juristische Universit.tsschriften. Zivilrecht, Bd. 6] (Berlin, 1995), pp. 17每20. See also the RAA＊s report to the RWM of June 6, 1930, BAK, B 280/13273. The most important source of information on the RAA＊s activities and 
Insofar as the Favag supervisory board is concerned, the chief problem lay (as so often the case with such scandals) in the blind confdence placed in the di-rectors and the failure to demand information even in the face of considerable suspicion that all was not well with its fnancial management. German super-visory boards were composed of persons who were not personally responsible for their failures as supervisors and whose organizations were not responsible, either. The supervisory board of Favag did take some action in May by setting up an auditing committee, but the Favag directors continued to maintain that the company was sound and provided the required information only slowly and reluctantly. Finally, however, enough facts were out to make impossible any fur-ther unwillingness on the part of the supervisory board to at least discuss the problem. Sometime in the summer of 1929, Lauinger was summoned home from vacation for a special meeting of the supervisory board of Favag, which was in a state of despair over the mounting evidence of irregularities in its balances. Lauinger advised them to demand an accurate balance and to determine who was responsible for the losses 每 advice for which the bankers on the board showed little enthusiasm because they feared that Favag would close its accounts with banks that pressed them too hard and give its business to competing banks in-stead. Needless to say, the supervisory board members were also rather nervous about revelations that would make matters worse and cast a shadow over their performance as supervisors. The trouble was that the RAA was also responding to the news it was getting from Lauinger and began to launch an investigation of its own.31 On August 17, Favag announced the cessation of payment to its creditors. Three days later, Allianz took over its direct insurance business, thus guaranteeing that policyholders would be protected. However, the satisfaction of other creditors (both national and international) was to become the subject of tedious negotiations as well as civil lawsuits, some of which dragged on into the mid-1930s. The criminal trials of the leading directors lasted into 1932, when they received jail sentences and fnes. The Favag affair was thus of a piece with the other bankruptcies and scandals of the Depression period and with public perceptions that there was something rotten in the world of capitalism. 
Once the scandal had broken, it very soon became manifest that the Favag gold mark opening balance was 5 million gold marks in excess of what it should have been, thanks to Dumcke＊s desire to increase the company＊s prestige and attrac-tiveness to investors. The chief benefciary of Dumcke＊s folly, Kurt Schmitt 每 who 
on court decisions connected with the insurance business is the Verfentlichungen des Reichsauf-
sichtsamts f Privatversicherung (Leipzig, 1901ff.). 31 Artur Lauinger, Das fentliche Gewissen. Erfahrungen und Erlebnisse eines Redakteurs der 
Frankfurter Zeitung (Frankfurt a.M., 1958), pp. 18每22. Lauinger＊s account telescopes some of 
the events between late 1928 and August 1929; he leaves the impression that his interviews with 
Dumcke and Becker and the supervisory board meeting took place within a short space of time, 
which could not have been possible because Dumcke died in February. Fortunately, a memo-
randum of Munich Re General Director Wilhelm Kisskalt of January 25, 1930, who spoke with 
Lauinger in April 1929 about the interview with Becker, helps clarify the sequence of events. The 
memorandum is in BAB, 80 Ba 2 /P 5785. 
later attributed Allianz＊s survival in the Depression to the modesty of its 1924 gold mark opening balance and the purposefulness of its expansion policy 每 ex-plained as follows: ※The excessively high demands on the capital resources of the company necessarily arose from the exaggerated conversion to gold of the Frankfurter Allgemeine. The decision to enter into dangerous fnancial engage-ments also arose from the effort to master these diffculties, which in the last analysis led to the collapse of the Frankfurter.§32 Even as Schmitt and his con-cern took over the best and most proftable parts of Favag＊s business, he warned against excessive optimism and risky engagements. Favag had collapsed because of a spectacular mix of bad decisions in the feld of indirect insurance, banking activities inappropriate for an insurance company, an inorganic concern struc-ture, and confation of the concern＊s interests with the personal enterprises of the directors. In the process Favag had accumulated very high debts 每 including short-term debts in Switzerland, England, and the Netherlands 每 for the fnanc-ing of long-term projects. German supervisory institutions, both governmental and private, had obviously failed to do their job. Schmitt was quite aware that all this had created a danger of international distrust of the German fnancial insurance business and the German economy in general. As he somewhat cyni-cally (but still hopefully) told his board of directors: 
One cannot deny that the events at the ※Frankfurter§ have led to a general crisis of con-fdence in the private insurance business; but it is to be hoped that this crisis will be overcome soon. In working against a migration of business, especially of life insurance to foreign companies, it is useful to point out that collapses similar to the ※Frankfurter§ are not unknown in America and England.33 
It is important to note that there had been some genuine national and inter-national resistance against Allianz＊s self-interested but salutary intervention in the Favag affair. As mentioned previously, Schmitt had broached the possibility of fusion with Allianz in his talks with Bodenheimer, and other discussions had taken place at a time when the problems of the company had not been revealed. Even after they were, the basic insurance business remained very attractive, which explains the rapidity of Schmitt＊s intervention. It was attractive to others as well, especially the group of insurance companies connected with Director Jo-hannes Nordhoff of the Berlinische Feuer-Versicherungs-Anstalt. The latter was closely allied to the Schweizerische Rkversicherungs-Gesellschaft (Swiss Re) in Zurich, which was a competitor of the Allianz-associated Munich Re. It was anxious to expand its operations in Germany, not by acquiring portions of the Favag itself (from which it expected more ※surprises§) but rather by gaining control of two old, solid, and well-respected companies in the Favag concern: Karlsruher Lebensversicherungsbank-AG in Karlsruhe and Vereinigte Berlinische und Preu.ische Lebensversicherungs AG in Berlin. Nordhoff complained to his friends in the Disconto-Gesellschaft that the Allianz takeover would upset the 
32 Vorstandssitzung am 5. und 6.Nov. 1929,FHA,p. 4,S 17.2 /4. 33 Ibid., p. 5. 
balance in the insurance business and would also bring about a further economic concentration in Berlin at the expense of Frankfurt and South Germany.34 
Yet another scheme was urged by the Victoria Versicherungs-Gesellschaft, and supported by Jakob Goldschmidt of the Danat-Bank, that would involve joint action on the part of all the large German insurance companies to deal with the problem. In the last analysis, however, the leading banks represented on the Favag supervisory board found the Allianz takeover most acceptable and wel-come despite the power shift that it entailed. On the one hand, the alternatives were all being proposed in August 1929, while the full scope of the disaster was gradually coming into focus 每 for example, that the ※silent reserves§ of Favag were really its own shares that it had bought and were being held in the portfolios of companies in the concern. On the other hand, Allianz had the distinct ad-vantage of operating in all the various insurance felds in which Favag operated, had a superior apparatus and organization for dealing with the Favag policies, and was willing to put up guarantees for these immediately while negotiating over the fnal purchase price. Time was of the essence if a widening crisis were to be averted and unwelcome interventions by the State avoided. As the bankers concluded: 
Finally, in view of the fact that it is impossible in the time available to wait for the com-ing together of the big insurance companies, which would take a very long time, and that one under no circumstances should allow the Reich Supervisory Agency for Private In-surance to mix in, it was decided to ask Herr Dr. Schmitt and Hilgard from the Allianz as well as Dr. Herzfelder of the Hermes Kreditversicherungsbank-AG to discuss the matter with us.35 
Furthermore, Allianz had considerable infuence with the Reich Supervisory Agency, thus making its role even more advantageous. 
Indeed, the RAA had to approve the contracts between Allianz and Favag; it did so on August 20, 1929, and thus immediately alienated a substantial (and the most intact and lucrative) portion of Favag＊s business without even summoning a meeting of its shareholders. Furthermore, the RAA thereby issued an effective ban on payment to other creditors until the price Allianz would pay could be de-cided and until the assets and liabilities of the rump Favag could be determined. It fell within the powers of the RAA to give primary protection to the policyholders, but these actions also involved a bypassing of the interests of shareholders and other creditors that the RAA could only justify with the argument that the value of Allianz＊s acquisition would diminish if insurance business turned elsewhere and that this would not be in the interest of anyone. Although Allianz certainly stood to gain substantially and could determine what it would and would not take over, it was willing to pay some heed to South German sensibilities as well as 
34 Aktenvermerk Frank (Disconto), 16. Aug. 1929, and other relevant correspondence in HADB, 
S236; Schweizer-Rk-Ausschu.-Sitzungen, August 1929, SR, Ausschu.-Sitzungen, Bd. 10. 35 Sitzung der Berliner Hauptbeteiligten des Bankkonsortiums, 17. Aug. 1929, HADB, S245. Her-
mes was a part of the Allianz concern, and Emil Herzfelder was a specialist in credit insurance. 
to anxieties about its increased power. Thus, Favag would be neither formally an-nexed nor allowed to disappear; rather, it would be reestablished (albeit as a com-pany within the Allianz concern) as Neue Frankfurter Allgemeine Versicherungs AG. Also, the major insurance companies in the Favag concern 每 the Hammo-nia (which was taken over jointly by Allianz and Munich Re), Karlsruher Leben, and Vereinigte Berlinische und Preu.ische Lebensversicherungs-AG 每 were to re-tain their formal independence and not be externally designated as belonging to Allianz. Nevertheless, despite a general recognition that Allianz (and particu-larly Schmitt) had acted to prevent the Favag collapse from turning into a major disaster for the German insurance business and the German economy, there was also considerable feeling, not only in the German insurance circles but also on the part of Swiss Re, that Allianz had taken whatever was worth taking.36 
There was also a great deal of sentiment at home and abroad that Allianz, which paid Favag 36,897,301 RM for the assets it acquired, had paid too little for the advantages received.37 The view of Allianz, of course, was that it had prevented a catastrophe for the German insurance industry and for the German economy in general. Both arguments were probably correct, and the debate was highly relevant to the second and far less soluble aspect of the Favag collapse: paying off as much as possible of the domestic and international debts the con-cern had contracted. These amounted to 63.9 million RM to domestic creditors and 35.6 million RM to foreign creditors.38 The obvious solution was to form a standstill syndicate of the creditors while the banking committee of the Favag supervisory board provided some guarantees and time was taken to determine Favag＊s actual status and what Allianz was willing to pay Favag for its acquisi-tions. Some of Favag＊s foreign creditors proved unwilling to agree and thought that the German banks on the supervisory board should pick up the bill. The sit-uation wasworrisome to Economics Minister Curtius, who summoned Directors Oscar Wassermann of Deutsche Bank and Jakob Goldschmidt of Danat-Bank and told them ※the banks must make large payments to prevent a cessation of payment by Favag. The German economy cannot bear a collapse.§ They all agreed, however, that the Reichsbank had to intervene and assist, and they went to see Reichsbank President Hjalmar Schacht toward this end. Schacht, how-ever, refused to do any such thing and also warned against the Reich Supervisory Agency issuing a payment ban ※because the outside world would view this as demonstrating the possibility of intervention from above with respect to the ful-fllment of payment obligations.... intervention from above would create fear 
36 Aktenvermerk Moesler, 19. Aug. 1929, HABD, S236, and Vorstandssitzung am 5. und 6.Nov. 
1929, FHA, S 17.2 /4. Little credence seems to have been given to the charges of the indicted direc-
tors that Allianz had been plotting to take over Favag all along and had even been responsible for 
the Lauinger articles. See the responses by Schmitt, He., Hilgard, and Kisskalt and their valuable 
accounts of their dealings with Favag in BAB, 80 Ba 2 /P 5785. For the Reich Supervisory Agency 
decision and justifcation of its actions, see its formal decision of Nov. 16, 1929, in the Protokol 
er die Gl.ubigerversammlung, 15. Jan. 1930, pp. 1每2, HABD, S244. 37 See Favag an das Finanzamt Frankfurt am Main, 17. Dez. 1932,BAK,B 280/13283. 38 Favag an Waller, 27. Aug. 1929, HABD, S234. 
that the same could also happen with respect to the numerous municipal cred-its taken abroad.§39 The great vulnerability created by the private and public borrowing in Germany was thus apparent. The reality of the Favag case, how-ever, was that a Reich Supervisory Agency payment ban had been created under the terms of the grant of permission to Allianz to take over the direct insur-ance business of Favag. This automatically protected policyholders. The RAA also mandated a payment ban for what remained of the Favag until its fnancial status was established and until Allianz and the Favag settled on what the former would pay the latter for the assets it had taken over. Schacht apparently raised no objections to this. Also, the Favag bankers seem to have used his good offces and infuence to bring recalcitrant English banks into accepting the standstill arrangement.40 
At the end of a rather dragged-out process, the creditors of Favag received between 20% and 40% of their due. It should come as no surprise that represen-tatives of the creditors bitterly resented the way in which the banks on the Favag supervisory board had behaved between August 1929 and when they fnally met in mid-January 1930: 
The frst thing that the administration did in the ※protection§ of the interests of the cred-itors was to take the most valuable assets which this enterprise had as its basis and sell them to Allianz. They should have been all the more cautious in doing so since the Al-lianz concern is one in which the majority of the administration banks are just as much represented as in the Favag concern. Represented in Allianz are: Deutsche Bank, Disconto-Gesellschaft, Darmst.dter Bank, Commerz-und Privatbank. One had, without setting a purchase price frst, shifted over this valuable set of assets from a concern that was in distress to a concern that was not and one had removed what had previously been the most dangerous competitor of the frm that was not in distress and turned it into the single most decisive insurance concern in Germany.... One had more or less skimmed the cream off the cake and left behind an unpalatable, spoiled dough for the creditors, without there being any security as to what is still to be saved from the Allianz concern for the creditors of the Favag concern.41 
This was probably a self-interested exaggeration under the circumstances. From a longer-term perspective, the solution to the Favag crisis must be under-stood in terms of the need, in Jakob Goldschmidt＊s words, ※to permit the curtain to fall over the matter so agitating for the public.§42 Whatever the aftershocks in the law courts, the agreements made between Favag and Allianz and between the Favag banking committee and the creditor committee in February 1930 laid the basic issues to rest and permitted the liquidation of Favag with some satisfaction of the creditors.43 It was an immense triumph for Kurt Schmitt, Hilgard (who played a prominent role in the negotiations), and Allianz, whose top leaders＊ 
39 Aktenvermerk Moesler, 1.Nov. 1929,HABD,S239. 40 See Moesler to Schacht, Sept. 4, 1929, HADB, S238. 41 Justizrat Heilbrunn at the Creditors meeting on Jan. 15, 1930, HADB, S245. 42 Aktennotiz vom 30. Jan. 1930, HADB, S241. 43 The agreements are to be found in HADB, S233. 
initiative and whose sheer strength had made it possible to provide the surest and most speedily implementable alternative to bankruptcy. This solution is in sharp contrast to that involving the failure of Danat-Bank in July 1931 (under, to be sure, much worse economic and fnancial conditions). The major banks refused or failed to come to the aid of Danat; the government had to step in and take over Danat-Bank and later Dresdner Bank, while the banking system itself was subjected to much more rigorous controls and much more serious attacks. 
the allianz concern in the 1930s: structure, organization, and personnel 
In May 1930, less than a year after it had acquired the insurance business of Favag and founded Neue Frankfurter, the Allianz concern celebrated its fortieth anniversary. Appropriately enough, it returned to its Munich roots. The super-visory board meetings and the formal anniversary celebration and dinner for the leadership of the concern took place in the elegant facilities of Munich Re. The members of the various supervisory boards, their counterparts in the regional committees for the branches of the concern, and the managing boards and di-rectors of the various companies and branches in the concern added up to a few hundred persons. They heard Kisskalt, Schmitt, and Georgii give speeches on the history of the concern, discuss contemporary issues of economic policy, and expound on the role of the insurance business and Allianz in the past, present, and future.44 
The festivities were not limited to such high personages, however. The Al-lianz close-of-the-business-year national meeting, which rotated between Berlin, Stuttgart, and Munich, was also held in the Bavarian capital on May 27每28and brought together some fve hundred ※Allianzers§ from branches, feld offces, and district offces of the company along with prize winners of various compe-titions and older employees in all pay categories. The host Allianz organization for these members of the ※Allianz family§ was Bayerische Versicherungsbank and its General Director, Wilhelm Arendts. They, too, were treated to an anniver-sary celebration at which fve hundred persons were in attendance in the Festival Hall of the Munich City Hall. One of the high points of this occasion was the award of the Spear Thrower to Alfred Wiedemann, head of the Dresden branch and later general director of Neue Frankfurter, which was conceded with grace and good humor in self-composed verse by the previous year＊s winner and one of the stars of the concern with a seemingly bright future, Director Maximilian Eichbaum of the Magdeburger branch. Prizes were also awarded to ten section heads (for different types of insurance offered by the concern), while sixteen in-surance offcials working in the feld also received various prizes. 
44 Bericht Moesler, 27.Mai 1930, BAB, 80 Ba 2/P 5787. 

Rudolf Schloe.mann, Hans He., Eduard Hilgard, and Kurt Schmitt (from right to left) at an excursion on the occasion of the end-of-the-fscal-year conference (1930), May 15, 1931. 
While Allianz thus honored the achievements of its employees, the latter＊s rep-resentatives also chose to celebrate their concern＊s birthday. Zech, chairman of the Berlin factory council and a representative of the Social Democratic Cen-tral Association of German Employees, presented Schmitt with a congratulatory card containing the signatures of every employee in the Berlin offces. Schmitt received these and other gifts of the Allianz councils with his usual grace and charm. In his speech, he emphasized the progress that had been made in the struggle against overspecialization in various branches of insurance, the creation of branches and offces that were better rooted in local conditions, the impor-tance of providing good customer service at low cost, and the need to train new generations of insurance agents and provide opportunities for promotion within the concern. All in all, it seems to have been a high-spirited event, un-doubtedly made all the more jovial by the Bierabend in the Lwenbr.ukeller that followed the formal celebration and the excursion into the mountains on the fol-lowing day.45 
The celebrations of May 1930 revealed the Allianz corporate culture at a criti-cal juncture in its history and, indeed, in German history. With its acquisition of 
45 ※Abschlu.tagung am 27. und 28.Mai 1930,§ Allianz-Zeitung 12 (1930), pp. 128每34. 
Favag, Allianz attained a plateau in its expansion that was to last until 1938 and faced the crucial tasks of digestion and organization. This was well refected in Schmitt＊s remark that a strong bond of friendship needed to be created among companies and persons who had been in sharp competition with one another for many years and now found themselves parts of Allianz. At the same time, the events just described took place in the early stages of what was to become the Great Depression and all the economic and political catastrophes that came in its wake. Thus, the May 1930 celebrations mark a convenient point from which to consider the structure and character of the Allianz concern and its personnel in the 1930s. 
It is essential to understand how the concern was organized and conducted its business if one is to discuss its subsequent history sensibly. Yet this is a somewhat frustrating undertaking because of the wartime destruction of inter-nal correspondence and other relevant materials that might have provided more intimate insights into the management practices, relationships among central headquarters and branches and daughter companies, and personnel problems that are so important to a full business history. Here one is highly dependent on the concern＊s self-presentation in published and unpublished histories and in its yearly business reports. Needless to say, these sources are intended to present the concern in the best possible light and offer a somewhat static and rosy pic-ture of a very complicated and dynamic enterprise. Nevertheless, an effort will be made to breathe some life into the available material. 
As Chart I shows, Allianz was a complex organization consisting of a central headquarters in Berlin, a number of companies devoted to special types of in-surance, and regional branch headquarters in various cities, a few of which were intimately related to important Allianz-controlled companies that nevertheless maintained a measure of individual identity. There were also companies not formally integrated into the concern but in which controlling interest had been acquired in various proportions by Allianz, Stuttgarter Verein, Allianz Leben, and Munich Re in the wake of the Favag collapse. It should be noted that Karls-ruher Leben (which had a community interest with Hammonia) and Vereinigte Berlinische und Preu.ische Lebensversicherungs-AG were allowed to function independently, while Hammonia and Neue Frankfurter were under the technical control of the concern. Hermes, whose controlling shares were held by Allianz and Munich Re, operated independently because of the special nature of credit insurance. 
There was manifestly some duplication in the insurance products sold by the individual companies and corporations in the concern. Allianz Leben and Karls-ruher Leben both sold life insurance, whileHammonia, Allianz, and Neue Frank-furter all marketed property insurance. There was certainly some regulation of competition within Allianz, and the entire concern beneftted from maintaining the names, connections, and good will established by the old companies that had entered its fold. Allianz did provide a substantial amount of their capital and also provided reinsurance or excess risk reinsurance. This participation refected 
Chart I. Organization of the Allianz Concern in 1931. Source: Allianz Business Report (1931). 
the wider purposes of this form of concentration: to broaden the ※community of those at risk,§ create a healthy mix of risks, improve the capacity for risk cal-culation, and establish a broader and more secure coverage and guarantee of policies. At the same time, the greater the concern, the larger was the potential pool of experience and experienced personnel upon which it could draw, and the stronger was the incentive and opportunity for fruitful rationalization and cost reduction. The history of the concern had shown and would continue to show that the companies brought into its community of interest almost inevitably were gradually absorbed into its fold and lost their autonomy, thus refecting a policy of friendly takeovers and friendly absorptions over the years.46 
Not only was the Allianz concern by far the largest and most important ex-ponent of the private corporate insurance business (as opposed to the publicly chartered insurance societies and the mutuals) in Germany, it was also the lead-ing and unabashed advocate of concentration in the insurance business. Those who spoke for Allianz, headed by Schmitt, rejected charges that the concern re-fected ※trustifcation§ of the insurance business or some kind of monopoly. As one of its directors and historians, Rudolf Hensel, wrote in 1930: 
Our Allianz, which only unites a sixth of the German insurance business in its entire concern, is unfortunately very far away from such a monopoly position每Iexpressly say unfortunately, for a further consolidation (it does not have to occur through us) would make insurance cheaper through the elimination of uneconomic companies and the sav-ings of cost thereby brought about.47 
Thus Hensel vigorously defended Allianz＊s expansion and also welcomed ex-pansion by its big competitors, such as Victoria, Nordstern, and Aachener und Mchener. The alternative to such concern building would have been cartels in the various insurance branches, and the experience with cartels in fre insurance and in other areas had not been satisfactory. Most of the cartels had collapsed after the war and infation. The reason in insurance (as well as in other felds of business) was that cartels were unstable in times of monetary unrest and unsat-isfactory in periods of capital shortage. Individual frms had a strong tendency to break ranks in order to gain some immediate advantage, thus breaking up the cartel. The conditions under which the Weimar economy operated from begin-ning to end were such that they favored the principle: ※to they that have shall be given.§48 Large concerns offering a wide range of insurance products appeared to be a more satisfactory way of attaining sensible levels of risk management and sensible premiums within major portions of the industry and thus in the indus-try as a whole. Therefore, competition among large concerns did not exclude 
46 These processes of absorption are demonstrated in illuminating detail in Hensel, ※40 Jahre Al-
lianz,§ FHA, AZ 1.3/1, pp. 127每216 and 259每98. 47 Ibid., p. 274. 48 See Alfred D. Chandler, Scale and Scope. The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism (Cambridge, 
1990), Ch. 13; for a good discussion of these processes in the insurance industry itself, see Arps, 
Durch unruhige Zeiten, Bd. 1, Kap. 11. 
collaboration and the need to moderate ambition. Further acquisitions after the Favag affair would have given Allianz digestive problems and bad publicity both. This was demonstrated in May 1931, for example, when Nordstern appeared to be in diffculty. Schmitt expressed a willingness to purchase a block of Nord-stern shares and then helped that company with its organizational problems and in improving its performance in the transportation insurance feld. He insisted, however, that the purchase be kept a secret since ※a takeover by fusion cannot come into question during the next decade.§49 
Of course, one might argue that Schmitt and Hensel could afford to be gen-erous to their competitors in the private insurance business, since the other con-cerns had a long way to catch up. In 1928, Allianz collected 178 million RM in premiums on all forms of property insurance. Adding the 30 million RM in premiums collected by Favag＊s successor, Neue Frankfurter, yields a total of approximately 208 million RM in 1929每1930. The next-ranking concern, Nord-stern und Vaterl.ndische, collected 70 million RM in premiums, while Albingia Versicherungs-AG and Victoria Feuer-Versicherungs-AG collected 37 and 34 mil-lion RM, respectively. In considering the growth and economic power of Allianz, therefore, it is important to take into account both the relative position in the private insurance business and what this meant in absolute earnings. In 1930, the concern collected over 20% of the entire premium income of the private insurance business in eight out of fourteen insurance categories: life (20.5%), liability (28%), accident (26.2%), break-in and theft (29.4%), guarantee and credit (53.4%), glass (21%), machines (97.2%), and water damage (36.7%). At the same time, it was also collecting a great deal more money. In 1924, Allianz collected 108 million RM (10.2%) of the 1.1 billion RM in premiums collected by all German private insurance companies. In 1929, its percentage rose to 13.1% after collecting 340 million RM out of a total of 2.5 billion RM in premiums. Similarly, Allianz Leben collected 1.6 billion RM (15.6%) of the 10.2 billion RM collected by 55 life insurance companies in 1927;in 1930, it collected 3 billion RM (18.7%) of the 16 billion RM in premiums collected by 53 companies.50 Al-lianz Leben was not, however, the only life insurance company in the Allianz concern. Hence there could be no question that Allianz was far ahead as the leader in the German private insurance business. 
The effectiveness of Allianz, and indeed of any concern, ultimately depended on the talents and skills of its leadership and personnel and on the balance be-tween centralization and decentralization in its organization. One of the chief charges made against concerns of this type, after all, was that their structure and organization were opaque and that they were overly bureaucratized, so that their costs and premiums were unnecessarily high. This is not the place to in-vestigate such questions, except to note that the available records indicate that 
49 Aktenvermerk Moesler, 20.Mai 1931, BAB, 80 Ba 2/P 5784. 50 See the appendices in Hensel, ※40 Jahre Allianz,§ FHA, AZ1.3/1, and Allianz-Zeitung 12 (1930), 
p. 99. 
the concern beneftted from a hard-nosed, cost-conscious management and ob-viously had a high degree of success in increasing its market share. The evidence suggests also (as already noted with reference to ※Papa He.§) that Allianz lead-ership succeeded in maintaining a high level of employee morale and loyalty and that it was aware of the need to work hard at keeping its customers and probably attained a reasonable measure of customer satisfaction. 
One of the most important tasks of the concern leadership was to create a healthy balance between centralization and decentralization.51 As might be ex-pected, the managing board in Berlin determined the general lines of policy: the branches of insurance to be developed, insurance policy conditions, premi-ums to be charged, acquisitions, investments, legal questions, personnel policies, relations with government authorities, membership in and relationship to busi-ness associations, and general bookkeeping and accounting. It thus combined administrative and monitoring functions. In the former case, for example, the board managed the pension and health care funds and other provisions designed to beneft the employees; in the latter case, it exercised oversight with respect to the development of the various branches of insurance within the entire concern. An especially important function of central headquarters was management of Allianz＊s substantial assets in cash, securities, shares, and real estate. There was, to be sure, a certain amount of decentralization even at the top of the company, since life, accident, and liability insurance were handled in Stuttgart. Neverthe-less, the basic management of the concern was centralized in Berlin. 
Allianz branches in various key cities and regions had already been created by He. in 1919. The decision to introduce a higher and more formal degree of de-centralization was taken in 1928. 52 By this time, the concern had consummated fourteen mergers, and management decided to set up nine regional headquarters (Landesdirektionen) at the geographical branches contained in the organization chart. By and large, these corresponded to the old big branches (or Zweig-niederlassungen, ZN) but now they became major administrative units for large geographical areas. Each of the regional headquarters did the equivalent busi-ness of a medium-sized insurance company (20每25 million RM in premiums per year) and each had an organizational structure that more or less paralleled that of the central offce in Berlin. 
Each of the various regional headquarters was provided with what was tan-tamount to its own supervisory board in the form of a regional committee (Landesausschu.) composed of prominent businessmen and public fgures from the region encompassed by the headquarters. Thus, in 1930, Allianz had not only a supervisory board of some 30 prominent bankers and businessmen but also a network of over 80 such persons in the various regional committees through-out Germany. The signifcance of Allianz＊s supervisory boards (and of the like 
51 There is an excellent discussion of the organization of the concern in Kisch, Ffzig Jahre Al-
lianz, pp. 103每20. 52 See Aktenvermerk Moesler, 11. Dez. 1928,BAB, 80 Ba 2 /P 5787. 
organs connected with its geographical branches) did not lie in their putative su-pervisory functions. As Hilgard noted with respect to his frst experience with a supervisory board meeting in 1921, ※I was already struck at this frst meeting that the supervisory board, on which sat the top men of the German banking business, indicated very little interest in the material under discussion and were exclusively interested in the size of the dividend to be expected, upon which de-pended the amount of their supervisory board royalty.§53 Such attitudes had led to the Favag＊s demise, but Allianz was a different company with different leaders, and the 16% dividend given in 1930 was a proper refection of the company＊s suc-cesses. Schmitt made a point of identifying the branches where the company was not doing well and indicating areas where he felt costs were unacceptable. One of the novelties of the business report for 1930 was that it provided detail beyond the call of duty with respect to the company＊s share and security investments.54 In the wake of the Favag scandal, Schmitt undoubtedly wished to set a standard and be a model of transparency. This all probably was quite reassuring to the supervisory board and regional land committees, but their real importance was in the business connections they established and the business they brought in for Allianz at the national, regional, and local levels. 
The work of selling insurance remained with the feld organization itself, and much of this was done at the level below the regional headquarters, which had organizational units under them in the form of branch feld offces (Filialdirek-tionen) and district feld offces (Bezirksdirektionen). The former 每 of which there were up to fve, depending on the size of the regional headquarters and the amount of business involved 每 were smaller versions of the regional head-quarters and had bookkeeping responsibilities; thus they were involved in the technical administration of their policies and also had personnel appointed to deal with the various branches of insurance. The district offces 每 between two and twelve per Landesdirektion 每 were exclusively concerned with the propa-ganda and personnel involved in the selling of insurance. At the head of each stood a district director, who oversaw the work of a number of district inspec-tors charged with the operation of smaller districts. Although some insurance companies (and even Allianz, at times) used general insurance agencies run by independent agents who worked on a commission basis at this level, Allianz had pursued a policy of replacing such agents with salaried employees of its own whose task it was to fnd, train, and control suitable insurance salesmen in the various branches of insurance sold in the district. The actual insurance sales force was a combination of salaried persons working solely for Allianz (only 2,334 in 1939), independent full-time salespersons who made their living from commissions, and men and women who sold insurance part-time in an effort to supplement their income. The exact number of such part-time salespersons is uncertain because part-time work was not registered in the Allianz statistics 
53 Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2/7,p. 23. 54 Bericht Moesler, 27.Mai 1930, BAB, 80 Ba 2/P 5787. 
examined and, indeed, is not available for Germany as a whole (since part-time work was not included in the national occupational census). The number of in-dependent salespersons in Germany, whether full-or part-time, was estimated at 50,000 in 1939. The part-time salespersons often serviced a variety of compa-nies, and they unquestionably played a vital role for the entire industry. Insofar as it was possible, Allianz sought salespersons that would sell Allianz products exclusively. In any case, it was very important that sales personnel be honest, be attentive to the needs of their clients, and engage in fair competition. This was not always the case, and the reputation of insurance salespersons often suffered as a result.55 
Inspectors and subinspectors therefore performed the crucial function of over-sight, since it was at this level that the company often dealt directly with its cus-tomers. The task of these company offcials, like that of the over 300 company employees charged with handling claims, was an especially delicate one. It is thus not surprising that the concern devoted considerable attention to the train-ing of personnel. On the one hand, it had a substantial apprentice program so as to provide future insurance professionals with training from an early age on. On the other, special effort was made to hone the skills of those employed as inspectors. Not only did they receive an 8每10-week training course, they also were required to work closely with a more experienced inspector for a substan-tial period of time before operating on their own. Furthermore, the entire staff of inspectors at a given branch met weekly on a Sunday or Monday evening to receive the latest directives from the home offce, listen to lectures on current issues, and exchange experiences. As noted earlier, the concern also ran a vari-ety of competitions, and it was a special honor to be a member of the ※million club§ 每 that is, to have sold a million RM in insurance. As Table A shows,56 the core companies in the Allianz concern underwent a considerable growth of per-sonnel between the end of the infation and 1938, and it is remarkable that the number of employees increased even during the Great Depression. Moreover, the reported staffng levels, especially in the so-called feld service, does not in-clude those selling insurance for commissions. Yet the increase in personnel was actually quite modest, given the extraordinary growth of the concern over these years. This may be explained by the fact that Allianz systematically sought to rationalize its operations, both technically and organizationally, and seems to have been reasonably successful in doing so. 
The role of technological rationalization was already evident with the intro-duction of the typewriter, telephone, and copying devices after the First World War and also involved the increasing use of female employees for secretarial and clerical tasks. Rationalization and deskilling through the use of offce machin-ery inevitably led to a downgrading of the males, who had previously performed many of these tasks by hand and who considered themselves to be ※offcials.§ 
55 Hensel, ※40 Jahre Allianz,§ FHA, AZ 1.3/1, pp. 68, 225每30. 56 Kisch, Ffzig Jahre Allianz, p. 208. 
Home Offce Employees 
Table A. Employees at Allianz, 1924每1938 

Property  Life  Field Service  
Year  Insurance  Insurance  Total  Employees  Total  
1924  3,660  291  3,951  1,818  5,769  
1925  3,164  339  3,503  757  4,260  
1926  2,983  370  3,353  460  3,813  
1927  4,040  680  4,720  546  5,266  
1928  4,342  786  5,128  672  5,800  
1929  5,699  1,753  7,452  1,005  8,457  
1930  5,590  2,285  7,875  1,205  9,080  
1931  5,606  2,933  8,538  1,412  9,950  
1932  5,881  3,179  9,060  1,373  10,433  
1933  6,236  3,445  9,681  1,669  11,350  
1934  6,544  3,466  10,010  1,828  11,838  
1935  6,940  3,514  10,454  2,345  12,799  
1936  7,098  3,479  10,577  2,725  13,302  
1937  7,377  3,457  10,834  2,819  13,653  
1938  7,345  3,465  10,810  2,701  13,511  

The technical changes of greatest importance in insurance, however, were the introduction of automatic addressing machines (the so-called Adrema process) and of the Hollerith punchcard system, which permitted the mechanical calcula-tion of premiums, production of policies, and record keeping. Much of the push for such mechanization came from the introduction in 1926 of the ASS (Allianz Spar-und Sterbekasse) 每 inexpensive, low-value insurance policies that com-bined life and burial insurance and whose necessarily lower proft margins made cost cutting particularly desirable. It was important, however, not to overdo the degree of mechanization. The Hollerith machines were lodged in the mathemat-ical section of the concern and hardly achieved the broad use they were to enjoy after the Second World War (not to mention the later computers). American in-surance companies apparently made much greater use of offce machinery. The American model was very much in the vogue, but even though Director Rudolf Hensel journeyed to the United States in 1927 and recounted his experiences in the Allianz-Zeitung, this side of American rationalization was slow to develop.57 
57 See Barbara Eggenk.mper, ※Die Vision vom ＆aktenlosen Bo＊. Von der Lochkarte zum Com-puter,§ in Burkhart Lauterbach (ed.), Gro.stadtmenschen. Die Welt der Angestellten (Frankfurt a.M., 1995), pp. 229每48. More generally, see Mary Nolan, Visions of Modernity. American Busi-ness and the Modernization of Germany (Oxford & New York, 1994). For Hensel＊s trip to the United States see Allianz-Zeitung 1927每1929 and Rudolf Hensel, Amerika. Aus Tagebuchbl.t-tern einer Reise (Berlin, 1928). 
Indeed, as the leadership in Berlin pointed out in November 1929, the success of rationalization measures aimed at simplifying procedures, as important as they were, had limited success compared to large-scale organizational measures recently implemented: the closing of the large branches in Breslau, Hannover, Karlsruhe, and Stettin as well as the shutting down of other smaller operations and the transfer of their business to the remaining large branches. Hence, plans were being made to undertake further consolidations 每 for example, of the orga-nization of Stuttgarter Verein and of Allianz offces in Wttemberg and Baden. The shifting of business (and the related greater administrative responsibilities) to the regional headquarters was accompanied by a strong pressure to reduce costs and the establishment of maximum costs for each branch of the business. For example, the acceptable cost quotient for break-in and burglary insurance was set at 50%, of which 40% was allowed to the regional headquarters and 10% to the general headquarters in Berlin.58 
The constant pressure to cut costs and increase effciency meant that Allianz＊s management had a considerable incentive to maintain the morale and loyalty of its regular employees. Director Hensel not only praised American rationaliza-tion methods but also the American system of ※welfare capitalism§; he argued (in his unpublished history of Allianz in 1930) that the concern not only at-tained American standards in the size of its operations but also measured up to its American counterparts in what it did for employees.59 One of the most im-portant benefts was providing a subsidized meal in the canteens of its Berlin and other major urban branch offces. This made it possible for employees to avoid traveling long distances home to take the main meal of the day and, needless to say, obviated an excessively long mealtime break. Because of its size, Allianz had its own sickness insurance fund, which was typical of such large business orga-nizations. Much less typical, however, was the Allianz pension fund, established in 1924 after the old pension fund had been wiped out in the infation and Al-lianz took over its obligations in order to prevent its employees from losing those assets. The new organization was based on the principle of self-administration by the employees themselves, and all regular employees of the concern were en-titled to join if they were between the ages of 20 and 50 (in the case of men) or between 20 and 40 (for women). The fund had 3.2 million RM in assets at the end of 1929, and it was set up to care for the needs of employees and their survivors after retirement or in case of disability. Employees contributed 6% of their yearly income, although the maximum income for such purposes was 10,000 RM, while Allianz contributed slightly under double the employee pay-ment. Members (of which there were 3,766 in 1929每1930) received only half their pension under the government insurance program for white-collar employees if they opted to join the Allianz plan also. In such cases, that half of the govern-ment pension to which they were entitled came out of the Allianz pension fund. Hence, the purpose was to make it possible to receive a larger pension by joining 
58 15. erweiterte Vorstandssitzung am 5. und 6.Nov. 1929, FHA, S 17.2/4, pp. 20每4. 59 Hensel, ※40 Jahre Allianz,§ FHA, AZ 1.3/1, pp. 217每24. 
the Allianz plan. Pensions started at 30% of income after four years, increased by 2% per year thereafter, and could reach a maximum of 70%, with the surviv-ing spouse receiving half the pension upon the death of the employee. Allianz also provided monies to assist widows and orphans and to pay for funeral costs. 
An important element in the corporate culture of Allianz was its emphasis on the physical well-being of its employees. Thus, by 1930, the concern had three vacation homes for employees who did not have the means to pay for a family vacation. The homes were located in Bad Harzburg, Aidenbach near Passau, and on the island of Ren; rooms were made available at a modest cost. Most important, however, was the concern＊s emphasis on sports, an interest that re-fected a more general trend in Germany at this time to try to correct the alleged ill consequences of urban living and desk work. The frst Allianz Sports Club was founded in Dresden in 1922.In 1925, the Sportverein Allianz-Konzern e.V. was founded, centered in Berlin and with local branches at other major Allianz outposts. It boasted 600 members by the end of 1929 and offered a wide range of sport facilities and activities 每 especially in Berlin, where it had a large indoor sports facility, a boat house in Kenick, and (as a gift to the employees in honor of the concern＊s fortieth anniversary in 1930) a large stadium that held 1,000 spectators and substantial facilities for family recreation in Berlin-Mariendorf. The high point of these activities was the Allianz ※Olympics§ held every fall and attended religiously by the managing board, where teams and athletes from the branches of the concern competed for prizes. 
In his otherwise very sober account of the concern, Hensel waxes rapturous in expressing the ideological side of the Allianz sports program: ※Movement, light, air, water are the greatest healing factors in the struggle with the damages of civilization.§ Sports drove away ※beer bellies, alcoholic fogginess, and cigarette poison.§ Sports also had positive political and social consequences by ※teach-ing comradeship and a sense of community and is in our divisive age almost the only area in which the members of the various ＆estates,＊ ＆classes,＊ and ＆parties＊ can fnd themselves as equal members of a single and great people＊s commu-nity.§ Last but not least, sports in his view promoted the kind of energy and spirit that Germany needed to compete in world markets; from this perspective, ※the health of the people is economic capital.§60 
Left-wing critics like Siegfried Kracauer treated such programs 每 whether they were company vacation homes, company sports organizations, or even company newspapers 每assomucheyewashdesignedtocoverupratherthantranscendclass differences, to veil the proletarianization of the white-collar workers and many of the frm offcials, and to distract attention from the processes of deskilling and exploitation connected with rationalization.61 Translating American tech-niques of corporate welfare capitalism into German equivalents certainly had 
60 Ibid., p. 221. 
61 This was the position taken by Siegfried Kracauer in Die Angestellten. Aus dem neuesten Deutsch-
land (Frankfurt a.M., 1930), reprinted as Die Angestellten. Eine Schrift vom Ende der Weimarer 
Republik (Allensbach& Bonn, 1959). Seeespeciallyhiscommentsontheroleofsports,pp. 66每74. 
its limitations. Businessmen like Hensel were well aware that conditions in the United States were very different, since there was scarcely any collective bar-gaining and no social security system across the Atlantic. Also, many of the practices of Allianz and other concerns refected a home-grown German interest in technocratic approaches to employer每labor relations that favored company unions (Werksgemeinschaften).62 Nevertheless, there is no evidence of a strong anti-union posture at Allianz and no real evidence that the corporate culture of the concern had sinister manipulative purposes. 
In the absence of much concrete information that would enable one to study the collective bargaining negotiations in the insurance business over time and to examine the discussions between the Allianz factory councils and the manage-ment, it is diffcult to form a defnitive judgment. It is important to note that white-collar workers were splintered among several trade unions: the Socialist Central Association of White-Collar Employees, the moderate bourgeois Unifed Association of White-Collar Worker Unions, the right-wing German National Retail Clerks Union, and the bourgeois but politically neutral General Associa-tion of Insurance Employees (AVV).63 
The last-named union, which concentrated specifcally on the insurance feld, did not rule out strikes but appeared most committed to direct settlement with employers and seemed to have had a substantial following. It is revealing that the factory councils at the branches in Frankfurt, Hamburg, and Cologne, as well as the majority of employees in Hannover, supported the 1927 collective agree-ment between the AVV and the insurance industry employer organization and protested when the Central Association of White-Collar Employees, the Unifed Association of White-Collar Worker Unions, and the German National Retail Clerks Union rejected the proposed agreement and called for binding arbitration by the Labor Ministry. These other unions were accused of taking such steps purely for purposes of agitation. As in most important sectors of the economy, labor disputes in the insurance industry were settled by binding arbitration in the Weimar Republic, so such militance was of limited consequence. In 1929 these unions pressed even harder for a salary increase and binding arbitration in their favor, and they made remarkably good use of Schmitt＊s speeches on how well the insurance business had been doing since 1925. In fact, the insurance in-dustry employers justifed their resistance to a salary increase by arguing that they had to show solidarity with their less fortunate colleagues in the rest of the economy. In the end, employees received a 3% increase.64 Whatever the case, the general impression is one of relatively decent relations between management and employees at Allianz. 
62 The most important of these advocates was the German Institute for Technical Labor Training, 
concerning which useful information is scattered in Nolan, Visions of Modernity. Its supporters, 
however, came by and large from industry. 63 On these unions, see Hans Speier, German White-Collar Workers and the Rise of Hitler (New 
Haven & London, 1988), esp. Chs. 12每14. 64 On the 1927 and 1929 wage contract negotiations, see the documents in BAB, R 4101/2582 and 
2583. 
the politics of the insurance business 
Successful as Allianz may have been, the private insurance industry did not es-cape entirely unscathed from the Favag affair, even as it managed to avoid mas-sive state intervention and an excess of public criticism. The leaders of Allianz played a dominant role in industry politics, and interest-group politics and gen-eral politics were becoming more and more intertwined in the fnal years of the Weimar Republic. The Favag affair demonstrated that government super-vision of insurance had been inadequate, and the RAA began working toward a reform of the VAG almost immediately after the Favag revelations in August 1929. Schmitt himself thought that such reform was necessary, since Favag had not been alone in failing to take the necessary ※step backwards§ when setting up its gold mark opening balance in 1924 and then not making the necessary corrections because of competition within the industry. Many companies were prepared to do anything to maintain their dividend levels. In Schmitt＊s view, ※the situation of the entire German insurance business with respect to proftability must be described as extraordinarily troublesome,§ and the RAA ※has not, at least in the last years, troubled itself about maintaining the health of insurance industry, but on the contrary has made business more diffcult by concessions to the insured.§ What Schmitt had in mind were the small companies charging low premiums that he considered unfair competition because they did not cover costs and risk suffciently. This was in sharp contrast to the RAA＊s Swiss coun-terpart, which forced companies to demonstrate they could make do with lower premiums than those charged by larger companies.65 
Schmitt certainly was no friend of excess government intervention or regula-tion, and his advocacy of a greater role for the RAA and a reform of the law must be understood in the context of his strong support for a strong Reich Associa-tion for Private Insurance. The origins of this industry association go back to 1911. Originally combining the employer association and branch associations, the former was separated from the latter in 1919 so that the Reich Association could devote itself exclusively to defending and representing the general interests of the industry. Schmitt and Hilgard were very anxious to strengthen the Reich Association as much as possible in order to increase its infuence with the RAA and also with the public in general, so as to fght more effectively against critics and opponents of private insurance. Schmitt was deputy chairman of the Reich Association and, by 1929, one of its most powerful voices; likewise, Allianz was one of its most infuential members. Schmitt and Hilgard tried everything pos-sible to upgrade the prestige and effectiveness of the Reich Association, and it was at Hilgard＊s suggestion that Schmitt wooed away the highly respected Berlin Stock Exchange Commissar Geheimrat Heinrich Lippert to serve as executive director of the Reich Association.66 
65 Niederschrift er die Sitzung des St.ndigen Ausschusses am 11. Dez. 1929, pp. 8每9,GDV, RS/24. 66 Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2/7, pp. 52每3. 
In the aftermath of the Favag affair and the impending VAG reforms designed to increase the supervisory powers and role of the RAA, Schmitt pushed through organizational reforms in the Reich Association that were designed to increase its effectiveness. Indeed, the Favag affair and its aftermath demonstrate Schmitt＊s conception of how business每government relations were supposed to work. Just as the RAA＊s ability to prevent Favag from declaring bankruptcy was an essen-tial power that enabled Allianz to take over its policies and secure the interests of the insured and insurers against other creditors and interests, so its increased oversight capacity would act as a barrier to further bankruptcies caused by inap-propriate investment policies or faulty business plans 每 thereby giving the Reich Association the leverage it needed to induce member organizations and compa-nies to fall into line. As Schmitt put it: 
It is one of the tasks of the Reich Association, through a detailed presentation of the sit-uation, to infuence the supervisory offce to view the maintenance of the health of the insurance industry as an important part of its tasks. I am not arguing that the Reich As-sociation should set itself the task of intervening in individual branches; the individual tasks should rather be reserved to the individual branch associations as before. But it is necessary to create the mentality and mood which is necessary in the branch associations so that they can overcome diffculties and constraints which show up at the branch level.67 
Thus, Schmitt was a strong opponent of invasive legislation, preferring state regulators to work hand-in-hand with business organizations. He was being perfectly consistent when he later argued against detailed banking legislation after the banking crisis: ※Banking supervision ... [and] supervision of the in-surance business must work economically together in an effective way with the branch representatives to bar and prevent abuses. The development of scandals is usually noted at the right time in informed circles.§68 
The new VAG promulgated on June 6, 1931, refected the collaboration be-tween the Reich Association and the RAA, and it is signifcant that it was one of the few pieces of economic legislation of the 1930每1933 period that was not the product of a decree but instead of the normal legislative process. The ma-jor new features of the law addressed themselves to the Favag experience. The types of assets that could be used as primary reserve for policies were severely restricted, and the RAA reserved the right to ban investment of non每primary re-serve funds in assets that had nothing to do with the insurance business. Most importantly, all insurance companies covered by the law were required to have their balances certifed by an independent auditor approved by the RAA, and the disposition over primary reserve assets required the approval of an independent trustee approved by the RAA. Finally, where before the RAA had been simply entitled to undertake an on-site audit of insurance companies every fve years, 
67 Niederschrift er die Sitzung des St.ndigen Ausschusses am 11. Dez. 1929,p. 9,GDV,RS/24. 
68 Sitzung des Ausschusses II des Wirtschaftsbeirats am 11.Nov. 1931, Akten der Reichskanzlei. 
Weimarer Republik. Die Kabinette Bring I und II, bearbeitet von Tilman Koops, Bd. 3: 10. 
Okt. 1931 bis 30. Mai 1932 (Boppard am Rhein, 1990), p. 1952. 
this review was now mandatory. This was, indeed, a vast increase of the over-sight powers and capacities of the RAA, but the Reich Association successfully fought back consumer demands for placing transport and reinsurance under the RAA. The Association argued that these branches were not suitable for such control and used its chief supporter in the Reichstag, People＊s Party Deputy Paul Moldenhauer, to drive through a compromise under which supervision could be extended to uncovered branches if the Reich Economics Ministry and the Reichs-rat agreed to do so. Both were expected to be friendlier to business interests than the Reichstag.69 In general, therefore, the new legislation was a political success for the insurance industry and was based on the type of business每government collaboration advocated by Schmitt. 
Indeed, the insurance business faced important political problems and chal-lenges in the Weimar Republic, and Schmitt was anxious to upgrade the qual-ity and visibility of the Reich Association. Thus, with the strong support of Kisskalt, in 1926 he successfully proposed that the general meetings of the Reich Association be modeled after those of the Central Association of German Banks and Bankers, so that 每 alongside the internal discussions 每 general reports and speeches of broader interest would be given ※in order to direct public interest toward the private insurance business.§ Also, representatives of the press and high offcials were to be invited. In his capacity as general director of Allianz, Schmitt was very active in cultivating the press for both economic and political purposes. In 1925, at the recommendation of Dresdner Bank＊s Herbert Gut-mann (who sat on the supervisory board of Allianz), the company employed Baron Edgar von Uexkl, a once rich but now impecunious Baltic nobleman who had served as an adjutant in the Russian embassy in Berlin. Gutmann recommended Uexkl for his excellent contacts and not for his understanding of the insurance business, which was initially nonexistent. Not quite knowing what to do with him, Hilgard sent Uexkl to He.＊s organization section; after a short stint as an acquisition agent, Uexkl engaged in what is today known as public relations and persuaded his superiors that what was needed was a press offce to cultivate the media. As it turned out, he had superb contacts with the German press, especially such noted Jewish publishers as Theodor Wolff and Georg Bernhard, and was naturally gifted as a public relations man. He was thus made head of a newly created press section and organized frequent press breakfasts or luncheons in the Kaiserhof Hotel at which Schmitt and Hil-gard regularly joined him. These turned out to be extremely popular events, and Schmitt＊s open and honest reporting on the state of the insurance busi-ness and other economic matters made him and his press meetings extremely popular.70 
69 Niederschrift er die Sitzung des Allgemeinen Pr.sidial-Ausschusses am 18. M.rz 1931, pp. 2每 
4,GDV,RS/10. 70 See Niederschrift er die Sitzung des St.ndigen Ausschusses am 13. April 1926,GDV, RS/24, pp. 
35f., quotation p. 35; Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7, pp. 67每9; Interrogation of Baron Edgar 
Uexkl, June 9, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /57/4. 
The goal of creating a good image for Allianz was of no small signifcance as the concern expanded. Thus, at the end of 1928, Schmitt invited leading parlia-mentarians and press representatives to tour the offces of Allianz and also hear him speak on the important role played by Allianz in helping reconstruct Ger-many＊s capital stock and long-term investments 每 not only by investing in real estate and shares but also by increasing its holdings of mortgages, now that in-fationary anxieties could be set aside. He stressed the signifcance of insurance to a modern economy and noted that Germany was fnally catching up with the United States and England in this respect. It was now in a position to bear the high risks of fight and auto insurance. At the same time, he emphasized that his expanded enterprise in no way represented a trustifcation of the German insurance business, since it held only 12.2% of the private insurance industry＊s premium income and 16.7% of its capital and reserves.71 
Schmitt also used this and other similar exercises in public relations and press cultivation to stake out a position in the most serious confict involving the pri-vate insurance industry after World War I: its struggle with publicly chartered insurance societies. This is not to be confused with the industry＊s brief struggle against socialization. While there had been some talk of socializing the insur-ance business shortly after the Revolution of November 1918, such plans were buried (along with all the other socialization plans) at this time. The idea of so-cialization actually went back to the prewar period 每 when it was advocated by the ※professorial socialist,§ Adolph Wagner 每 and much of the enthusiasm for socialization during and after the war was fscal in character and aimed at an insurance monopoly that could serve state fnances. The Socialists were them-selves divided on the issue and had no clear idea of what they wanted to do. The end result was the introduction of an insurance tax that irritated companies and consumers alike but effectively ended the socialization debate for the rest of the Weimar Republic. Its primary effect was to mobilize the industry and encourage the development of the Reich Association.72 
The chartered insurance societies, like the private companies, were no friends of an insurance monopoly or of socialization. Originally created before the war to insure real estate, they were territorially based insurance societies organized on the principle of mutuality, that is, participation of insurers and insured in gains but also in coverage of losses. A monopoly would necessarily be antitheti-cal to these characteristics, whereas socialization would turn all their agents into civil servants and reduce their incomes. After the war, the chartered societies began expanding their felds of activity and were soon competing with the pri-vate companies in nearly every feld of insurance. Like the savings banks, which also began expanding into other felds of banking in this period, these societies were often linked to municipal and state governments, which encouraged and guaranteed their activities. They had the strong support of advocates of compul-sory fre and property insurance and were looked upon with favor by the Social 
71 Bsen-Kurier vom 8. Dez. 1928,GDV, 8-020 P1/Kurt Schmitt. 72 See the good discussion in Arps, Durch unruhige Zeiten, Bd. 1,Kap. 6. 
Democrats as a form of ※socialization§ that was linked to increased municipal and government activity in the economy. They also enjoyed support in conserva-tive (especially agrarian) circles as well as from regionalist-minded conservatives in Bavaria and elsewhere.73 
The aggressiveness of the chartered society agents in trying to win customers away from private insurers 每 together with the countermeasures employed by the private insurance agents 每 led to a considerable amount of ugly and costly com-petition. At the same time, the situation in the insurance industry was part of a larger struggle on the part of the private sector of the economy against what became known as ※cold socialization§: the growing involvement of the public sector in a host of fnancial, commercial, and industrial activities; and the in-creasing competition for capital between the private and public sectors.74 Thus, not only were municipal authorities competing with the private construction business by engaging in actual housing construction, but the mortgages were being fnanced by municipal savings banks and insured by chartered insurance societies. On November 10, 1926, the various peak associations of the busi-ness community, including the Reich Association for Private Insurance, joined together at a protest meeting in Berlin to attack ※cold socialization.§ Hilgard was given the task of speaking for the private insurers, and he launched a sharp attack on the publicly chartered companies for expanding into new areas and above all for having unfair advantages in their competition with the private insur-ers. Not only were they free of the corporation tax, tax on assets, stamp taxes, and other fees, but they also were spared RAA supervision. They were favored by the public authorities, who not only recommended them but often mandated their use 每 as, for example, with school student accident insurance in certain places. Local governments had actually recapitalized some of the societies after the infation, guaranteed their policies, and allowed them to charge premiums that were economically unjustifable and violated sound business practices. Pub-lic authorities gave the impression that such unwarranted low premiums were a public good but actually were subsidizing the chartered societies at the ex-pense of the taxpayer. Hilgard warned in dire tones that the private insurance business would be ruined by such unfair competition, that its employees would be thrown out of work, and that the increasing amounts of foreign exchange gained through private insurance business abroad would be lost to the national 
75
economy. 
Hilgard＊s attack infuriated the chartered society associations, who not only denied the charges but also launched counterattacks of their own, claiming es-pecially that private insurance agents were themselves engaging in underbidding and were claiming that the chartered company agents were Social Democrats. At 
73 Ibid., Bd. 2,Kap. 1. 
74 See Carl Bret, Aktionen gegen die ※kalte Sozialisierung§ 1926每1930. Ein Beitrag zum Wirken 
onomischer Einfu.verb.nde in der Weimarer Republik [Schriften zur Wirtschafts-und Sozial-
geschichte 3] (Berlin, 1966). 75 Beilage zu Heft 11 der Allianz-Zeitung 8 (1926) and other related materials in BAB, R 3101/17049. 
the same time, the chartered associations insisted that they wanted to cooperate with the private insurers for the common good, that the attacks on them were bound to revive the dormant socialization discussion, and that Hilgard＊s fero-cious assault threatened to make a peaceful solution impossible. Typical of the mood was the decision of the chief reinsurance organization of the chartered societies, the Deutscher Gemeinnziger Rkversicherungs-Verband, to break relations with Munich Re. Director Friedrich Baumgarte found it totally im-plausible that Hilgard could have made such a speech unless it represented the views of Allianz and Munich Re; this contention Kisskalt fatly denied, claim-ing that Hilgard was not speaking for the concerns but rather as the appointed spokesman for the Reich Association. The distinction was more convenient than convincing, but this was by no means the last time it would play a role: it in-volved a useful division of labor between Hilgard, who was often to be sent to the front line, and the other Allianz leaders, who could decide how to act later. In this case, Hilgard had fred a shot across the bow of the chartered insurance societies but, as Kisskalt pointed out, a peaceful settlement was bound to be the end result of such conficts.76 
This was, indeed, the goal of Hilgard as well, who feared that a court case would develop out of the charges and countercharges. There was also the dan-ger that complaining about publicly chartered companies charging excessively low premiums would backfre, since the public was naturally disposed to lower premiums. He appealed to the Reich Economics Ministry (RWM) to mediate. The matter was taken over by Ministerial Director Hans Sch.ffer, one of the great economic talents in the government at this time,77 who decided to follow Hilgard＊s suggestion because he did not want the entire idea of insurance to be damaged by an open confict between the two kinds of companies. While not formally exercising control over the publicly chartered companies, the RWM nev-ertheless had responsibility for the general economic welfare. Also, it tended to be favorably disposed to private enterprise. Although Hilgard was speaking for the industry and not the concerns with whom it was connected, it was precisely the leadership of Allianz and Munich Re 每 Schmitt, Hilgard, and Kisskalt 每 who negotiated for the private insurers in the discussions that began in early March 1927 and thereby demonstrated the powerful position their concerns had in the Association. Hilgard and Schmitt excused the sharpness of their attack by pres-sure from below (i.e., the insurance agents) as well as by the need for the private sector to show solidarity; there was no intention to question the integrity of the chartered societies. Nevertheless, they then catalogued what they consid-ered to be special privileges enjoyed by the chartered societies and called for an end to their abuse in competition with the private companies. For their part, the chartered companies claimed they had been victimized by unfair attacks and demanded that the Reich Association disavow Hilgard＊s remarks. 
76 Baumgarte an Thieme, 20. Dez. 1926, Kisskalt an Baumgarte, 29. Dez. 1926, MR, A 3.15/29. 77 See the rather inadequate biography by Eckhard Wandel, Hans Sch.ffer. Steuermann in wirt-
schaftlichen und politischen Krisen (Stuttgart, 1974). 
A major source of diffculty was the claim 每 sometimes contained in the very names of the chartered societies 每 that they were ※gemeinnzig,§ that is, non-proft organizations serving the public interest. The private companies claimed they were also effectively nonproft, since most of their profts were returned to their customers, and were even more adamant that they were serving the public interest. Whatever the case, an agreement was reached that Hilgard＊s words and intent had been ※misunderstood§; an armistice was called while a subcommittee representing the two sides hammered out a compromise and developed mecha-nisms for the adjudication and mediation of their differences. This was fnally achieved in July 1927, although special arrangements had to be made for Bavaria and some chartered societies and private companies. Johannes Tiedke, the gen-eral director of Alte Leipziger, was particularly hostile to the chartered societies and refused (as was often the case with this rather crusty and independent per-sonage) to compromise. In truth, the agreement did not prove terribly effective, as demonstrated by another meeting in the RWM in November 1930: now it was the chartered societies who protested the behavior of private company agents and of Tiedke, while Schmitt warned that throwing Tiedke out of the Reich Associa-tion would make him even more obstreperous. Signifcantly, the RAA supported private insurers in their continued protest that chartered societies were unfairly laying claim to a monopoly on ※Gemeinnzigkeit.§ Once again, a decision was made to try to avoid an open battle and to rein in both sides, but this was no easy matter in the depressed and highly competitive conditions of the early 1930s.78 
Kurt Schmitt, who became chairman and thus leading spokesman of the Reich Association for Private Insurance at the end of 1931, never tired of pointing out that the insurance business was weathering the economic crisis rather well com-pared to other business sectors. Allianz was doing particularly well under the circumstances. He attributed this success to the long-range character of insur-ance policies, the care with which the industry invested its money, and the need for every kind of insurance even in bad times. Because of the need to back up its policies with proper coverage, the insurance industry was not dependent on short-term foreign money but was rather a granter of credits itself and thus did not suffer from the liquidity problems facing other economic sectors. Thus, whereas many sectors had as much as a 50% reduction of business in 1931, the insurance sector dropped only between 5% and 10%. Schmitt was certainly concerned about premature termination of policies, which refected the growing impoverishment of many Germans, and he felt that it was worth the extra ad-ministrative cost to maintain existing policies and bring in new business. In his frequent public statements to the press and in radio addresses, Schmitt sought to present an upbeat message and to promote confdence in Germany＊s business leadership. He was very critical of the dragging on of trials in connection with various business scandals, as was occurring in the Favag and other cases, and he 
78 See the negotiations of March 4, 1927, the agreements of July 1, 1927, and the negotiations of 
November 28, 1930,inBAB,R 3101/17049. See also the diary entry for March 4, 1927, in Hans 
Sch.ffer, Tagebher, Leo Baeck Institute, New York, Hans Sch.ffer Papers. 
emphasized the probity of Germany＊s business community. A similar tone was taken in the business reports of Allianz, and it refected the attitude expressed at meetings of the Allianz directors. Thus, on October 25, 1932, at the last such meeting held before the National Socialists came to power, note was taken of a general reduction of pessimism and improvement of business conditions even as continued economic uncertainty required an ongoing policy of caution.79 
These public pronouncements were free of partisan political commentary and criticism despite the profound political unrest and political violence of these years. Indeed, such restraint characterized Allianz as well as the Reich Associa-tion, distinguishing it from the more vociferous criticisms to be found in public commentary put out by great industrial frms and by the Reich Association of German Industry. Insofar as Allianz and its leaders (as well as the industry) con-cerned themselves with political issues, such engagement appeared limited to those areas directly affecting their interests. 
Typical of such interest-group politics was the reaction of the insurance busi-ness to the introduction of exchange controls following the banking crisis of July 1931. Designed to prevent the further fight of capital that had played a major role in bringing on the banking crisis, the measure effectively took Germany off the gold standard. However, in contrast to the British departure from gold in September 1931, the Germans sought to maintain the value of the Reichsmark by persisting in defationary policies at home. Nevertheless, the new exchange con-trol regime was a severe departure from liberal economic trade policies, and it was one that had dangerous implications for the insurance industry. Quite aside from the fact that there were a number of foreign insurers operating in Germany that could be affected by the measures, the entire reinsurance business was inter-national in character and domestic German insurance companies also operated abroad. Allianz, for example, was substantially increasing its foreign business at this time. On the one hand, it had opened or was opening agencies or insurance marketing connections for varieties of insurance 每 not only in the major Euro-pean countries but also, for example, in Palestine, Cyprus, Iraq, the British and Dutch Indies, China, Siam, and Ceylon. On the other hand, it was increasing or acquiring shares in foreign insurance companies, most notably Bore Insurance Company in Stockholm and the South African Liberal Life Ltd. In almost all cases, Allianz required the approval of the RAA for such engagements because they involved a change in the business plan, but the introduction of exchange controls meant that they also needed permission to secure the foreign exchange necessary to carry on these operations. Finally, as noted earlier, there were nu-merous policies denominated in foreign currencies, and the payment both of premiums and of policy proceeds were now subject to exchange controls.80 
79 20. erweiterte Vorstandssitzung am 25. Okt. 1931,FHA, S 17.2 /4. There is a good collection 
of Schmitt＊s press interviews and radio talks in GDV, 8-020 P1/Kurt Schmitt, and in BAK, B 
280/14321. See also the Gesch.ftsberichte of Allianz for 1930每1933 in FHA. 80 See the correspondence in BAK, B 280/12253, Bl. 2每76, and BAK, B 280/12257, Bl. 1每53. See also 
the Allianz Gesch.ftsbericht for 1931, pp. 7, 12, and for 1932,p. 44,FHA. 
The ensuing years-long preoccupation with the endless stream of decrees and regulations connected with foreign exchange is a monument to the stupidities and ineffciencies of the illiberal trade policies and governmental regulation that came to characterize this era. Beginning with the issuance of the frst decrees and then throughout the coming years, the insurance business made extraordi-nary and often remarkably successful efforts to establish a special place for itself in the foreign exchange control regime. This was possible only through con-stant effort. The system placed a high premium on close and good contacts with the relevant government authorities and made this a central consideration in all political calculations. Thus, even though the initial decrees explicitly protected insurance contracts, supervision was placed in the hands of the RAA, which was empowered to evaluate foreign exchange operations in great detail. In early August 1931, the Reich Association leadership (accompanied by Kisskalt) ap-peared on the doorstep of the government authorities with complaints that the industry was not being protected enough from the complicated requirements and with warnings that its domestic and foreign business was being threatened. The result of such efforts was a series of exemptions, but these could only be achieved with the promise that the industry demonstrate extreme discipline in moving capital, that it show proftability in its international business, and that it apply the utmost restraint in its foreign exchange requests. All of this, in turn, placed a premium on discipline within the industry itself and greatly strength-ened the hand of the Reich Association. Thus, when Lippert reported the results of these negotiations with the government to the full assembly of the Reich As-sociation on November 26, 1931, Schmitt immediately followed by warning his colleagues to follow the regulations as precisely as possible and to avoid doing anything that might make the precarious foreign exchange situation of the Reich even worse. He pointed to the diffcult position of the savings banks in July 1931, which had placed their monies at the disposal of municipalities that, like the insurance companies, had made long-term investments, primarily in mort-gages. The savings banks, like the insurance companies, had never anticipated a run. The situation of the savings banks had improved thanks to government intervention, while the insurance companies had been spared and enjoyed large reserves. For Schmitt, this was their opportunity to reinforce their position, so that ※hopefully one will later be able to point out with pride that the German life insurance has proven itself in the greatest crisis as the largest continually func-tioning reserve of the German people.§81 
As Schmitt well knew and was by no means shy about saying, the same could not be said for the German social insurance system, whose total defcit he es-timated to be 18每22 billion RM and whose yearly defcit he estimated to be 1.2每1.4 billion RM. Schmitt had provided these fgures confdentially to the Al-lianz supervisory board in May 1931 in connection with his request that the 
81 Sitzungsbericht er die 2. Ordentliche Hauptversammlung des Reichsverbandes der Privatver-
sicherung am 26.Nov. 1931,GDV,RS/3,p. 12; for the various decrees and discussions, see GDV, 
RS/2 and 3. 
Allianz business report for 1930 indicate, which it subsequently did, that the social insurance system was in trouble and that a reconstruction plan was essen-tial. He pointed out that it was politically impossible to reveal the full extent of the defcit and noted that, whereas Allianz had thirty insurance mathemati-cians at its disposal, the entire social security system had only fve such persons. It was necessary to raise contributions and reduce payments if the system were to survive.82 
If Schmitt felt called upon to take such a measure, it was because he had be-come something of a public fgure who was well-informed and very concerned about such matters. This undoubtedly was due to his press conferences and other public relations activities as well as to his decisiveness and success in the Favag affair. He thus enjoyed considerable authority, and given the desperate ef-forts of the dying Republic＊s fnal governments to secure the active participation of leading businessmen, Schmitt appeared to be a natural candidate for a high ministerial position. Chancellor Bring was one of the many high government personages with whom Schmitt had contact because of his central role in the Reich Association and other business organizations. In 1931, Bring invited Schmitt and Professor Hermann Warmbold, an IG Farben director, to discuss the economic situation with the intention of inviting one of them to take the post of economics minister. Schmitt turned down the idea, because of ※my lack of membership in any political party and my lack of interest in leaving the Allianz in favor of a political post.§83 Bring, in any case, seemed to prefer Warmbold, who was an economic statistician of high repute. In the same year, Bring com-missioned the private banker Hans Arnhold, who had some business dealings with Schmitt, to ask the latter if he would not serve as fnance minister. Again, Schmitt refused, responding to Arnhold＊s overture by saying that ※it is too early.§ Trying later to explain his decisions to Arnhold, who had fed Germany and was living in New York when they resumed contact in 1948, Schmitt claimed that ※it was not because of my political position, but rather out of lack of desire to leave my beautiful Allianz to go into politics, but in general also because of the justifed feeling at that time, that the activity would have stood on weak and short-term legs given the constitution of the parties and their short-sighted ego-tistical fght among themselves.§84 
This disdain for political parties and partisan political confict certainly was no novelty among leading German businessmen, and Schmitt was not the only business leader to turn down a high post for the reasons he gave. Nevertheless, he 
82 Aktenvermerk Moesler, 12.Mai 1931,BAB, 80 Ba 2 /P 5787, and Allianz Gesch.ftsbericht 1930, 
p. 7,FHA. 83 Interrogation of Kurt Schmitt, July 8, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /58/3. See also 
Schmitt＊s testimony at Nuremberg in his interrogation by Robert W. Kempner, Aug. 1, 1946,AM, 
Spruchkammerakten Dr. Kurt Schmitt, Akten der Spruchkammer Starnberg, Teil I, Dokument 
38. 84 Arnhold to Schmitt, March 25, 1948, and Schmitt to Arnhold, April 1, 1948,FHA, NL 1/16. 
For a published version of this exchange, see Gerald D. Feldman, ※Existenzk.mpfe,§ in Der 
Tagesspiegel, 6.Nov. 1998, Sonderbeilage er die American Academy Berlin, p. 5. 
was willing to lend his services as an adviser to the government, and in October 1931 he accepted an appointment to serve on the newly created Economic Advi-sory Council. This council was established at the outset of Heinrich Bring＊s second Cabinet, and the Chancellor attached great importance to its assigned role in helping to work out the details of his defationary program of reducing not only wages and salaries but also prices and interest rates.85 It proved less signifcant than Bring had hoped. 
Although certainly worried about the economic situation, Schmitt＊s basic stance was that ultimately the economy had to cure itself and to avoid exces-sive state intervention. Naturally, he placed great emphasis on defcit reduction at all levels of government and on maintaining the stability of the currency. Al-though he could not deny the need for emergency measures, he was especially concerned about the inclination to reduce interest rates by decree, seeing in such measures a loss of nerve that would create greater uncertainty and insecurity in the population. This stance was hardly surprising for an insurance business exec-utive, since lower interest rates would reduce both the return on insurance assets and on the mortgages that constituted an important component of insurance company reserves. Arguing that premiums inevitably adjusted to price levels in any case, Schmitt insisted the situation would even be worse if lower premiums were mandated. In short, he was insistent that one could not relieve debtors without creating insecurity among creditors and that the result would be artif-cial regulations trying to square the circle. Indeed, Schmitt 每 in alliance with the powerful lignite industrialist Paul Silverberg 每 preferred to see the Reichsbank lower its discount rates and to have a measure of subsidization of the heavily in-debted agricultural sector and expansion of credit to spark the economy, a policy opposed by the Reichsbank and by more conservative members of the Advisory Council. The end result of all these deliberations was the Fourth Emergency De-cree issued at the beginning of December 1931, which sought to lower prices and interest rates and created a new offce of price commissar, flled by the former mayor of Leipzig, Carl Goerdeler. The decree, however, also pushed wages and salaries back to 1927 levels. The basic goal was to complete the process of defa-tion and prepare the way for an upswing. Schmitt certainly believed this possible, but when he met with his colleagues on the Reich Association, the emphasis was above all on cost reduction 每 that is, the reduction of wages and salaries.86 
The Economic Advisory Council was presided over by Reich President Paul von Hindenburg, and Schmitt＊s performance seemed to have pleased the old man, who had a liking for veterans who cut a good fgure and conveyed a confdent and 
85 On the Economic Advisory Council, see Bring＊s remarks at the Cabinet meeting of Oct. 10, 
1931,in Akten der Reichskanzlei. Weimarer Republik. Die Kabinette Bring I und II, bearbeitet 
von Tilman Koops, Bd. 3: 10. Okt. 1931 bis 30. Mai 1932 (Boppard am Rhein, 1990), pp. 1823每4, 
as well as the frst meetings of Oct. 29每30, 1931, ibid., pp. 1860每72, 1881每90. 86 Ibid., pp. 1884每5, and the meeting of Nov. 11, 1931, ibid., pp. 1948每58. For his general evaluation 
of the Emergency Decree and his views on the need to cut costs, see his remarks at the Sitzungs-
bericht er die 2. Ordentliche Hauptversammlung des Reichsverbandes der Privatversicherung 
am 26.Nov. 1931, pp. 7每8,GDV,RS/3. 
optimistic message. This may have had something to do with Schmitt＊s name coming up high on the list of potential fnance ministers when Franz von Papen was forming his new government in June 1932. Be that as it may, Schmitt met von Papen for the frst time at this juncture and was offered the ministership, which Schmitt refused, telling his interrogators in 1947, ※I considered his gov-ernment could not be long lived as it possessed too narrow a base among the parties. No government could hope successfully to carry on for a long period with the Socialists, Communists, Nazis and a portion of the Center Party in op-position.§87 
Thus, Schmitt had turned down Bring because one could not rule with the political parties, and now he turned down von Papen because one could not rule without them. The common denominator, aside from the fact that he was loathe to leave his job at Allianz, was a belief that he could not be an effective min-ister under existing conditions. These were perfectly rational perceptions for a man with no political experience and interests, and Schmitt＊s preference for playing the economic policy expert to the unstable authoritarian regimes ruling Germany is understandable. Nevertheless, Schmitt was well aware of the great hardships created by the depression and the defationary policies he advocated. He fretted over the high unemployment and worried about political violence, especially from the left. There is no evidence that he had any formal political affliation during the fnal years of the Republic, and the increasingly authori-tarian character of the Bring and von Papen regimes and their dependence on emergency decrees obviated the need for party affliation in his contacts with the government. Like most business leaders, he urged contact with all the po-litical parties and seems to have had decent relations with Social Democrats as well. Indeed, insofar as direct participation in a politicized organization is con-cerned, there is only his somewhat mysterious decision to join the Stahlhelm (a right-wing veterans＊ organization) sometime in 1931 and to leave it sometime in 1932. 88 Nevertheless, Schmitt did have very close (albeit private) contacts with the leaders of one political party: the National Socialists. 
schmitt, gring, and hitler 
Tracing the relationships among businessmen and political leaders and parties is never an easy matter, but it is especially diffcult when the party in question is a radical totalitarian political movement. Before the National Socialists (NSDAP) came to power, it was not politic for businessmen to have openly close relations 
87 Interrogation of Schmitt, July 8, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /58/3. On von Papen＊s 
offer, see the press clippings in GDV, 8-020 P1/Kurt Schmitt, especially the clipping from ※Die 
Versicherung§ (Wien), June 2, 1932, and also the press clippings in FHA, NL 1/47. 88 On his Stahlhelm affliation, see the Fragebogen vom 4. Aug. 1937, BAB, ehem. BDC, SSO Dr. 
Kurt Schmitt (*7.10.1886). On Schmitt＊s contacts with representatives of other parties, includ-
ing the SPD, see the statement of the Allianz lawyer in 1933, Carl Wolff, dated April 20, 1946, 
AM, Spruchkammerakten Dr. Kurt Schmitt, Akten der Spruchkammer Starnberg, 6. Teil, Doku-
ment 30. 
with them, and only a few mavericks like Fritz Thyssen and Emil Kirdorf were prepared to openly identify themselves with the NSDAP. Once Hitler was in-stalled in offce, it was diffcult if not impossible for businessmen not to have contacts and relations with at least some elements in the political leadership, but then it becomes very diffcult for historians to distinguish between what was said and done for tactical or opportunistic reasons and what was the product of conviction. The investigation of societies in which people do not speak or write freely and are loathe to set down their thoughts or records of their conversations presents grave problems. It is much easier to study businessmen in the Weimar Republic than in the Third Reich. Finally, businessmen 每 and, indeed, all persons who had been engaged with the regime 每 did not feel a pent-up urge to recount their experiences once the regime was gone, especially if they were being interro-gated by Allied offcers or were being denazifed. In fact, most persons involved felt a desperate need to reconstruct their memories so as to make them more bear-able to their own self-esteem. They had no desire to dwell on the horrors of the regime and preferred to concentrate on their present hardships. In short, a study such as this faces massive problems of critical analysis of the sources, made all the more diffcult by the Allied bombers who succeeded in destroying the build-ings and records at Allianz headquarters in Berlin. The exercise in historical reconstruction and judgment that now begins with Kurt Schmitt＊s and Allianz＊s relationship to the National Socialists is one for which I take full responsibility. 
After 1945, Schmitt (and others who spoke for him) sought to portray his rela-tion with the National Socialist leader and Reichstag Deputy Hermann Ging in the aforementioned context of general contact with all the non-Communist political parties in order to protect company and industry interests. In one of his interrogations in July 1947, Schmitt claimed that he frst met Ging in 1932 at a small dinner party given by Walter Eggerss, a director of Allianz who spe-cialized in the fre insurance feld, and claimed never to have met Hitler prior to his coming to power. He stated that perhaps four or fve persons were present at the meeting with Ging, Hilgard possibly being one of them.89 The latter＊s account in his unpublished memoirs was somewhat different.90 According to Hilgard, Schmitt and he were concerned about the rise of the NSDAP and felt it important to keep abreast of developments in the party and try to infuence its economic policies. The most promising person in this connection appeared to be Ging, whose views were thought to be closest to those of the business commu-nity. When they learned that Eggerss had a personal connection with Ging, they asked him to arrange a meeting. According to Hilgard, this frst meeting took place in the fall of 1932 in a private room at the Restaurant Hiller, located on the Unter den Linden in Berlin. Hilgard remembered it as being a two-hour meeting that left a rather unsatisfactory impression. Ging spoke in glowing terms about Hitler＊s goals, gave vague assurances that business had nothing to fear from the Nazis, who were anxious to promote private initiative, and tried to 
89 Interrogation of Schmitt, July 8, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /58/2每7. 90 For the discussion that follows, see Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7, pp. 86每90. 
calm their fears with respect to the Jewish question. According to Ging, Nazi intentions were to prevent more foreign Jews, especially from the East, from en-tering Germany and to gradually remove Jews from public offces. They would, however, remain free to pursue their economic activities. 
Hilgard claimed that Ging＊s performance only increased his own mistrust in the NSDAP, but that the meeting had the important result of leading to a meet-ing with Hitler himself. The initiative came from Ging, who was apparently very impressed with Schmitt, and was seconded by Berliner Bsenzeitung edi-tor Walther Funk, a prominent journalist who had gone over to the NSDAP and was anxious to bring business leaders into the fold. Thus, in November or De-cember 1932, Ging and Funk accompanied Schmitt and Hilgard to a meeting at the Hotel Kaiserhof, where Hitler held court at this time. Hilgard, for whom clothes made the man, was repulsed by Hitler＊s unkempt appearance and his in-elegant double-breasted dark blue suit, and he claims to have found it hard to shake Hitler＊s hand on this and the two or three other occasions when they met in subsequent years. Matters were not improved by the ninety-minute lecture to which they were subjected, Hitler arguing that the NSDAP was the only barrier remaining against the Communists and that it was therefore important to give his party support and money. Hitler did not appear to be in a mood for discus-sion, and the meeting ended after a few questions and cursory answers. 
According to Hilgard＊s account, he and Schmitt went away with the feeling that Hitler＊s coming to power was not in Germany＊s interest but also that it was important ※not to remain on the sidelines in the near future but to seek contact with the leading men of the NSDAP and in this way to gain infuence over the way things developed.§91 Ging was in hot pursuit in any case, and followed up the meeting with an invitation to lunch in his home in the Kaiserstra.e, where they were joined by his later adjutant Paul Kner. What most interested Ging, of course, was a large contribution to the Party, but he also pressed Schmitt to join the Party and promised to arrange the matter. Schmitt demurred and the mat-ter was left hanging, but Hilgard knew that Schmitt, who had a tendency to seek out the positive in everyone, found Ging quite charming 每 especially in com-parison with Hitler. 
There are obviously substantial differences between Hilgard＊s account, writ-ten in the 1960s after Schmitt was dead, and Schmitt＊s statements at his 1947 interrogation. Whereas both agree that the meeting with Ging took place in 1932 and that Eggerss was the contact man, Schmitt denied that he had ever met Hitler before the latter took power. Hilgard＊s memoirs thus contradict Schmitt＊s testimony by claiming that there had been such a meeting with Hitler and at least one other meeting with Ging. Then again, however, Hilgard himself had told a somewhat different story when he was interrogated on July 14, 1947 (i.e., at the same time as Schmitt). In that interrogation, he never mentioned a meeting with Hitler and spoke of only one meeting with Ging in the summer, not the 
91 Ibid., p. 87. 
fall, of 1932. He claimed there that during one of the Allianz press conferences he had asked Emil Helfferich 每 brother of the late Karl Helfferich (a German Na-tional People＊s Party deputy) and a businessman from Hamburg 每 if the NSDAP had any exceptional personalities, to which Helfferich replied by naming Ging as the ablest representative of the Party despite his terrible character. Hilgard then suggested to Schmitt that they make contact with Ging, which they did through Eggerss. According to this account, Ging came two hours late to the Restaurant Hiller, asked for support against the Communists, indicated an in-tention to drive the Jews from public life, but did not make any specifc requests for propaganda and fnancial support. While admitting that both he and Schmitt were impressed with Ging as a coming man, Hilgard nevertheless claimed to have never met with him again before the seizure of power. Yet we have seen that Hilgard＊s own memoirs belie this statement.92 
It is, of course, in no way surprising that Schmitt and Hilgard were anxious to hide or forget contacts with Hitler before 1933 and, more generally, to date their contacts with Ging and the Nazis to as near the end of the Weimar Republic as possible. The trouble with both accounts, however, is that they are refuted by the interrogation of the man who did indeed bring them together with Ging 每 namely, Walter Eggerss, who on August 17, 1947, gave a precise and detailed ac-count of what happened that in no way fattered himself or anyone else.93 
Eggerss had met Ging for the frst time at the home of Georg Emil von Stau. of the Deutsche Bank in October 1930. Stau. was a member of the German Peo-ple＊s Party but was one of the frst major businessmen to try to forge a link with the National Socialists in the fush of their great victory in the Reichstag elections of September 1930, and he regularly invited major Nazis to his home. Ging was one of the dozen or so persons present at the dinner in question, and Eggerss spoke with him privately for about an hour, primarily about Hitler＊s idea of setting up an ※economic senate§ of leading experts to advise him. Fritz Thyssen, one of the few industrialist enthusiasts for Hitler, had agreed to serve. While it was expected that those who served would support the goals of the Party, membership was not required. Eggerss suggested that it would be im-portant to have an insurance industry leader on such a body and recommended that he meet Schmitt. Eggerss, who had a very favorable impression of Ging and who was convinced that ※sooner or later the Nazis were certain to come to power,§ spoke to Schmitt on the next day and pointed out that ※it would be clever tactics on our part to cultivate the acquaintanceship of leading Nazi per-sonalities at an earlier rather than at a later date so as to win thereby a voice in the shaping of the economic program of the Party.§ Schmitt agreed with this analysis, and what then followed was a meeting at Restaurant Hiller in the last days of October or the frst days of November 1930 between Eggerss, Schmitt, and Ging. 
92 Interrogation of Eduard Hilgard, July 14, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /57/4. 93 The account and quotations that follow are based on this interrogation of the just-retired Walter 
Eggerss on August 17, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /56/10. 
During the two-hour luncheon, Ging apparently so impressed and over-whelmed the two men that ※he won us over completely to the political program of the Nazi Party.§ Ging 
spoke of the Jews ... and expressed the view that they ought to be permitted to live peace-fully in Germany but that the right to vote should be withdrawn from them and that they should not be permitted to hold public offce or to participate in the professions or to hold positions which would place them in authority over Germans. 
Eggerss admitted that ※Dr. Schmitt and myself shared these views at the time and hence Ging＊s statement struck us both as very reasonable.§ Furthermore, this was by no means the only meeting; Eggerss stated that Schmitt, Ging, and Eggerss held some eight to ten meetings at two-or three-week intervals at Restaurant Hiller between October 1930 and March 1931. Eggerss remembered two other persons being present at individual meetings as well. One was the later Reichsstatthalter of Bavaria and Schmitt＊s former regimental commander, Franz Xaver Ritter von Epp. The other was Eduard Hilgard, who was at one of the luncheons in early 1931. 
Schmitt apparently expressed great admiration for Ging. Thus, after one of the lunches in the fall of 1930, Schmitt told Eggerss: ※If I did not hold my present position of the frst rank in the German economy, I could readily conceive that I would gladly play a role in this movement.§ For the same reason of his role as a leading business executive and public fgure, Schmitt did not want to join the projected economic senate and proposed that Eggerss enter it instead ※and re-main in the foreground but that he would stand behind me in the background.§ The senate never came into being, but Ging continued to enjoy eating and drinking at Allianz＊s expense 每 the lunches ran between 180 and 200 RM for three persons 每 although Eggerss admitted that ※we found it quite amusing to indulge his appetite.§ Schmitt also seemed willing to indulge Ging＊s rather ex-pensive lifestyle. When Ging complained that he was fnding it hard to meet expenses, Schmitt told Eggerss that Ging ※has good political ideas and we must help him. I will get the Allianz Insurance Company to send him a check for RM 5,000.§ Eggerss considered Schmitt a man of his word and was certain the check was sent. 
There are many reasons to give more credence to Eggerss＊s account than to either Schmitt＊s or Hilgard＊s. First of all, Eggerss＊s explanation of how he came to contact Ging is consistent with what is known about the banker Stau..94 Second, Eggerss was no longer in Berlin after April 1931, when he was trans-ferred to the board of directors of Neue Frankfurter. He stayed there until 1934, took a leave of absence to work with Kessler of the Reich Economic Chamber, 
94 See Feldman, ※Deutsche Bank,§ p. 249; Harold James, ※The Deutsche Bank and the Dictatorship, 1933每1945,§ in Lothar Gall et al., The Deutsche Bank, 1870每1995 (London, 1995), pp. 277每356, here pp. 308每18; and Henry A. Turner, Jr., German Big Business and the Rise of Hitler (Oxford & New York, 1985), pp. 142每4. 
and then returned to Allianz in the fall of 1934 and stayed on until May 1947. Eggerss became a member of the NSDAP in the spring of 1933 but then voluntar-ily withdrew from the party in October 1935. His testimony, it is important to note, was given after his retirement. Therefore, it is obvious that Eggerss intro-duced Schmitt and Hilgard to Ging before he left for Frankfurt in the spring of 1931. All this does not mean that Schmitt and Hilgard did not meet with Ging after April 1931 and in 1932. Indeed, Eggerss specifcally states that the meetings continued and that his role as liaison was taken over by Director Walter Boehm, later director of the Allianz branch in Dresden encompassing Saxony and Sile-sia. Thus, Schmitt had many meetings with Ging, and Hilgard attended at least at one before the meetings he describes in his memoirs. 
In fact, this was well attested to by others who worked with Schmitt, both later and at the time. Thus, in his interrogation in 1947, Baron Uexkl was much less precise than Eggerss but quite defnitive about the relationship, saying that Schmitt met Ging 
about 1931 and as a result became an enthusiastic Nazi. He lunched frequently with Ging during 1931/1932 at Hiller＊s Restaurant on Unter den Linden. During 1932 Dr. Schmitt met Hitler at the Kaiserhof Hotel at Berlin and spoke to me afterward about it in glowing terms. Dr. Schmitt was also on excellent terms with Walther Funk, who was devoting his full energies toward the winning over to the Nazi cause of leading fgures in industry and fnance.95 
Similarly, on August 17, 1932, Reich Association Executive Director Lippert re-sponded to reports of complaints made to General Director Stieringer of the National Allgemeine Versicherungs-AG in Stettin that the insurance industry was failing to have suffcient contact with the NSDAP leadership, suggesting that those to whom Stieringer had spoken were not in contact with the Party leadership since ※it is known to me that the chairman of the Reich Association, General Director Dr. Schmitt has already often conferred with leading represen-tatives of the National Socialist Party. Herr Dr. Schmitt has also even reported about this at various times in meetings.§96 Finally, what Eggerss and Uexkl described concerning Schmitt＊s enthusiasm for Ging and Hitler is completely consistent with Schmitt＊s unrefective, very personal, and impulsive approach to politics before and after January 30, 1933. 
In fact, Schmitt＊s frst meeting with Hitler did not take place in November 1932, as Hilgard claims in his memoirs, but rather on February 3, 1931.The source of this information is Oscar Wagener, Hitler＊s economic adviser at this time and a leading fgure in the Sturmabteilung (SA). Wagener was in the rad-ical wing of the Party and was no friend of industry; though his views were quite eccentric, there is no reason to question the reliability of postwar recon-structions from his diary. Indeed, what he describes fts in quite well with the 
95 Interrogation of Baron Edgar Uexkl, June 9, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /57/4. 96 Lippert to Stieringer, Aug. 17, 1932,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2/58/2每7. 
impulsiveness of Schmitt in his dealings with the Nazis at this time. The en-counter took place just when Hitler had made the Kaiserhof, which was across the street from the central offces of Allianz, his Berlin headquarters with the purpose of having quarters satisfactory enough to meet the high and mighty. At this time, Hitler and his closest advisers were concerned about the danger of a right-wing reactionary putsch that would set loose left-wing violence and cre-ate a civil war that would tear the NSDAP apart. In their view, only an armed SA could challenge the army and stop the Socialists and Communists. This re-quired substantial sums of money, and Wagener proposed they consult with the journalist Walther Funk. The latter produced a number of industrialists for dis-cussions of this problem, which was to be posed naturally as an effort to counter a revolt from the left, not the right. The frst of the businessmen produced by Funk were Kurt Schmitt and the head of the Allianz supervisory board, August von Finck of the Bavarian private banking house of Merck, Finck & Co. Hitler laid out the position in a half-hour talk, which was followed by a discussion in which both Schmitt and von Finck indicated considerable pessimism with re-spect to the unemployment problem and their feeling that left-wing unrest was inevitable. After showing them out, Funk came back with the news that Allianz would provide 5 million RM for the arming of the SA in the event of left-wing unrest. Since the eventuality never arose, the promise was never tested, but this was yet another demonstration of Schmitt＊s predisposition toward the Nazis be-
97
fore 1933. 
Indeed, there is no evidence that Allianz gave any money to the National So-cialist Party or made more than a modest contribution to Ging＊s lunchtime contentment and high living. It is notable, however, that Allianz carried an ad-vertisement in the Vkischer Beobachter as early as June 3, 1930 (and then again on November 11, 1930), despite its numerous attacks on Jewish banks 每 and their role in the Favag affair 每 and critical articles on insurance company profts. It was rare for large concerns to advertise there until 1932. Nevertheless, this can easily be attributed to aggressive marketing rather than ideological sympathy. In contrast to Stau., whose open support for National Socialist participation in the government caused embarrassment for Deutsche Bank and loss of Jewish customers, Schmitt＊s contacts were private and discreet; he studiously avoided partisan political statements. Whereas Eggerss seemed to share Schmitt＊s enthu-siasm for National Socialism, there is no evidence that Hilgard felt the same way or that any other leading directors at Allianz or its affliated companies were involved. What, then, was the meaning and the content of Schmitt＊s National Socialist enthusiasm? 
97 Henry A. Turner, Jr. (ed.), Hitler aus n.chster N.he. Aufzeichnungen eines Vertrauten 1929每 1932 (Frankfurt a.M., 1978), pp. 368每74, and Turner, German Big Business, pp. 149每50. Unfor-tunately, this is the only source available on this encounter and the 5 million RM mentioned is ex-tremely sizeable for this period. Also, on the basis of this source it is hard to tell how seriously Kurt Schmitt took his offer and whether he was thinking of Allianz alone or of other companies as well. 

Allianz and Allianz Leben advertised in the Nazi paper Vkischer Beobachter as early as June 3, 1930 (※travel carefree§) and November 11, 1930 (※whether you earn 3,000 RM or 30,000 RM a year§). 
Although Schmitt was reluctant to reveal to his postwar interrogators the amount of contact he had with Ging and Hitler before 1933, he did try to put down his thoughts and remembrances at various points, and these are useful in understanding his mentality. He confessed that prior to 1933 he had scarcely concerned himself with the actual content of the National Socialist program be-yond reading headlines in the papers and various placards. He had never read more than a small fraction of Hitler＊s Mein Kampf. In the critical period at the end of 1932, he did listen to speeches by von Papen and Hitler and, like most of those with whom he consorted in educated and wealthy circles, was impressed by the difference between the rhetoric of the two men. While put off by Hitler＊s speeches, he was surprised by how Hitler＊s following had grown and noted that, in the propaganda struggle with the Communists, it was not the Social Demo-cratic Party and other parties but rather the Nazis that held the feld. Indeed, Schmitt argued that, in the industrial areas and the Ruhr, anxiety about a left block led by the Communists was very great; the NSDAP skillfully played upon the need to cleanse public life, recognize achievement, protect private property, save the Mittelstand, and the like. Added to this was the failure of the parliamen-tary system in Germany. There were too many parties and there was too much partisan politics. This was in sharp contrast to England (for which Schmitt had great admiration), where the number of parties were small and the governmental transitions smooth. The National Socialist claim to be ※above§ parties was par-ticularly appealing in this context, and Schmitt considered especially promising its advocacy of the right to work and its pledge to end the demoralization of youth. 
Needless to say, these are not terribly original or interesting explanations in themselves. They refected the thought of a person who paid little attention to politics and whose anxiety about the existing situation 每 above all, the threat of Communism 每 and distaste for politics had rendered him oblivious to the moral differences between one kind of political party and another. Schmitt, in fact, was a perfect illustration of the antidemocratic political culture of important segments of the business community inherited from the old Empire and carried on into the Weimar Republic. In contrast to many more conservative business-men who were attracted to Franz von Papen＊s authoritarian and conservative program, Schmitt, who did not come from any old establishment and had risen on the strength of his own talents, was probably for such reasons more ready to place his trust in a ※modern§ and ※dynamic§ movement. Whatever the case, his political sense and understanding were pathetically underdeveloped, which was truly remarkable in an otherwise so talented businessman and negotiator. 
Even more depressing, however, was his understanding of and attitude toward the ※Jewish question,§ which found expression in his acceptance of Ging＊s description of National Socialist plans to fundamentally reverse Jewish emanci-pation and in effect drive the Jews from public life. His postwar refections are especially revealing and deserve extensive quotation: 
I was no anti-Semite. I had a number of personal and business friends, who were Jews. In part, I did not know, but in any case it hardly interested me if they were persons I found agreeable. On the other side, there was in Berlin a type of Jew that was not only thoroughly disagreeable to people like us but also to their own upright co-confessionals. They were loud, frivolous and presumptuous beyond all measure. Along with it they had the unpleasant characteristic of systematically only drawing Jews into their circle. This type was very strongly represented in the legal profession. When I think back to the Favag trial and the unheard of manner in which I was treated in the hearing like a person ac-cused, then I can only today be thankful to the presiding judge and the state attorney that I was spared having to defend myself. There were also very unpleasant types of this kind in economic life .... Such a person was, for example, Sobernheim of the Commerzbank, whom I knew particularly well from the Favag trial and of whom I have the most unpleas-ant remembrance. Such people rode roughshod over the interests of other people with cold-bloodedness and cynicism .... It is certainly false to generalize such phenomena. There are Christians who are second to none in what has been described, and there are Jews who I have always only admired for their fneness and selfessness in thought which they combined with the greatest possible capacity and feeling of responsibility. 
This, then, was the context in which Schmitt viewed the plans for the Jews expressed by Ging before and immediately after the seizure of power: 
I must honestly say, that I had no reservations about this line, for it cannot objectively be contested that in our public and intellectual life, beginning with the Reichstag, in the press, and also in many scientifc faculties, in the legal feld and above all in the Berlin banking business, the Jews had too strong and too loud and also an unhealthy infuence. A certain pushing of them back and holding them to great modesty can only be desired and good. Many a Jewish friend has confrmed this as his own view.98 
98 Schmitt, ※Erinnerungen,§ FHA, NL 1/133, pp. 22f. 
Manifestly, neither Schmitt＊s politics nor his views on the ※Jewish question§ were unique to himself, and he was right in saying that there were Jews who felt that they were bringing some of the criticism upon themselves.99 Nevertheless, Schmitt was not just any person but rather the general director of Germany＊s leading insurance company and a public fgure of great importance. He was going to learn a thing or two during the coming years, but not, alas, as much as one could hope given his post-1945 refections. At the same time, however, it is important to recognize that the responsibility for the evils that he and his organization were to experience and perpetrate during the coming years lay to an important extent in the fact that he (and others like him) shared a political culture and an anti-Semitic posture that made the coming and installation of the Third Reich possible. 
99 See for example the proposal of Georg Solmssen, a director of the Deutsche Bank, to Ging that a Jewish National Council be founded to examine the charges against Jews and organize the ex-pulsion of those who were considered harmful or who were otherwise undesirable. See James, ※Deutsche Bank,§ p. 296. 
2 

Allianz, Kurt Schmitt, and the Third Reich, 1933每1934 
disorder and delusion: an economics minister for the third reich 
The relations between Allianz executives and the National Socialists appear to have been limited to a very few persons at the top of the concern, and there is no record of how many of the concern＊s personnel were sympathetic to the Nazis or involved with them. Schmitt＊s dealings with Ging and Hitler had been private, and Allianz apparently banned partisan political activity or the wearing or car-rying of party uniforms, insignia, and the like at work before January 30, 1933, and for as long as it could afterward.1 The only evidence found so far of offcial favor to the Party came from Munich, where Barerstra.e 15, a building owned by Allianz, was used on November 30, 1930, for a meeting of the SA leadership. The NSDAP later owned the building and probably was already renting offces there.2 There is also very little information available about National Social-ist activities within the company. It certainly had its National Socialist factory cell organization (NSBO), as did many other leading insurance companies and banks in Berlin and elsewhere. Thus, the National Socialist Angriff reported in December 1930 that the factory cell had held its monthly meeting at which a Party comrade (Pg.) Pfster gave a ※convincing§ talk on the fnancial program of the Party that allegedly resulted in new memberships. The next month, Pfs-ter held forth on ※What Will 1931 Bring?§ The Party also agitated at meetings of its branch group, where Pg. Kner, who came from Allianz, spoke on ※Why National Socialist Factory Cells?§3 
1 See the remarks of Hilgard at the 21. erweiterte Vorstandssitzung am 10.Mai 1933,p. 12,FHA, 
S 17.2 /4. 2 Lagebericht der Polizeidirektor Mchen, 4. Dez. 1930, Bayerisches Hauptstaatsarchiv, MA 
101235/3. The building in question was Barerstra.e 15, which had formerly been the adminis-
tration building of Deutsche Lebensversicherungsbank Arminia. It was sold to the NSDAP in 1934 
because it formed part of the NSDAP Party quarter of the city. See Gesch.ftsberichte f 1933,p. 
23, and 1934,p. 23. See also Andreas Werner, SA und NSDAP. SA ※Wehrverband,§ ※Parteitruppe§ 
oder ※Revolutionsarmee§? Studien zur Geschichte der SA und der NSDAP 1920每1933, Phil. Diss. 
(Erlangen, 1964), pp. 503每11. For the SA meeting, see BAB, Sammlung Schumacher/403. 3 Der Angriff, Jan. 3, 1931,March 9, 1931,Nov. 3, 1931,Nov. 22, 1931, Dec. 22, 1931,Feb. 2, 
1932. There is a problem in identifying the Kner in question. Two Wilhelm Kners worked for 
60 
Despite its efforts, the NSBO apparently had only limited success, as evi-denced by the factory council elections at Allianz of March 16, 1933. These elections took place after Hitler became chancellor and after the Reichstag fre and decrees of February 27每28 that effectively established the dictatorship and unleashed all the suppression and terror that followed. The factory council elections also took place after the Reichstag election of March 5, whichgavea majority to the so-called Government of National Resurrection. Nevertheless, the Socialist-oriented Central Association of Employees received fve seats; the National Socialist list, four seats; and the General Association of Insurance Em-ployees, one seat.4 These results provided National Socialist critics of the big insurance companies with a welcome opportunity to make their case that the ※internal operation of the companies is strongly Jewish and Marxist,§ and that ※such red companies must be put in check.§5 
They had no grounds for fear. On March 30, the new Allianz factory coun-cil met to hold its constitutive meeting, which was supposed to elect a chairman and plant committee. By this time, the Enabling Act of March 21 had also been passed by the Reichstag, but this had been done under a mantle of promises of law and order and that there would be no ※individual actions.§ Exactly how little such promises meant was demonstrated at the beginning of the Allianz fac-tory council meeting, when ffteen uniformed SA and SS men came into the back entrance of the Allianz Berlin headquarters on the Mauerstra.e, where they were met by the Allianz NSBO members. The SA and SS men then took control of all entrances and exits to the building and the telephone. The SA men and some NSBO offcials betook themselves to an anteroom whose door opened upon the factory council room, where the meeting had just begun. At this point the NSBO offcial, Hans Lange, read a written declaration announcing that a commissarial factory council was being established for Allianz ※until a fnal legal regulation was put in place by the Reich government§ and that ※the elected members of the Marxist-oriented Central Association of White-Collar Employees were imme-diately to declare their resignations in writing on forms that had already been specially prepared.§ When Zech, the chairman who was also the senior member of the council and a member of the union in question, asked by whose authority the action was being taken, he was informed that there would be no discus-sion and that the resignations were to be submitted unconditionally. A similar 
Allianz in this period, and both were acting directors of the machine section of the concern. The 
frst retired in 1934; the second became an acting director in 1937. For reasons that will become 
clear later in this study, it is most likely the second Kner. 4 The report in the Vossische Zeitung, 17. M.rz 1933, on the Allianz election of March 16, BAK, B 
280/1432, Bl. 174, gives the National Socialists only one seat and is not accurate. See the fgures 
given in Allgemeiner Verband der Versicherungsangestellten an Reichsarbeitsminister Seldte, 30. 
M.rz 1933,BAB,R 3101/17078. 5 Carl Gerlach an das Reichsministerium des Innern, 18. April 1933,BAB, R 3101/17069. The writer 
was an insurance adviser who identifed himself as a Pg. and also complained about the huge 
salaries of the insurance executives and the lack of professionalism among insurance salesmen. 
demand was made of Georg Kreutzinger, who represented the General Associ-ation of Insurance Employees (AVV), even though he protested that he was not a Marxist or even politically engaged. Under the impress of the SA and NSBO men in the next room, however, the resignations were tendered. Additionally, Zech was told to give a declaration that he had no factory council documents in his personal possession and to surrender all the council＊s documents in its offces. These were then formally declared sequestered. The key to the rooms was taken, and the rooms were declared sealed. Finally, the names of the com-missarial factory council were posted in order to inform the employees of the existence and membership of the new council that had seized offce in the man-ner described.6 
The General Association of Insurance Employees complained in a letter to the Labor Minister that this violated the promises of the government, but they had even more to protest with respect to the NSBO and SA actions at Allianz Leben. The factory council there had been elected on November 30, 1932, be-cause the NSBO representatives had resigned from the council elected in June. The council that took over consisted of four representatives of the General Asso-ciation, two from the Central Association of White-Collar Employees, two from the NSBO, and one each from the centrist General Association of Employees and the German National Retail Clerks Association, which was close to the Nazis. In this case, the council was meeting under the chairmanship of Max Scholber of the General Insurance Employees Association on March 30, 1933, when the door was forcibly opened by NSBO member Bruno Rycerz. The council mem-bers were then summoned individually to sign their resignation forms, which they all did ※because the danger existed of arrest by the two SA men standing by.§ There followed the installation of another commissarial factory council. Once again the General Association protested the ※individual action§ and this all the more because it, like the Central Association, claimed to be nonpolit-ical and nonpartisan 每 as if the NSBO and SA should consider these special virtues.7 The usefulness of appealing to the government in such an instance was well illustrated by the reaction of Reich Economics Minister Alfred Hugenberg, who argued that ※since such interventions only create an actual condition but not a legal condition the RWM ought initially to refrain from taking special mea-sures.§8 The actions in question were in fact anything but ※individual§ and were part of a pattern of factory council takeovers by the NSBO and SA throughout the country. Indeed, the new government was paving the way for the eventual destruction of the trade union movement by issuing a law on April 4 suspending all factory council elections still scheduled to be held, retroactively legalizing the 
6 Allgemeiner Verband der Versicherungsangestellten an Reichsarbeitsminister Seldte, 30. M.rz 
1933,BAB,R 3101/17078. 7 Allgemeiner Verband der Versicherungsangestellten an Reichsarbeitsminister Seldte, 31. M.rz 
1933, ibid. 8 Vermerk (undated), ibid. 
takeover of factory councils, and giving employers the right to dismiss workers who behaved in a way hostile to the State.9 
Allianz had never, of course, been a ※red§ company, but all the evidence sug-gests it was not run by fre-eating employers either. Max Scholber, the ousted Social Democratic chairman of the factory council who was to return to that position after 1945, had constant dealings with Hilgard, who represented both the management of Allianz and the insurance industry employers. Scholber had nothing but praise for the social policies of Allianz, and he gave credit to Hil-gard for constantly promoting them. Obviously their politics were different, but their relation seems to have been based on mutual respect. While Hilgard does not seem to have lifted a fnger to prevent the removal of the duly elected factory council by the NSBO, he absolutely refused to accede to the demand that Schol-ber be fred, and as the latter 每 who apparently remained at Allianz and resumed his old position as head of the factory council after the war 每 testifed in 1947, ※Herr Hilgard told me in a last conversation (1933) that his door remained open to me as before.§10 
While Hilgard maintained his reserve toward the National Socialists and con-tinued his old personnel practices as best he could, others were less willing to remain aloof from the new order coming into being. August von Finck and Kurt Schmitt, for example, were among those invited to attend a meeting of big busi-ness leaders at the home of Ging on February 20, 1933 (i.e., before the March election) at which Hitler would allegedly explain his economic policies. Hitler greeted each of those present and gave a ninety-minute speech, promising among other things that the forthcoming election would be the last. Hjalmar Schacht called on the business community to make a 3-million RM contribution to the cause. Von Finck claims to have slipped out before being called upon personally to contribute and, given his reputation for stinginess, this may well have been the case; but he was to make up for this lapse later. As for Schmitt, he later re-ported that Schacht visited him at his offce the next day and Schmitt agreed to make a donation of RM 10,000 to the election campaign, and that Munich Re would pay one third of that amount.11 
It was a sign of the changing situation that Schmitt decided to identify with the new regime and express support for it publicly. Sometime in the spring of 1933 he joined the National Socialist Party and became member Nr. 2651252.He was later to claim that he applied for admission to the Party only when he became economics minister at the end of June and was accepted in August. His Party 
9 See Akten der Reichskanzlei. Regierung Hitler 1933每1938, hrsg. von Konrad Repgen & Hans Booms, bearb. von Karl-Heinz Minuth, Teil I: 1933/34, Bd. 1: 30. Januar bis 31. August 1933 (Boppard am Rhein, 1983), I, pp. 254每5, 274每5, 279每80, 334每6. 
10 Erkl.rung Max Scholber, 22. April 1947, FHA/NL 2 /1. 
11 Interrogation of August von Finck, Sept. 22, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /57/4; inter-
rogation of Kurt Schmitt, July 8, 1947, ibid., 2 /58/3. More generally, see Turner, Big Business, 
pp. 329每32. 
book did indeed give August 25, 1933, as the date of his entry into the Party, but this was probably because he had requested a Party membership book; his membership card gives August 1, 1933, as the date of his entry. Other docu-ments in his Party fle give April 1 and May 1 as the date of his entry into the Party.12 In any case, Schmitt joined the Party at least two months before he was appointed to a government position. It is thus in no way surprising that Schmitt also decided to express support of the new regime openly on the occasion of Hitler＊s birthday on April 20, 1933.The Vkischer Beobachter reported that the entire offce closed down at 14:30 ※to celebrate the birthday of our Leader Adolf Hitler§ and that, after NSBO members had assembled before the Allianz offces and marched in closed ranks to the festival hall, they entered the latter to marching music provided by the Allianz orchestra. Furthermore, General Direc-tor Schmitt and other directors joined the celebration and, after ※Party Comrade Kner held the impressive celebration speech,§ Schmitt took the foor and ※em-phasized that now our people can face a better and happier future.§ This was followed by the singing of the German national anthem.13 
Needless to say, such celebrations had not been held for previous chancellors of Germany, and it was not long before the new political commitment became company policy. This became clear on May 10, 1933, when the Allianz concern held one of its periodic expanded management meetings. These meetings, which had been held since the currency reform and stabilization of 1924, provided an opportunity for the top management in Berlin to update their colleagues in the various companies and major branches of the concern regarding the state of business in the overall concern as well as in the multitude of insurance branches in which Allianz provided services, to lay down the basic lines of policy, and to discuss current issues. After making his usual report on business conditions, which basically had not changed much since they last met in October 1932, Schmitt turned to the political situation, which of course had changed dramati-cally. Schmitt announced that a positive attitude was in order: 
Until now the ※Allianz§ has practiced a self-evident reserve with respect to the political development, since politics in general ought have nothing to do with business operations. Naturally this does not mean that no infuence should be exercised over important de-cisions in economic policy. In particular, today＊s conception of the state fundamentally 
12 Thus, in the questionnaire for the SS he flled out in August 1937, he was asked to give his party number and date of entry ※according to the Party book§ and gave Aug. 25, 1933, as the date, BAB, ehem. BDC, SSO Dr. Kurt Schmitt (*7.10.1886). The Kurt Schmitt Party fle in BAB, ehem. BDC, PK Dr. Kurt Schmitt (*7.10.1886) contains various documents of relevance: a letter from the Gauleitung of Hessen-Nassau of April 17, 1942; a political report of Sep. 16, 1942; a report of the Auslands Organisation of July 7, 1943, whichgiveMay 1, 1933 as his date of entry; a let-ter to the Gauleitung Berlin and a political report of April 26, 1939, which date his entry into the Party as April 1, 1933; and a membership fle card that contains as the entry date August 1, 1933; BAB, ehem. BDC, NSDAP-Mitgliederkartei Dr. Kurt Schmitt (*7.10.1886). 
13 Vkischer Beobachter, 25. April 1933,p. 3. 
means that a different position must be taken, now that party differences in the previ-ous sense no longer exist and what matters is to represent common German interests. It would be false today to withdraw from collaboration in the building up of our Father-land, and one can only desire that especially the leading men of our company everywhere in the Reich make available their energies and capabilities for positive collaboration so that inexperienced elements do not play the defning role in decision making. If, as in the past, the insurance industry fulflls its tasks, then there is no danger of socialization since the government has committed itself to a free economy.14 
Themessagewasnotonlyforthemanagers,however. OnMay 19, Allianzcele-brated the conclusion of its business year by opening a new building in Cologne. As the Allianz-Zeitung described in almost euphoric terms, Schmitt took the speaker＊s podium before his ※soldiers§ while they awaited his words in ※breath-less silence.§ 
If previously the view was correct, so he [Schmitt] declared, that we do not occupy our-selves with pure political matters, then a change has now taken place. Not, that we should now begin to politicize 每 for we are here to work in our profession 每 but rather that the entire German people is politicized through the national resurrection and everyone must work together so that the goal of a people infamed by its ideals can be attained.15 
What, however, did it mean to take a ※different position§ and to engage in ※positive collaboration§ with the new regime? After celebrating a ※Day of Na-tional Labor§ on May 1, the National Socialists smashed the trade union move-ment and seized all assets of the non每National Socialist organizations on May 2. At Allianz, of course, the factory councils had already been ※coordinated,§ but the usurpers could now claim full legitimacy. Hilgard reported to the Allianz di-rectors at the May 10 meeting that relations with the new councils in Berlin and elsewhere were good, but warned against granting them greater responsibilities than those defned in the Factory Councils Law. At the same time, however, he admitted that the ban on wearing party pins and symbols at work could not be implemented under existing conditions, although he thought it advisable to let the regulation stand for the time being. 
The situation was quite touchy, as demonstrated by a meeting of the Allianz employees in late May or June 1933 at which a representative of the newly created German Labor Front (DAF) gave a fery nationalist speech, which was followed by the singing of the Horst Wessel song. The Party members present gave the Na-tional Socialist salute during the singing. When the directors present abstained from this exercise, they were called upon to join in by the factory council lead-ers and then were subjected to threatening catcalls when they refused to do so. Schmitt saved the day, and Hilgard was full of admiration for the way Schmitt 每 totally unprepared and visibly upset 每 nevertheless pulled himself together and 
14 21. erweiterte Vorstandssitzung am 10.Mai 1933, FHA, S. 17.2 /4. 15 Allianz-Zeitung 15 (1933), p. 160. 
spoke to the throng about the importance of maintaining the dignity of the con-cern and its leaders.16 
Nevertheless, Schmitt was rather more enthusiastic and active than his col-leagues in pandering to the new order at this time. Not only was he prominently on display at the aforementioned Hitler birthday festivities, he also catered to the ※socialistic§ side of the regime while playing the public defender of employer interests with the new rulers as well. Thus, Schmitt was instrumental in sum-moning a meeting of the Berlin insurance industry employers on April 28 and proposing that all employers give a bonus to employees in honor of May Day. Apparently the agreement was secured, but it was a violation of the statutes of the insurance industry employer association to decide labor questions in another insurance association. One executive, who claimed to stand on the side of the ※national movement,§ openly criticized the action, suggesting that ※apparently there was a company which wanted to gain ＆special credit＊ under the changed political constellation.§17 Be that as it may, Allianz gave a 40% monthly pay bonus to its employees in honor of the Day of National Labor, as did Nord-stern; other companies gave 30%or 20%.18 This was followed, however, by yet another Schmitt sociopolitical initiative that put him into the limelight 每 namely, a visit to Reich Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels on May 4 to discuss work creation and the future of employer每employee relations. The press reported that Goebbels assured Schmitt that the new regime would also be protective of the merchant and employer who ※decided to engage in positive collaboration in the new political and social tasks.§19 
Schmitt was in fact taking a series of initiatives, not all of them supportive of the Nazis. Notwithstanding his own anti-Semitic feelings toward certain types of Jews and his sympathy with some of the anti-Jewish measures being taken by the regime,20 he thoroughly and consistently disapproved of the attacks on Jew-ish business colleagues and the already visible efforts to drive them from German business life. He did have close personal relations with some Jewish business-men, particularly the banker Otto Jeidels of Berliner Handelsgesellschaft; he got on very well with former Undersecretary Hans Sch.ffer in the Finance Ministry and was on excellent terms with the journalist Artur Lauinger of the Frankfurter Zeitung. 
The campaign against Jews in the frst months of the National Socialist regime was in fact a terrible shock. April 1933 marked a major turning away from Jew-ish emancipation and the start of a process that would begin with progressive 
16 Since the DAF was founded on May 10, 1933, and Schmitt left Allianz on June 30, the event de-
scribed by Hilgard must have occurred between these dates; see Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7, 
pp. 96每7. 17 Director Tosberg an Generaldirektor Tiedtke, 22.Mai 1933, HM, E0002-00005/2. 18 Deutschnationaler Handlungsgehilfenverband, Rundschreiben, 2.Mai 1933, BAB,NS 6 VI/13500, 
Bl. 114. 19 Berliner Bsen-Zeitung, 5.Mai 1933,BAK,B 280/12237. 20 Schmitt, ※Erinnerungen,§ FHA, NL 1/133, pp. 22每3. 
exclusion and end in extermination. The month began with an organized na-tionwide boycott of Jewish businesses, allegedly in response to Jewish-organized foreign protests against the new regime＊s treatment of the Jews. This was fol-lowed by legislation. The Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service of April 7 mandated that all non-Aryans 每 defned as those who had one parent or grandparent who was Jewish 每 be excluded from the civil service. Another law of April 11 excluded Jews from the legal profession. In both cases, however, exemptions were made for Jews who had done military service or had been in the civil service or had been practicing before 1914. Legislation was also passed on April 22 limiting the institutions in which Jewish physicians could practice, and restrictions were imposed on April 25 limiting the number of Jews who could attend universities. These measures were accompanied by a variety of local SA, NSBO, and NSDAP initiatives that excluded Jews from public facil-ities. No less portentous than the aforementioned organized boycott and legal measures, however, were the ※spontaneous§ efforts to drive Jews from employ-ment by putting pressures on businesses to eliminate their Jewish employees and to designate as ※non-German§ those companies with Jewish directors, supervi-sory board members, or personnel. There was a growing fear that Jews would simply be eliminated from German economic life.21 
Schmitt＊s opposition to such economic discrimination against the Jews must have been known to these men. It was therefore natural that he should be among those contacted when the Hamburg banker Max Warburg and his colleague Carl Melchior 每 along with General Director Emil Herzfelder of Victoria Insurance Co., banker Rudolf Loeb of the banking house of Mendelssohn & Co., and Hans Sch.ffer 每 launched an effort to fght economic exclusion while trying to meet the Nazis half-way by encouraging young Jews to shift out of urban and pro-fessional activities and move into agriculture and other forms of manual labor. The Gentile businessmen involved (in addition to Schmitt) were Carl Bosch of BASF, Gustav Krupp of Bohlen und Halbach, Carl Friedrich von Siemens, and Albert Vler of Vereinigte Stahlwerke. Actually, Schmitt did not attend either of the two meetings held by the group 每 the frst on May 23 and the second on June 28, 1933 每 but was kept informed. He was thus less a member of this cir-cle than an important fgure who encouraged their work and to whom they felt they could turn. The program developed by the group, which they planned to set down in a memorandum, at once sought to stop the anti-Jewish economic mea-sures and promote an occupational redirection of Jews. It called for the ending of the boycott in the provinces as well as Berlin, the support of enterprises trying to keep their Jewish employees by business organizations, and the elimination of discriminatory clauses in public contracts that were being used to strengthen the boycott and promote the fring of Jewish employees. They were particularly 
21 Saul Friedlander, Nazi Germany and the Jews. Volume 1: The Years of Persecution, 1933每1939 
(New York, 1997), pp. 20每39; Peter Longerich, Politik der Vernichtung. Eine Gesamtdarstellung 
der nationalsozialistischen Judenverfolgung (Munich & Zich, 1998), Ch. I. 
concerned about preventing an ※organic§ reconstruction of the economy (ac-cording to occupations) that would also involve an exclusion of Jews.22 
It is important to recognize that the insurance business was also under strong pressure to fre its Jewish employees, particularly those in key positions. Thus, Kurt Daluege, a Party member since 1922 and a member of the SS who was to take over the Prussian Police in April and become head of Himmler＊s Order Police in 1936, 23 forwarded a denunciation to the RAA claiming that Victoria Insurance Company was ※Jewifed§ and corrupt. The response of Kissel (head of the RAA), which he sent through the Reich Economics Ministry, was to point out that while it was certainly true that, relatively speaking, there were quite a few Jews at Victoria, the RAA could not simply dismiss directors and employ-ees who had legal contracts.24 This was not, in the end, going to save the jobs of Jewish employees and directors at Victoria 每 Herzfelder, who had become general director in 1932, was to fee Germany in 1935 每 and there were more ef-fective means of pressuring companies at the disposal of the National Socialists. Nevertheless, so early an intervention by so sinister and powerful a personage as Daluege was indicative of the kind of pressure already being exercised early in the regime on both government agencies and frms. 
However, the chief demands to dismiss Jewish supervisory board members, di-rectors, and employees came at this time less from government agencies or man-agement than from below. A good illustration was Hamburger-Mannheimer Versicherungs AG, a majority share of which was actually owned by a Swedish frm, Svea. As General Director Hermann Hitzler reported on April 7, 1933, the ※Jewish question§ (the quotation marks were Hitzler＊s) had become ※acute§ far earlier than he had anticipated. The insurance companies would obviously not be spared, ※especially [as] our company fnds itself in the critical crossfre, since we work especially strongly with middle class and civil service circles and it is pre-cisely these strata of the population that have adapted to the new order and are ready to support the government in all its intentions, even in very specifc ones, most consequentially.§ To be sure, there had been a measure of anti-Semitism that was widespread during the previous few years, but it had little practical signifcance. Now, however, the matter had taken on serious dimensions 每 not only because of measures against Jews in civil service and professions but also because the boycott of Jewish businesses had led to the resignation of Jewish supervisory board members from large department stores (like Karstadt and Tietz) and major concerns like the AEG. This became apparent in the manner in which the company＊s insurance agents were being compelled to declare that their 
22 Sch.ffer Tagebuch, 23.Mai 1933, IfZ, ED 93, pp. 47每9. More generally, see Peter Hayes, ※Big 
Business and ＆Aryanization＊ in Germany, 1933每1939,§ Jahrbuch f Antisemitismusforschung 3 
(1992), pp. 254每81, esp. pp. 257每9, 275. 23 On Daluege, see Wolfgang Benz et al., Enzyklop.die des Nationalsozialismus (Munich, 1997), 
p. 829. 24 Kissel to RWM, April 13, 1933,BAB,R 3101/17024. 
company was not ※Jewish§ and had no Jewish directors or supervisory board members. Hitzler had suggested to the agents that they answer such questions to the best of their knowledge without contacting the home offce, but ultimately this would not work. What made the matter worse was that there were insur-ance companies that were truly ※free of Jews§ and could thus gain a competitive advantage. Hamburg-Mannheimer, however, had a number of Jews on its su-pervisory board, including the politician Erich Koch-Weser and Erich Warburg, the son of Max Warburg. The entire situation was very ※painful§ since the com-pany itself would never have thought of treating Warburg as if he were a burden. Yet when Hitzler asked the views of the Svea leadership, their response was un-equivocal: ※that the Svea in no case considers the continuation of Herr Warburg to be correct if his remaining involves an impairment of business.§25 Evidently, opportunistic conformity was not a vice limited to Germans, and it was not long before the supervisory board was ※Judenfrei§ through the anticipatory or ※sug-gested§ withdrawal of its Jewish members. 
As Hitzler correctly noted, there were some frms that had few or no Jewish supervisory board or management board members. Allianz did have some Jew-ish bankers on its supervisory board, most notably Hans Fstenberg of Berliner Handelsgesellschaft, who worked closely with Schmitt. There is no record of the Berlin concern itself having Jewish managing board directors. Nevertheless, the concern was not free of the pressures experienced by other insurance companies because it did have some Jewish directors among its member companies. Neue Frankfurter was an early case in point, where the Jewish director of the Frank-furt branch of Allianz, James Freudenburg, also served as a member of the Neue Frankfurter board of directors. That this had become a problem was evident from a letter written to Director Carl Gehrke by Director Robert Re on April 21, 1933: 
As a result of the political transformation we have repeatedly had to defend ourselves against the complaint that we are Jewish-oriented. The loss of the Youth-Care contract is, along with a substantial lower premium bid by the ※Dseldorfer Lloyd,§ probably to be attributed to the fact that it was claimed by an interested party that there was a Jew-ish infuence on our company. Unfortunately, because I was not aware of this, I could not contradict it in time. For the same reason we almost lost the insurance contract for the higher and public schools of the Free State of Hessen. It will interest you in this con-nection that Herr Dr. Freudenburg has announced his resignation from the board of our company. 
There was also some new business to be reported by Re since the political regime change: ※On the other side, we have also done business with the National Socialist Party, and it is anticipated that through Herr Busch in Dseldorf, a deal of truly considerable dimensions will be concluded.§26 Freudenburg did in 
25 Hitzler to Sandorf, April 7, 1933, HM, A0002-00003/4. 26 Re to Gehrke, April 21, 1945,FHA,B 2.4.5/145. 
fact leave the Neue Frankfurter board, although he attended board meetings dur-ing 1933 as a ※guest.§27 
These, then, were the conditions that had led to the initiative of Warburg and his colleagues to fnd a way of protecting Jews already employed in economic life while preparing the way for the pursuit of more ※diverse§ occupations by com-ing generations. It was indicative of how little Schmitt understood the National Socialism toward which he professed such enthusiasm that he was prepared to promote such efforts. The goal of the Nazis, after all, was to get rid of the Jews, not to have them till Germany＊s sacred soil. In contrast, Schmitt＊s vision of Na-tional Socialism mainly involved the creation of a political environment in which the economy could recover. At a meeting of Germany＊s most important business leaders with Hitler on May 29, 1933, concerning work creation, Schmitt contin-ued to make his usual argument that recovery ultimately depended on private initiative and not the State. What was needed was the reconstruction of pur-chasing power, as demonstrated by the fact that insurance policies purchased by individuals were averaging no more than 1,000 RM; increased purchasing power would be possible only if people were economically active. To achieve this, it was necessary ※to throw the great spark of work creation into the economy. And that is home ownership, road construction, automobiles.§ Schmitt was thus a believer in the idea that the economy could recover only if it were ※ignited,§ after which it would continue under its own power. Crucial to success, however, was a climate of legal security and confdence that one could invest and make a proft, and now ※we have, thank God, a State in which one does not have to be con-cerned that another policy will be pursued in six weeks.§28 
Given this alleged policy stability, it was somewhat ironic that National Social-ist Germany＊s frst economic minister, Alfred Hugenberg (the German National-ist Party leader) was proving inadequate to his task, irritating Hitler and Ging with his opposition to their efforts against unemployment and 每 by his per-formance at the World Economic Conference 每 giving Germany and the world an impression of uncertainty and inadequacy in the managing of Germany＊s economic affairs.29 Schmitt was to be his replacement. As with his contacts with National Socialist leaders before January 30, his post-1945 explanations of his behavior need to be compared with other testimony and with the evidence available from 1933. Let us begin with Schmitt＊s post-1945 explanation to the denazifcation authorities of his decision to enter into Hitler＊s Cabinet, which was based on an expos谷 dated June 1, 1945. 30 According to Schmitt, Ging had 
27 See the meetings of Sept. 22 and Nov. 29, 1933,inFHA,B 2.3.1/2. 
28 Besprechung mit Industriellen er Arbeitsbeschaffung am 29.Mai 1933,BAB, R 43 II/536, Bl. 
118每21. On Schmitt＊s ※initial spark§ concept, see Dan P. Silverman, Hitler＊s Economy. Nazi Work 
Creation Programs, 1933每1936 (Cambridge, Mass., 1998), pp. 221每2. 29 On Hugenberg, see Willi Boelcke, Die deutsche Wirtschaft 1930每1945. Interna des Reichswirt-
schaftsministeriums (Dseldorf, 1983), pp. 58每65. 30 The discussion and quotations that follow are based on Schmitt＊s expos谷 written for his denazi-
fcation procedure, June 1, 1945. See AM, Spruchkammerakten Dr. Kurt Schmitt, Akten des 
Generalankl.gers, Teil II, also to be found in FHA, NL 1/73每76. 
suggested in the course of their meetings after the March 1933 elections that he would be a good economics minister. Schmitt claims to have visited Ging two or three times in the latter＊s capacity as Minister-President of Prussia for the pur-pose of using Ging＊s infuence to stop SA and party actions against businesses and businessmen. In one case, Schmitt gained the release of a Bohemian sugar industrialist, Ernst von Janotta, whom the Nazis were attempting to intimidate by holding him in jail. Ging＊s willingness to act on Schmitt＊s requests gave the latter the feeling that Ging wanted to prevent actions against the business community and maintain law and order. 
On June 28, 1933, Ging summoned Schmitt and formally offered him the post of economics minister, something that Schmitt claims not to have expected despite Ging＊s previous hints. Schmitt＊s initial response was that he did not have any political experience, had only been engaged with one sector of the econ-omy, and above all feared ※as a nonmember of the Party [sic!] and former general director of the largest insurance company, that I would not be able to have my way, which seemed most urgent in view of the many interventions by party agen-cies.§ Ging responded by pointing out that if German businessmen refused to participate, ※then they ought not wonder and complain when the dogmatic per-sons in the party determine the fate of the economy. The Reich Chancellor and he would like to have at the head of the Economics Ministry a person who has been successfully active in business practice. His own and the Reich Chancellor＊s support would guarantee my authority.§ 
Schmitt asked for an opportunity to think the matter over and claims to have found the decision very diffcult, since he had no political ambitions and enjoyed his present work. However, he also felt that the fate of Germany now lay in the hands of the National Socialists, who had an absolute majority in the Reichs-tag. That this majority had been attained by exclusion of the opposition and by terror did not, apparently, disturb him. In any case, he believed this was an op-portunity to ensure that the German economy would continue to have private enterprise as its basis and that foreign trade, which he considered in dire need of support, could be strengthened. He evidently also felt that he could do some-thing about the Jewish situation.31 
Ironically, it was because of his summons to Ging that Schmitt was com-pelled to miss a meeting of the group Warburg had assembled on the problems of the Jews, which he had planned to attend and which had produced a memoran-dum outlining their program. However, the group did not know where to send the document or whether it was wise to send it at all. Schmitt, when informing them of the reasons for his nonattendance, suggested that the time was probably not right to submit such a document because ※things have once again become much worse§; he also indicated that if negotiations on taking over the RWM came to a positive result then ※things will be better,§ since Schmitt intended to secure ※certain commitments§ as part of his price for taking on the new job.32 
31 
Ibid. 32 Sch.ffer Tagebuch, 28. Juni 1933, IfZ, ED 93,p. 66. 
Thus, in considering Ging＊s offer, Schmitt claimed he had to ask himself the question: ※In the case of my refusal would the German economy not be shaken in its foundations by inexperienced party doctrinaires and the confdence of the outside world be placed at risk?§ 
Ging summoned Schmitt once again on June 29 and told him that various Party agencies had tried the previous evening to prevent Schmitt＊s appointment, but that Ging had forcefully come down on Schmitt＊s side. Schmitt felt he had no choice: ※Filled with a sense of responsibility, I set aside my reservations and considered it my duty toward my own country as well as toward the world to take over the Ministry and thereby prevent a sliding into radicalism.§ Ging then took Schmitt to Hitler, who confrmed that he did not want a dogmatic Party man in the job and promised to help Schmitt in every way to run the economy in an independent manner. On June 30, 1933, Schmitt was appointed minister of economics by Hindenburg. He alleged that it was only then that he applied for membership in the National Socialist Party and was accepted in August. As we have shown, he was already a member of the Party and, indeed, was greeted as such by a reception committee of National Socialists (headed by Lossau, the NSBO leader in the Ministry) and a maid of honor with a bouquet of fowers. They expressed gratitude that at last a National Socialist was in charge of the Ministry.33 
As with his accounts of pre-1933 contacts with Ging and Hitler, Schmitt＊s post-1945 account of his decision to take the position of economics minister re-fects his tendency to date compromising contacts and actions 每 especially his joining the Party 每 later than they actually occurred. Nevertheless, his expla-nation in his denazifcation proceedings of his decision to become economics minister was precise and detailed and, as far as it goes, confrmed by other reli-able sources. One of these is his successor as general director of Allianz, Hans He., who detested the National Socialists, never joined the Party (no small mat-ter for a man in his position), and was to prove his hostility to the regime in deed as well as word. His friendship with Schmitt was extremely close, and the two men discussed business and political affairs regularly both before and after Schmitt took offce. He. may have been the only one among Schmitt＊s close friends and associates who strongly advised him against taking the Min-istry position 每 not only because he disliked the National Socialist leaders but also because, as he wrote to Schmitt in November 1945, ※I instinctively felt that you would ft with these people like fre and water.§34 Nevertheless, He. was convinced that Schmitt took the position out of idealism and a desire to serve his Fatherland and that it was a ※sacrifce.§ This view was shared by Hilgard, a shrewd man who had also warned Schmitt that he would have a hard time working with the people around Hitler. Apparently, the strongest proponent 
33 Report on the Investigation of Dr. Kurt Schmitt, NA, RG 260, OMGUS, AG, 1948/120/2. See 
Boelcke, Deutsche Wirtschaft, pp. 66每7. 34 He. to Schmitt, Nov. 8, 1945, FHA, NL 1/20. 
(among his colleagues) of Schmitt＊s taking the offce was August von Finck, who 每 according to Hilgard 每 was anxious for business to have a strong voice in the new regime and also felt it would be helpful to Allianz and to his bank. Munich Re General Director Wilhelm Kisskalt also spoke of Schmitt＊s ※sacri-fce§ and later admitted that he and others were guilty of urging Schmitt to accept the position for the beneft of the German economy. Schmitt＊s family was quite divided. Frau Schmitt opposed the National Socialists for religious reasons and did not want her husband to become minister, while their eldest son Gther was very ambitious for his father and urged him to accept the offer.35 
Most impressive, however, was the testimony of the banker Otto Jeidels of Berliner Handelsgesellschaft, who wrote on behalf of Schmitt in September 1946 from San Francisco, where he had become vice-president of the Bank of Amer-ica.36 Jeidels (who was Jewish) and Schmitt had become good friends before 1933 and continued their business and personal relationship until Jeidels went into exile in 1938; it then resumed between 1945 and Jeidels＊s death in 1947. Schmitt regularly took long public walks in the Tiergarten with Jeidels even after be-coming economics minister, and it is hard to imagine that this went unnoticed. According to Jeidels, Schmitt had already been warning his banking and business friends before 1933 to be prepared for the National Socialists taking a danger-ous direction. Jeidels claimed that Schmitt had been outraged by the National Socialist government even if he was ※realist enough§ to recognize its strength. Schmitt expressed frequent concern to Jeidels about the violent behavior that accompanied the National Socialist seizure of power in early 1933, but he also argued that ※it had at least come into existence constitutionally in form§ and that its existence was a reality requiring that ※one had to exercise infuence over it through a certain measure of collaboration.§ Thus, ※it was extraordinarily diffcult for Kurt Schmitt to accept Hitler＊s call, and he also spoke to me at that time about his positive considerations, about his conscience pangs, and about his personal problem as to a friend in whom he had confdence.§ In Jeidel＊s view, Schmitt 每 who stood at the peak of his business career 每 had nothing whatever to gain from taking the offce and was indeed making a sacrifce in the hope that Hitler would respond to it by supporting him. Schmitt told Jeidels that he even hoped he could eliminate the Party＊s anti-Semitism, or at least tone it down. Jeidels was less sanguine, but he does not seem in any way to have tried to dis-suade Schmitt from taking the position and remained deeply respectful of his good and honorable intentions. 
In his own self-defense, Schmitt made a particular point of noting that this positive view of his decision was shared not only by his friends and colleagues but also by the press at home and abroad. The London Times viewed his ap-pointment as ※the unmistakable sign of the desire to get back to solid grounds 
35 Kisskalt to Schmitt, Jan. 18, 1946,FHA,NL 1/74, and Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7, 89每91. 36 Otto Jeidels, Erkl.rung betreffend Herrn Dr. Kurt Schmitt, 4. Sept. 1946,FHA,NL 1/74. 
in economics,§ while the Basler Nachrichten positively commented on the fact that whereas his undersecretary in the Ministry (Gottfried Feder) and the new agriculture minister (Walther Darr谷) were identifed as Party members, Schmitt was in no way so described. In Germany, the Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung cele-brated Schmitt＊s achievements at Allianz and made a special point of noting that he came from a business that was particularly supportive of savers and of build-ing capital, so that one could expect him to support the interests of such persons: ※Schmitt＊s name guarantees therefore that there will be no experiments at the expense of the saver, shareholder, and bondholder.§37 Schmitt undoubtedly was very pleased by this response in the international press and by similarly worded letters of congratulation he received from home and abroad. A good illustration was the note from his close friend Heinrich Fehlmann from Schweizerische Unfall Versicherungs-Gesellschaft in Winterthur, who was aware of the previous min-istership offers made to Schmitt. Fehlmann was especially happy that Schmitt came from the insurance business and was thus internationally oriented.38 
This was, of course, precisely the reaction Hitler and Ging were seeking when they appointed Schmitt as economics minister. Gaining the support (or at least the passivity) of the business community was essential to the consoli-dation of National Socialist power, and they needed to keep the Party radicals in line with respect to the economic sector. Ging had told Schmitt the abso-lute truth when he claimed on June 29 that radicals in the Party opposed his appointment. His information was based on an intelligence report giving an ac-count of an entire series of conversations held within a network of party radicals who supported an anticapitalist ※second revolution§ and were anxious to have Otto Wagener (SA Chief of Staff, head of the economic policy offce of the NS-DAP, and, since April, Reich Commissar for the Economy) replace Hugenberg. Wagener had been prepared in 1931 to take 5 million RM from Allianz if it were needed to arm the SA, but he always argued that the goal of the Party had to be a new socialism that would replace the ※egoistic spirit of proft of the indi-vidual person with common striving in the interest of the community.§ What Schmitt and his ilk wanted, in Wagener＊s eyes, was ※to earn money, money, flthy money.§39 Wagener＊s supporters were well informed that not he but rather Schmitt, Ludwig Grauert (the reactionary fellow traveler of the Nazis and execu-tive director of the northwest group of the Association of German Iron and Steel Industrialists), and Walther Funk (the economic journalist who had worked so hard to bring industrialists and Nazis together) were Ging＊s candidates for the Hugenberg succession. Not one of these was an ※Old Fighter§ or a tried and true National Socialist in the eyes of Wagener＊s supporters, the most active of which was a retired Captain Gustav Wolff. As the intelligence agent reported: 
37 London Times, Aug. 1, 1933, FHA NL 1/68; Basler Nachrichten, 30. Juni 1933, and Deutsche 
Allgemeine Zeitung, 2. Juli 1933, FHA NL 1/48. 38 Fehlmann to Schmitt, June 30, 1933, FHA, NL 1/1. 39 Quoted in Turner (ed.), Hitler aus n.chster N.he, pp. 373每4. 
Captain Wolff speaks with Gauleiter Terboven and tries to infuence him that he should support a 100% National Socialist, namely Dr. Wagener, since Ging and Goebbels had the intention, with the help of Dr. Schacht, to push through Director Schmidt [sic] of Al-lianz, one of the March fallen,40 a typical liberal and representative of the capitalist world view. The Frer wants to do Dr. Schacht a favor at the moment and name Schmidt [sic] economics minister. The circle around Dr. Wagener, without the knowledge of Dr. Wag-ener, wants to have Wagener as economics minister. All the Gauleiter in the East and the territory of Dr. v. Gregory are storming the Frer about this. Rm has already gone to bat for Dr. Wagener twice. Everyone that knows Schmidt [sic] rejects him. Terboven should join this movement. Terboven answers that he does not to be sure know Schmidt [sic], but that the Frer from his high position has a better overview concerning this than all the others.41 
Such efforts to mobilize Nazi radicals and Old Fighters (like the Nazi busi-nessman and Governor of Saxony Martin Mutschmann) or Nazifed organiza-tions (like the Chamber of Commerce in Kigsberg) were stopped dead in their tracks by Ging. Hitler may in fact have planned to appoint Wagener, since he summoned him to the Reich Chancellory on the evening of June 28. Ging got there frst, however, and Wagener was forced to wait in the antechamber while Ging showed Hitler the intelligence reports concerning the efforts of those in Wagener＊s circle to organize a campaign against Schmitt. Ging appar-ently persuaded Hitler that Wagener was the wrong man for the job. Hitler was infuriated with Wagener and personally called him in, telling Wagener that he had intended to make him economics minister but was now dismissing him in-stead. The four men from Wagener＊s offce involved in the action against Schmitt were thrown out of the Party because ※they have tried to rob the Frer of his freedom to take necessary decisions by sending telegrams and making calls to Gauleiter, chambers of commerce, and industrialists.§42 It was a severe punish-ment for men like these who lived for the Party and movement, and they spent a year and a half appealing for reinstatement and confessing the error of their ways before fnally being taken back into the fold through a pardon by Hitler in Feb-ruary 1935. 43 The lesson was clear: Hitler knew best, and those who ※worked toward the Frer§ would get their reward while those who did not would be cast down.44 
40 A reference to those who joined the Party after March 1933. 
41 Nachrichtenamt an Ministerpr.sident, 28. Juni 1933, BAB, ehem. BDC, OPG Gustav Wolff 
(*20.11.1876), Bl. 7每9. I would like to thank Ralf Pauli, Munich, for bringing this material to my 
attention. 42 Parteiausschlu. auf Befehl des Frers f Hauptmann Dr. Ernst Zunker, Hauptmann Willy Mar-
witz,HauptmannHermannCordemann,HauptmannGustavWolff,EndeJuni/Anfang Juli 1933, 
ibid., Bl. 3每6. 43 See the correspondence between September 1933 and February 5, 1935 (ibid.). See also Turner, 
Hitler aus n.chster N.he, pp. iii, 482每3. 44 This was the revealing phrase used by Werner Wilikens of the Prussian Agricultural Ministry; it is 
a central point, and I believe a valid one, in the interpretation of the regime. Ian Kershaw, Hitler. 
1889每1936. Hubris (New York & London, 1999), pp. 529每31. 
The episode also sheds some light on fundamental problems in the interpreta-tion Schmitt and his defenders gave to his decision to head the Economics Min-istry. Ging and Hitler knew what they were doing when they picked Schmitt, a basically decent but ambitious, vain, and politically na.ve man who would in his own way ※work toward the Frer§ whether he wanted to or not. Schmitt was an optimist by nature. Though he claimed he was making a great sacrifce to prevent the radicals in the Party from having their way, he deluded himself into believing that he was on the road to victory for his ideas and that the new leaders were genuinely ready to support him. Hence there was another side to the coin of his anxieties about the new regime 每 and he could hardly be oblivi-ous to its violent nature 每 namely, a measure of enthusiasm and willingness to believe that all would be well. As Kisskalt, who himself had joined the NSDAP on May 1, 1933, 45 wrote to a Swedish colleague: 
The taking over of the Reich Economics Ministry is thought neither from the side of Herr Dr. Schmitt nor from the side of the Reich Chancellor as a passing matter. On the con-trary, we hope that he will remain 10 to 20 years in this post. Fortunately, we do not live any longer in a democratic State in which the fate of the Cabinet is dependent on chang-ing majorities. 
It was certainly a great sacrifce for Schmitt to leave Allianz, just as things were settling down after the Favag acquisitions, and to take up the heavy burdens of public offce; but, as Kisskalt reported, Schmitt 
is thoroughly confdent about this and, just as in his speech yesterday to the business leaders, so also in detailed private conversations with me, he has given expression to his absolute optimism with respect to a favorable development and his continually increasing admiration for the great statesmanlike qualities of the Reich Chancellor Hitler. We can therefore look into the future with the greatest confdence and always console ourselves with respect to the Allianz that if the Reich Economics Ministry was otherwise occupied this could in certain circumstances be a misfortune for the entire German economy.46 
The political scientist Karl W. Deutsch once described the 1930s as ※a period of cognitive catastrophes,§47 and Kisskalt and Schmitt offered an exceptionally fne illustration of what Deutsch meant by the term. Such cognitive catastro-phes, however, are no less subject to criticism than business failures. There was nothing in past experience, including the most recent, to suggest that Schmitt would not actually become what he apparently thought he would 每 namely, the 
45 BAB, ehem. BDC, PK Dr. Wilhelm Kisskalt (*24.8.1873). 
46 Kisskalt an Generaldirektor Adolf Jochnick, 14. Juli 1933,MR, D/5. Hilgard, in his memoirs, 
also noted that Schmitt expected to hold the offce for a long time; see Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, 
NL 2 /7,p. 91. 47 See his discussion in Martin Broszat et al. (eds.), Deutschlands Weg in die Diktatur (Berlin, 
1983), p. 324. For a fuller treatment of the theme, see Gerald D. Feldman, ※Politische Kultur und 
Wirtschaft in der Weimarer Zeit,§ Zeitschrift f Unternehmensgeschichte 43 (1998), pp. 3每18. 
general director of the German economy 每 for a decade or longer. His willing-ness to entertain such fantasies refected a defcit of political culture, also shared by Kisskalt and many other German businessmen, who were willing to convince themselves that Hitler had ※statesmanlike qualities.§ The alacrity with which they welcomed the end of parliamentary democracy and put themselves at the disposal of a person whom they had previously perceived to be a political dem-agogue 每 in the expectation that they could use his dictatorial powers to run the economy according to their lights 每 refected a posture toward politics that helps explain why the National Socialists would fnd it so easy to ※coordinate§ the business community. Schmitt had no qualms whatever about describing his path to National Socialism in 1933. Thus, no less important an economic jour-nal than the Deutsche Volkswirt reported, after Schmitt took offce, that 
when advising the Bring government, he [Schmitt] came to the realization that there was no possibility in a parliamentary democracy to translate economic insight into fruit-ful reality. From this time on he strengthened his connections to the National Socialist movement that he had taken up quite early and whose leader he recognized as the man to overcome an obsolete political system. Today the road is open for the economic minister to realize many of his basic ideas for the reordering of German economic life.48 
Schmitt had thus been doing a rather good job of self-coordination for some time, and he was continuing the process of his own volition. He did not have to join the Party when he did. Hilgard, who had been a member of the Ger-man People＊s Party, did not join at this time, and He. never did join. Schmitt wanted to have it both ways, to appear as the nonpartisan and expert economic adviser to the government but also to become part of the movement itself 每 for the simple reason that he believed that Hitler had produced the kind of regime in which he could realize his ideas. Once that step was taken, worse ones could and did follow. Thus, when Himmler in September 1933 offered to do him the honor of appointing him an SS-Oberfrer with the right to wear an SS uniform, Schmitt accepted the offer. There can be no question about the fact that he had a peculiar penchant for wearing the uniform on public occasions, that he cut an impressive fgure in it, and that it pleased his vanity. As Baron Uexkl later put it: ※Dr. Schmitt who was a handsome and physically impressive man frequently wore his SS uniform when traveling. The uniform showed him off particularly well and he attracted in it considerable attention.§49 There is some plausibility to Schmitt＊s later excuse that the SS did not play the role in 1933 that it was to play later and that it appeared quite ※nonpolitical§ in comparison to Rm＊s SA, but the SS was certainly not the Rotary Club and the uniform was not exactly a business suit. 
48 Der Deutsche Volkswirt, 7. Juli 1933, FHA, NL 1/48, along with other articles dealing with 
Schmitt＊s appointment. 49 Interrogation of Baron Edgar Uexkl, June 9, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2/57/4. See 
Himmler to Schmitt, Sept. 18, 1933, BAB, ehem. BDC, SSO Dr. Kurt Schmitt (*7.10.1886). On 
Schmitt＊s enthusiasm for the uniform, see Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7,p. 93. 
Finally, it isalso important to note certain limits toSchmitt＊s※sacrifce,§ which were revealed in the course of his denazifcation proceedings after the war and which are also relevant to understanding his mentality. Unlike Wagener, Schmitt did not fnd money ※flthy.§ Schmitt had built up a considerable and well-earned fortune in his labors for Allianz. His income in the early 1930swas 630,000 RM a year, and his taxable assets totaled 1.49 million RM. Half his income went to taxes, a quarter to investment, and another quarter to consumption. Thus, his ministerial position would have involved a considerable change in lifestyle be-cause he had a house in Dahlem that cost 20,000 RM a year, a hunting domain in Bavaria which he leased for 15,000 RM a year, and an agricultural estate in Bavaria, Tiefenbrunn, that cost 20,000 RM a year. He also kept up life insur-ance policies to the tune of 25,000 RM in annual premiums. Entry into the civil service meant a reduction of his yearly income to 20%每25% of what it had been, even with Allianz＊s generous pension plan. In his opinion, this would have been a ※monstrous sacrifce,§ especially in view of the fourteen mergers over which he had presided, his role in building up the concern more generally, and the surren-der of his satisfying position in order to serve the German economy on the basis of assurances given by Hitler and Ging. Thus, Schmitt asked and received of Allianz a ※respectable recognition§ for his services in the form of 1,000每1,200 Al-lianz shares valued at RM 400,000. The alternative would have been a doubling of his pension, a solution he eschewed. As he explained in 1946, that would have involved a continuous burden for the company. Ironically, the RAA was uncon-vinced and complained about the arrangement, to no avail. Schmitt thought it important to note as well that he refused to accept the government housing avail-able to him and actually did not want to take his government salary. He had to accept the latter for income tax reasons, but he then donated what remained after taxes to charitable causes. In this fashion he intended, as he explained with his breathtaking political na.vet谷, ※to maintain my complete fnancial indepen-dence of the State and those who held power.§50 
the schmitt intermezzo: reorganizing for the third reich 
Schmitt was to pay a high price for the ※cognitive catastrophe§ of believing he could be an effective economics minister in the new regime, and the year he spent actively heading the Ministry was to prove a personal nightmare. Business was now linked to politics as never before, and the internecine conficts that plagued Schmitt＊s efforts to run the economy provide a useful context for dealing with the problems faced by Allianz and the insurance industry in this period. The in-dustrial leaders in this sector, as in all others, had to respond to the demands 
50 Aktennote er mein Einkommen vor der Ministerzeit, 1. April 1946, AM, Spruchkammerakten 
Dr. Kurt Schmitt, Akten der Spruchkammer Starnberg, 2. Teil, Bl. 201每3c; and Hilgard, ※Leben,§ 
FHA, NL 2 /7,p. 91. 
and challenges set by the dictatorial regime. Schmitt had chosen to do so by be-coming part of the regime itself and by identifying with what he thought were its positive features in order to serve the German economy as a whole. The al-ternative would have been to remain aloof politically, deal with the situation as best one could, and try to conduct business as usual. 
Even this posture, however, required making complicated arrangements, as was evident in the distribution of responsibility at the highest levels of Allianz after Schmitt＊s departure. Hans He. succeeded Schmitt as general director of Allianz. This constituted a political problem; though He. was deeply respected for his capacities as an organizer and insurance man, his distaste for the Nazis was well known to his colleagues. Thus, as Uexkl later testifed, ※it was agreed that Eduard Hilgard would represent the Allianz in its relations with govern-ment and Party offcials and that Dr. He. would attend strictly to the internal administration of the Allianz.§51 This is not to say that He. did not have Na-tional Socialist friends. For example, he had a close relationship with Wolf H. Count von Helldorf, the Nazi police president in Potsdam and (after 1935) Berlin, whom He. had previously employed in the industry section of Allianz.52 Hell-dorf was a notorious SA leader and anti-Semitic rowdy who had spent a great deal of time violating the law before becoming an alleged law enforcer, and it is hard to see how He. could consort with him. What seems to have bound them together was their enthusiasm for horses and card playing, and both were mem-bers of the Club of Berlin. Apparently they agreed to disagree on politics. As for the role assigned to Hilgard, it is important to remember that Hilgard had already been used by Schmitt in all issues dealing with employee relations and had often been asked to represent Schmitt in the various associations. He was smooth, self-assured, diplomatic, and a talented political infghter. Hilgard was well equipped by his previous government career and experience to take on the public functions assigned to him. The new leaders of Allianz intended to run the concern ※in the old sense and spirit,§ and Schmitt remained a presence in the concern since he continued to be consulted on important questions.53 
Indeed, Hilgard was far better equipped than Schmitt, who found himself not only in the unfamiliar world of government bureaucracy but also trying to maneuver in the evolving National Socialist polycracy with its multiple and competing power centers.54 That Hitler had been prepared to appoint Wagener 
51 Interrogation of Baron Edgar Uexkl, June 9, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /57/4. 52 Ibid. See Dirk Walter, Antisemitische Kriminalit.t und Gewalt. Judenfeindschaft in der Weimarer 
Republik (Bonn, 1999), pp. 211每18, 313每15. 53 Report by General Director Bebler of the Swiss Re on his discussions with Hilgard and He., Sept. 
6, 1933, SR, Feuer 11. 54 For the interpretation of National Socialism as a polycratic state, see especially Martin Broszat, 
Der Staat Hitlers. Grundlegung und Entwicklung seiner inneren Verfassung (Munich, 1975); for a 
critical discussion, see Klaus Hildebrand, ※Monokratie oder Polykratie? Hitlers Herrschaft und 
das Dritte Reich,§ in Gerhard Hirschfeld & Lothar Kettenacker (eds.), Der ※Frerstaat§: Mythos 
und Politik. Studien zur Struktur und Politik des Dritten Reiches (Stuttgart, 1981), pp. 73每97. 
(before Ging persuaded Hitler to appoint Schmitt) as economics minister was indicative of Hitler＊s fundamental lack of interest in the basic issues of economic policy, let alone rational modes of governance. Schmitt was given as undersec-retary none other than Gottfried Feder, the man who had written the Nazi Party Program.55 The Program, with its attack on ※interest slavery§ and other absur-dities, was a far cry from any of the economic principles Schmitt had taken offce to defend. Feder, however, was a spent force (albeit an irritating one), in confict with many of his fellow Old Fighters and in desperate need of the job and salary to take care of his family and pay off his debts. His appointment refected the fact that Schmitt, as once remarked, was a ※National Socialist greenhorn§56 who required the kind of help with Party matters that the other RWM civil servants were in no position to give. The real problems came from the host of NSBO, SA, and Party leaders throughout the country who were trying to implement their notions of how the economy should be run, and above all from the Nazi empire builders in high places like Joseph Goebbels, who simply took over the directing of economic propaganda, exhibitions, and fairs. Most dangerous were Robert Ley (leader of the German Labor Front) and Walter Richard Darr谷 (of the Reich Food Estate), who was also Reich Food and Agricultural Minister. The former wanted to take the entire economy under his wing with a thoroughgoing organi-zation of the economy according to ※occupational estates.§ The latter, a blood and soil fanatic, treated all agricultural issues as belonging to his personal fef-dom. Schmitt found all of this most irrational, especially since he was frmly convinced that the economy needed a period of peace and quiet. At the same time, Schmitt found it diffcult to see Hitler and, despite all the latter＊s promises, to push through his programs.57 
By early September, Schmitt was feeling some discomfture in his own min-istry. Thus, when Hans Sch.ffer 每 who at this time acted as a go-between for the Wallenbergs (important Swedish bankers with close ties to Germany) and other Swedish business interests 每 wished to convey information to Schmitt, he was told to see Hilgard instead. Hilgard expressed Schmitt＊s regrets that he could not see him in the Ministry, to which Sch.ffer responded by saying that he realized that Schmitt ※feels controlled there.§ Hilgard confrmed that this was indeed the case.58 Sch.ffer did see Schmitt shortly afterward, undoubtedly outside the Ministry, where Schmitt responded somewhat helplessly to Sch.ffer＊s complaints about plans for an estate system and the treatment of Jews in department stores 
55 Albrecht Tyrell, ※Gottfried Feder 每 Der gescheiterte Programmatiker,§ in Ronald Smelser & 
Rainer Zitelmann (eds.), Die braune Elite I. 22 biographische Skizzen (Darmstadt, 1989), pp. 
28每40. 56 Herbert Rolf Fritzsche an Schmitt, 31. Aug. 1948, FHA, NL 1/16. 57 See Boelcke, Deutsche Wirtschaft, pp. 68每76; Schmitt＊s account of his tenure in the RWM of June 
1, 1945, AM, Spruchkammerakten Dr. Kurt Schmitt, Akten des Generalankl.gers, Teil II, pp. 
3每13; Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7, pp. 92每3. On Ley and his ambitions, see Ronald Smelser, 
Robert Ley. Hitler＊s Labor Front Leader (Oxford, New York, & Hamburg, 1988), esp. Chs. 5每6. 58 Sch.ffer Tagebuch, 4. Sept. 1933, IfZ, ED 93, Bl. 83. 

Kurt Schmitt (2nd row, 1st on left) wearing the uniform of an SS-Oberfrers at the May Day celebrations 1934 at the Tempelhofer Feld in Berlin. Next to Schmitt on the right are Richard Walter Darr谷 (Minister for Food and Agriculture) and (front row, from the left) Rudolf He., Hermann Ging, Adolf Hitler, Joseph Goebbels, Max Amann (President of the Reich Press Chamber), Vice Chancellor Franz von Papen, Minister of the Interior Wilhelm Frick, and Labor Minister Franz Seldte. 
like Karstadt. As Sch.ffer reported, Schmitt ※complains that the individual busi-nessmen do not have any courage. He is the only one who occasionally expresses his opinion.§59 
This assessment was curiously at odds with conversations between General Director Emil Bebler (of Swiss Re), He., and Hilgard on September 6 in Berlin. Hilgard was ※extraordinarily confdent with respect to future developments.§ Regarding the dangers to private enterprise, Hilgard thought matters very much under control: 
For the private economy, which appeared strongly endangered in the frst period of the Revolution, there are no more grounds for fear today. Dr. Schmitt has the reins frmly in his hands in this respect. He has known how to push through his views relentlessly 
59 Sch.ffer Tagebuch, 15. Juli 1933, Sch.ffer Papers, Leo Baeck Institute (New York). Sch.ffer saw Schmitt yet again on January 13, 1934; see his letter to Schmitt of Jan. 13, 1934, and accompany-ing material on the anti-Jewish boycott, AM, Spruchkammerakten Dr. Kurt Schmitt, Akten der Spruchkammer Starnberg, 6. Teil. 
in the Ministry. Hitler has great confdence in him. The infuence of State Secretary Dr. Feder, who dominated things in the Reich Economics Ministry with his unclear ideas during Hugenberg＊s time, is today completely pushed back. ※Feder eats out of Schmitt＊s hand,§ Hilgard remarked. Since he is one of Hitler＊s oldest Party comrades and is very well known and regarded in National Socialist circles, Schmitt uses him as a valued collaborator.60 
These contradictory assessments of Schmitt＊s situation undoubtedly refected the genuine ambiguity of these early months of his tenure in offce. On balance, however, Schmitt was in a diffcult situation 每 and so was the Allianz concern and the insurance industry as a whole. Political considerations often took prece-dence over economic ones. The ambitious Nazi leaders at the top of the regime were jockeying for position, and Schmitt was constantly having to take into ac-count their plans and programs, many of which made no sense at all to him. There were constant complaints about Nazi ※initiatives§ from below. At the same time, all kinds of schemes were being hatched for the reorganization of the economy or its various key sectors, which made the economy＊s future a matter of concern and anxiety. Fundamentally, the leaders of the insurance industry (and, indeed, of most of German industry) would have been quite content to retain the organizational status quo, but this had become a dangerous proposition; if one did not participate proactively in the reorganization mania, one was likely to end up being reorganized by Germany＊s new political bosses. Also, many of the new schemes for organizing the economy had profound implications for the conduct of the private insurance industry itself. It is not surprising, then, that all eyes in the private insurance business turned to Schmitt 每 who was, after all, their man. He. and Hilgard were, of course, quite aware that an excessively visible re-liance on Schmitt could backfre, and they instructed the regional headquarters of the concern not to turn to Schmitt for help in dealing with the special busi-ness interests of Allianz and also to handle problems with Party interference in their affairs through direct negotiation with local and regional Party leaders.61 Insofar as some problems affected interests of the industry as a whole, how-ever, reliance was increasingly placed on the insurance industry＊s organizations, where Allianz directors played a decisive leadership role. The history of Allianz in the National Socialist period is therefore intimately bound up with the history of the organizations it dominated. 
Of course, some priorities of the new regime simply had to be accepted. Al-though Schmitt was strongly opposed to unproductive work as a means of fght-ing unemployment, employment policies at Allianz did not really change during his tenure in offce. At the last meeting of the directors over which he presided on May 10, 1933, Schmitt opposed personnel reduction as a means to combat 
60 Report by General Director Bebler of the Swiss Re on his discussions with Hilgard and He., 
Sept. 6, 1933, SR, Feuer 11. 61 22. erweiterte Vorstandssitzung am 8. Sept. 1933, FHA, S 17.2 /4. 
rising costs due to diminishing premiums. Not only had administrative work in-creased, but also he viewed it as a mistake to release trained workers at a time when the economy was expected to improve. Moreover, dismissals would run counter to the goals of the government. When the directors met again on Sep-tember 8 under He.＊s chairmanship, premiums had continued to decline while costs had gone up; still, He. noted that ※since appropriate countermeasures through personnel savings which are in and of themselves possible, are out of the question at this time in view of the desire of the government to fght un-employment as quickly and effectively as possible, one will have to accept this development.§62 Even so, He. instructed his directors to resist ※unreasonable demands§ to hire more personnel by pointing out that in July 1933 Allianz al-ready had 4.6% more offcials in the home offce and 10% more in the feld than it had in July 1932. Yet such injunctions seem to have been of limited effect, since He. reported new hires at the meeting of May 4, 1934, despite diminish-ing premiums and higher administrative costs. Some of the additional personnel had been necessary because of the conversion of non每RM-denominated policies into RM-denominated policies, but people had also been hired simply to pre-vent a further increase of unemployment. In fact, the cost of the work creation effort had made it impossible to reduce premiums, which might otherwise have been reduced by 10%. The pressure exerted by the new regime obviously had its special qualities, but the economy still failed to ※ignite§ in the way Schmitt had hoped.63 
There was pressure not only to hire but also to fre, and here both Schmitt and the insurance business generally were locked in confict with Nazi off-cials and Party activists at various levels who tried to reduce unemployment by driving out ※double earners,§ that is, persons holding two jobs and female members of families who were earning money in addition to the principal male breadwinner. Both Schmitt and Labor Minister Franz Seldte fought such in-terventions, which were often inconsistent with one another and of dubious or nonexistent legality. The actions taken against double earners were also quite destructive of government intentions, since many families were utterly dependent on more than one earner and since double earners were often pre-cisely the individuals whose energy and initiative one wished to encourage.64 For the insurance industry, the matter was of particular importance because working as an insurance agent or salesperson was often a secondary occupa-tion. The insurance industry counted on a large network of persons at the lo-cal level who made a practice of informing their friends, neighbors, and clients of the availability of various kinds of insurance and then receiving a commis-sion for their roles in either selling such insurance or acting as intermediaries 
62 See ibid. for this and the other such meetings discussed here. 63 See Gerald D. Feldman, ※Industrialists, Bankers and the Problem of Unemployment in the Weimar 
Republic,§ Central European History 25 (1992), pp. 76每96. 64 See the valuable discussion in Silverman, Hitler＊s Economy, pp. 207每9. 
in the selling of policies. For example, real estate agents, movers, jewelers, and veterinarians played an important role in informing their customers of rele-vant insurance and in helping to sell policies. He. and his colleagues were anxious that ※their indispensable and economically important activity be per-mitted again.§65 Allianz, along with the Reich Association, appealed to both the Reich Offce for Labor Exchanges and Unemployment Insurance and to the RWM for relief from these pressures, and decrees prohibiting some of the Nazi excesses were duly issued. The ministries had hoped to issue regulations dealing with the problem but rapidly discovered that government regulatory efforts would do more harm than good in so complex an area. Therefore, or-ders were issued between September and November 1933 that left the question to individual employers and heads of government agencies, and it was made clear that dismissals were to occur only in extreme cases of disproportionate earnings.66 
One signifcant area where tensions between Nazi organizational efforts and insurance business interests were closely linked was agriculture. On September 13, 1933, Darr谷 had set up his Reich Food Estate (Reichsn.hrstand) and then expanded it in such a way that, by the early months of 1934, it encompassed por-tions of the crafts connected with food (e.g., butchers and bakers) and also those who marketed and sold food. On the one hand, this removed agriculture and the food trades from the RWM＊s purview. On the other, it separated them from the regular organizations of industry and commerce and created an encapsulated agrarian sector that well refected the blood-and-soil fantasies of Darr谷 and his colleagues. The most important expression of their ideology was the Law on Hereditary Entailment (Erbhofgesetz) of September 29, 1933, which removed 55% of Germany＊s agricultural land from the market to provide the security of tenure and protection from foreclosure due to indebtedness.67 
While Schmitt and the business community were helpless to contain the agrar-ian empire being established by Darr谷 and his cronies, the private insurance industry was interested in the new agrarian leaders as clients and in selling as much insurance as they could to farmers under the new conditions. In-deed, Allianz had a special interest in the question because it had an agree-ment with the chief agrarian organization, the Landbund, under which the latter recommended Allianz for insurance. Thus, at the end of August 1933, the Al-lianz concern sought to cement its relations to agriculture by inviting Staatsrat 
65 22. erweiterte Vorstandssitzung am 8. Sept. 1933, FHA, S 17.2 /4. See also Heinrich Kel, ※Der 
nebenberufiche Vertreter im Versicherungsgewerbe,§ Neumanns Zeitschrift f Versicherungs-
wesen 56 (1933), pp. 832每3. 66 Niederschrift er die Sitzung des Allgemeinen Pr.sidialausschusses des Reichsverbandes der Pri-
vatversicherung, 19. Sept. 1933,GDV, RS/24,p. 7. See also the Rundschreiben of the Reichsver-
band of Nov. 21 and Dec. 9, 1933, FHA, S 17.7/61. 
67 See John E. Farquharson, The Plough and the Swastika. The NSDAP and Agriculture in Germany 1928每1945 (London & Beverly Hills, 1976), esp. Ch. 8, and Gustavo Corni & Horst Gies, Brot. Butter. Kanonen. Die Ern.hrungswirtschaft unter der Diktatur Hitlers (Berlin, 1997), esp. Ch. 2. 
Wilhelm Meinberg (Darr谷＊s right-hand man) and the Bavarian agrarian leader State Secretary Georg Luber to join the supervisory boards of, respectively, Al-lianz and Bayerische Versicherungsbank.68 Private insurers fretted over the dan-ger that they might be prevented from collecting overdue premiums from the peasants benefting from the entailment law, and they were especially disturbed by some farmers who felt they no longer needed to take out liability insurance and were indeed free of their obligations under such insurance. Still, private insurers were anxious to take advantage of the law and persuade peasants to take out life insurance, since mortgages could no longer secure provision for old age.69 
The campaign to sell life insurance to peasants using such arguments was sharply criticized by the strong opponents of private life insurance in the agrar-ian sector. The effort to create a special agrarian estate was accompanied by an attempt on the part of the Regeno-Raiffeisen-Versicherungsgesellschaften 每 which had been set up in collaboration with the Reich Association of Agricul-tural Cooperatives 每 to monopolize the sale of insurance to peasants and farmers. It began to claim that Hitler stood behind insurance by occupation and that the regime supported a monopoly of insurance in agriculture by those companies set upspeciallytoserveagriculture. Indeed,Darr谷hadactuallyencouragedthepeas-ants and farmers to give their business to the Regeno-Raiffeisen-Gesellschaften. Thanks to protests from the Reich Association of Private Insurers, this formal en-dorsement was revoked by the fall of 1933, although not quite to the satisfaction of the Association. Hilgard also negotiated an agreement with the leadership of the Regeno-Raiffeisen-Gesellschaften in November under which the latter dis-avowed any pretension to having a monopoly in agriculture.70 
In fact, by early 1934 the Association found that the agreements reached only a few months earlier with Staatsrat Meinberg were not being kept and that some of thepeasantleaderswerenotpayinganyattentiontothem,either. Thesupporters 
68 Announcement in the Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, 24. Aug. 1933,BAB, B 280/1432, Bl. 186. On Meinberg and Luber, see Corni & Gies, Brot, pp. 190ff., 181ff. Neither lived up to ex-pectations. Luber was dismissed for corruption at the end of 1933, while Meinberg ended up quarrelling with Darr谷 and went into industry in 1938. On the question of unpaid premiums and the complicated solution to this issue in 1936, see the Tagesordnung f die ordentliche Hauptversammlung des Reichsverbandes der Privatversicherung am 17.Nov. 1933, Anlage 4: Landwirtschaftliche Schutzma.nahmen (Vollstreckungsschutz), S. 6每7,GDV, RS/5, and Tages-ordnung f die Hauptversammlung des Reichsverbandes der Privatversicherung, 13.Feb. 1936, Anlage 10,p. 18,GDV,RS/14. 
69 Deutschland-Berichte der Sozialdemokratischen Partei Deutschlands (Sopade) 1934每1940, (1934), (Frankfurt a.M., 1980), p. 52. On the liability insurance issue, see the Bericht er die Ausschu.-sitzung des Unfall-und Haftpficht-Versicherungs-Verbandes am 12. Dez. 1933,FHA,AZ 7.1/8. 
70 Sitzung des Allgemeinen Pr.sidialausschusses des Reichsverbandes am 19. Sept. 1933,p. 7, GDV, RS/12; Niederschrift er die gemeinsame Sitzung des Hauptausschusses und des All-gemeinen Pr.sidialausschusses des Reichsverbandes am 16.Nov. 1933, pp. 8每9,GDV, RS/13; Rundschreiben des Reichsverbandes vom 13. November 1933,FHA, AZ 5.1/3. On the Regeno-Versicherungsgesellschaft, see Arps, Durch unruhige Zeiten, Bd. 1, pp. 430每1. 

Brochure of Allianz Leben on the Law on Hereditary Entailment, advertising life insur-ance (1939). 
of separate insurance for farmers insisted that they were not getting the kind of capital investment they needed in light of the premiums they were paying to the insurance companies. This, indeed, was an important motive for all proponents of occupational insurance: that the investment of the insurers should go exclu-sively to the group being insured. Director Schloe.mann and other leaders of the life insurance business protested that they actually invested disproportion-ately more in mortgages and agricultural securities than they received in policies from the agricultural sector. Indeed, Allianz Leben did a special calculation to prove that, while its premium income from agriculture was 4.5%每5%ofits business, its investment was about 6%每7%. As far as the private insurers were concerned, however, such calculations really were not to the point. They argued that juxtaposition of premiums and capital investment was absurd because the truly relevant comparison was between premiums and claims paid.71 Ultimately, matters were ※settled§ by direct negotiations between Schmitt and Darr谷, who in March 1934 came up with a joint statement that the creation of monopoly-like credit institutes and occupation-based insurance enterprises was ※undesir-able§ and that banks and insurance companies should take into account the special needs of the sectors with which they were dealing. However, the Reich Association did not seem particularly sanguine about the enforceability of this agreement, commenting that much more was needed to eliminate the unbearable aspects of the existing situation and so make the agreement a reality. Neverthe-less, the cultivation of Meinberg by Allianz seemed to have worked: in early May, after numerous negotiations with him, Director Koenig was able to report that the Reich Food Estate had taken over the old agreement with the Reichslandbund to recommend Allianz for insurance purposes. This 40-year-old agreement was annulled at the end of 1935 because the Reich Supervisory Board had placed a ban on such arrangements, but Allianz made a special point of emphasizing that this in no way detracted from its good relations with the Reich Food Estate and that Meinberg＊s presence on the supervisory board was not affected.72 
A much greater threat 每 both to Schmitt＊s conception of economic organi-zation and to the private insurance business 每 was Ley＊s German Labor Front. Ley had begun a campaign to bring employers into the DAF, which was to rest on four pillars: the employers, salaried employees, workers, and free profes-sions. These were then to be divided regionally by district (Gau) and also by branch. As Hilgard 每 who had taken Schmitt＊s place in the Reich Association and who had negotiated on its behalf with Ley and Wilhelm Keppler (Hitler＊s economic adviser in the Reich Chancellory) 每 worriedly noted, there was the dan-ger that ※through a premature entry into the Labor Front, the corporatist task could be prematurely settled, which would contradict the tendency of the Reich government, especially the Reich Economics Ministry.§73 The entire matter was very muddy, which is not surprising given the utter absurdity of trying to base a modern industrial society on corporatist principles and the empire-building that characterized the new Nazi regime, but Hilgard felt that they had to express a basic willingness to join. At the same time, he urged collaboration between the private insurance companies and the banks, which were also affected, as well as development of an employer position and strategy. It would be neces-sary, for example, to clarify the future of the Reich Association and the employer 
71 Niederschrift er die Sitzung des Allgemeinen Pr.sidialausschusses, 8. M.rz 1934, pp. 2每5,GDV, RS/13; for the Allianz position, see the Rundschreiben of March 23, 1934,inFHA, S 17.7/61. 72 For the agreement between Darr谷 and Schmitt, see the Reichsverband Rundschreiben of March 
5, 1934,GDV, RS/5. For the Allianz agreement with Meinberg, see the 23. erweiterte Vor-
standssitzung am 4.Mai 1934,FHA,S 17.2 /4. On the cancellation of the policy, see the Allianz 
Rundschreiben of 23. Dez. 1935 and the lengthy explanation sent out to the various branches, 
FHA, AZ 5.1/4. 73 Niederschrift er die Sitzung des Allgemeinen Pr.sidialausschusses des Reichsverbandes der Pri-
vatversicherung am 19. Sept. 1933,p. 4,GDV,RS/24. 
association. Indeed, given the elimination of trade unions, there seemed to be no further need for an employer association. 
As in the case of the new order in agriculture 每 only far more so with respect to the new organization of labor 每 competition within the insurance business itself constituted a great threat to private insurance interests. The DAF had be-come a substantial participant in the insurance business overnight by acquiring the old trade union insurance organizations: Deutscher Versicherungs-Konzern, which had its headquarters in Berlin and had been run by the Christian unions; the Hamburg-based Deutscher Ring, which had been run by the German Na-tional Retail Clerks Association; and Volksfsorge, also based in Hamburg, which was connected with the Socialist unions. The private insurance compa-nies might have tried to purchase these assets, but the DAF had every intention of turning them into economic enterprises of its own and to begin competing with the private and the publicly chartered insurance organizations for market share. There was considerable anxiety that any new organization of the econ-omy would operate in a way that favored DAF enterprises and might produce a socialization of the insurance industry itself. That is, the private insurance in-dustry had to confront not only the old publicly chartered companies but also the old trade union insurance enterprises now associated with the politically formidable DAF. 
Relations between the private and the union insurance organizations, espe-cially Deutscher Ring, were anything but pleasant. Allianz and the Cologne-based Concordia had sued Deutscher Ring for advertising itself as the only in-surance organization that understood its national and social mission and whose insured were not the victims of ※dividend-addicted directors and shareholders.§ Most distressing was the claim of a Nazi insurance agent working for Deutscher Ring that ※Allianz is a Jewish company or a mainstay of Jewish high fnance.§74 Allianz won the cases alleging unfair competition and defamation that it brought against the Deutscher Ring and the insurance agent involved. Court orders of June 28 and July 7, 1933, required that the charge against Allianz be withdrawn; that the man who made it publicly declare that it was unfounded; and that the Deutscher Ring cease its unfair competition through invidious claims about its ※mission§ in its business reports. 
Nevertheless, this hardly solved the general problem, which in fact intensi-fed as discussions moved forward about reordering the economy along occu-pational lines. Even Nazis were complaining. In August, Fritz Sauckel (Reich District Governor of Thuringia) sent the RWM protests from an Old Fighter from the Gothaer Lebenversicherungsbank a. G. about the manner in which various Party members, the NSBO, and other agencies were recommending and favoring 
74 Rundschreiben Allianz, 25. Juli 1933,FHA S 17.20/167, and ※Allianz und Stuttgarter Leben und 
Concordia gegen Deutscher Ring,§ Neumanns Zeitschrift f Versicherungswesen 56 (1933), 
pp. 589每90. 
various insurance companies, among them those associated with the DAF. The insurance man in question reported that the concept of occupational organi-zation was leading people to think that the entire insurance industry could be organized according to occupational principles and even be given a monopoly. This was very dangerous in his view, which was shared by the private insurance industry in general: 
One must strongly warn against such an organization of insurance. There are great dan-gers in the gathering of different occupational groups each in their own companies, which are especially to be found in the absence of a suffcient mixing of risks and in the mixing of capital investments. Further to be considered is that an organization of life insurance according to occupational estates, which would grant a monopoly position to individual companies, must lead to the exclusion of a healthy competition that will serve progress.75 
He noted that Italy had experimented with nationalizing its insurance industry but that Mussolini decided to reprivatize, with the result that the Italian industry was enjoying a big upswing. The Reich District Governor was in complete agree-ment with these points and went on to note that General Director Hans Ullrich of the Gothaer, himself long associated with the NSDAP and a Party member, was asking for a direct discussion with Economics Minister Schmitt about the problem. 
The complaints continued through the fall of 1933 and the frst months of 1934. The Reich Association struggled against tendencies to encapsulate agrar-ian insurance under one company and also expressed worries that the craftsmen would be organized along occupational lines for insurance purposes. What was particularly galling was the use of the Swastika and Party symbols (as well as of Hitler＊s name and particularly Nazi slogans like ※the common good before per-sonal good§) to suggest that some types of insurance or certain companies were favored by the regime.76 It is certainly no surprise that Schmitt was profoundly irritated by all this, as were the other RWM offcials 每 above all Ministerial Coun-cilor Bernard, who was in charge of the desk dealing with insurance questions. At the end of September, he issued a press release pointing out that the mixing of the Party with business interests was not allowed and that no one had the right to claim they were acting in the name of the NSDAP in trying to win insurance customers.77 
Such injunctions seem not to have had much effect on the Deutscher Ring and Volksfsorge, whoseautumncampaignsrepeatedlystressedtheir relationshipto the Labor Front. This led to renewed protests against such advertising practices, not only from the private insurance leaders but also from their NSBO activists. In 
75 Reichsstatthalter in Thingen an Reichswirtschaftsminister, 19. Aug. 1933, und Anlage, BAB, R 
3101/17057, Bl. 25每 6. 76 Reichsverband an den Reichswirtschaftsminister, 12. Sept. 1933, ibid., Bl. 30每7. 77 Aktennotiz, 30. Sept. 1933, ibid., Bl. 69. 
November, the NSBO steward at Allianz, Bruno Rycerz, and the chairman of the Workers Council, Hans Lange, joined with their counterparts from Aachener und Mchener, Friedrich-Wilhelm Lebensversicherungs-AG, and Victoria to protest the competitive practices of the DAF insurance companies.78 Espe-cially interesting in this vein was a long complaint to Pg. Haid of the Deutsche Ring from Hans Goebbels (brother of Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels), who was head of the publicly chartered Provinzial-Feuerversicherungsanstalt der Rheinprovinz. He, too, warned against an overemphasis on exclusive occupa-tion insurance companies, but he particularly protested that the ※coordinated§ former trade union insurance companies seemed to forget the true purpose of ※coordination.§ It certainly was not ※to experience a new rendition of the war of all against all under the imprimatur of our sacred fghting symbol!§79 
This by no means meant that the private and the publicly chartered compa-nies had buried the hatchet, but the most immediate threat certainly came from the DAF. It was producing major conficts with the RWM, where various in-surance companies and Schmitt were protesting DAF interference in the health insurance area.80 Finally, an agreement was reached between the Reich Asso-ciation and the DAF insurance organizations in mid-February 1934; the former promised not to advertise against the latter by calling them ※Marxist,§ and the latter agreed not to advertise themselves as DAF insurance organizations and to engage in fair competition.81 Whether this was really the end of the confict or only the frst skirmish in the struggle with the DAF companies remained to be seen, but the competition faced by the private insurance industry had broadened in a very dangerous way owing to the Nazi seizure of power. 
The various ※treaties§ that were concluded with reference to insurance in agri-culture and relations between private insurers and DAF organizations in the early winter of 1934 were a refection of more general treaties 每 between Schmitt, on the one hand, and Darr谷 and Ley, on the other 每 concerning the organization of the economy, and they were symptomatic of the odd way in which government affairs were now being conducted. Schmitt and Seldte were anxious to prevent the DAF from becoming either a super trade union or a vehicle for structur-ing the economy along corporatist lines. They seemed on the road to achieving their goal when they signed (in late November 1933) an agreement with Ley, who was becoming very nervous about the radicals in his ranks and especially in the NSBO. Ley accepted the notion that the DAF was to function as a mass 
78 See their letter to the Wirtschaftspolitisches Amt of the NSDAP of Nov. 4, 1933, as well as Werner 
Lenz an Schmitt, 25.Nov. 1933, and the various appended documents, ibid., Bl. 129每30, 180每205. 79 Hans Goebbels an den Verbandsvorsteher Pg. Haid, 15.Nov. 1933, ibid., Bl. 203每5. 80 See the Niederschrift er die gemeinsame Sitzung des Hauptausschusses und des Allgemeinen 
Pr.sidialausschusses des Reichsverbandes, 16.Nov. 1933,GDV, RS/24, pp. 12每16, and the cor-
respondence of Director George von Bruchhausen of Deutsche-Kranken-Versicherungs-AG of 
Aug.每Sept. 1933, HM, E0002-00005/2. 81 Rundschreiben Reichsverband, 13.Feb. 1934 with appendices, BAB, R 3101/17052, Bl. 230每2. 
organization for the purposes of educating and guiding the workers, rather than as a great union. Employers and workers alike were to be urged to join, and this explains Hilgard＊s rather tentative readiness to state that insurance industry em-ployers were willing to join the DAF.82 
Schmitt and Seldte continued working together to constraint and constrict the activities of the DAF. At the beginning of December 1933, Schmitt presented a proposal designed to relegate the DAF to the function of a corporate body charged with primarily ※educational§ functions, precluding its involvement in wage questions. He also hoped to bar it from owning economic enterprises and thereby prevent the DAF＊s expanding into an overwhelming factor in the econ-omy. Labor questions 每 to be formally legislated in the ※Law for the Ordering of National Labor§ presented to the cabinet a few days later and then promul-gated on January 20, 1934 每 were to be handled on an individual enterprise basis, with the employers as ※plant leaders§ and with appointed steward＊s councils as-suming the task of employee representation in each enterprise. Appointed labor trustees were to function as arbitrators in the event of disputes that could not be settled on the spot. The DAF was assigned the fundamental task of replacing class confict with a sense of community and gaining acceptance for the leader-ship principle in business enterprises.83 
Schmitt was not successful in his effort to place the DAF in a position where it had a clear legal status 每 it was not to have such a status throughout the regime＊s history 每 and he also failed to bar it from the insurance business and other economic activities. However, just as Schmitt was able to ally with Seldte to prevent the DAF from functioning as a union, so he was able to ally with Finance Minister Schwerin von Krosigk to mobilize criticism of the high dues and other fnancial demands on workers being made by the DAF.84 Finally, and most importantly, Schmitt was able to bury proposals for an occupational or ※estate§ organization of the economy once and for all, except in agriculture, by securing Cabinet acceptance in late February 1934 of his own law for the ※or-ganic§ organization of the economy. The Law for the Preparation of the Organic Structuring of the German Economy was offcially promulgated on March 13, 1934. Its fundamental purposes, aside from preempting other options and ensur-ing a key position for the RWM in determining German economic organization and policy, was to rationalize the organization of the economy by replacing or supplementing the existing associational structure of peak associations and 
82 Smelser, Robert Ley, pp. 147每8. Hilgard＊s position paralleled that of the other business organi-
zation leaders. 83 See Schmitt＊s presentation to the Cabinet meeting of Dec. 1, 1933, Karl-Heinz Minuth (Bearb.), 
Akten der Reichskanzlei. Die Regierung Hitler 1933每1938. Teil 1: 1933/1934, 2 Bd. (Boppard am 
Rhein, 1983), 2, pp. 992每5. On the Gesetz zur Ordnung der nationalen Arbeit, see Cabinet meet-
ing of Jan. 12, 1934, ibid., pp. 1070每3, and RGBl, 1934,I, p. 25. See also Tim Mason, Sozialpolitik 
im Dritten Reich. Arbeiterklasse und Volksgemeinschaft (Opladen, 1977), pp. 117每23. 84 Smelser, Robert Ley, pp. 220每2. 
interest-group organizations with Reich Groups for the various branches of the economy, organizing them on the basis of the ※Frer principle§ and thereby creating organizations that would prove adequate for the transmission of aims formed by the State.85 
The new law was the outcome of yet another power struggle in the regime and was the latest ※treaty§ between Schmitt and Ley. Thus, on March 21, 1934, Hil-gard sent members of the Reich Association for Private Insurance an interview given by Schmitt to the editor of the DAF newspaper Der Deutsche, in which Schmitt spelled out the signifcance of the new law in providing the basis for a unifed economic policy under the guidance of leaders that he was summoning to head the new Reich Groups. He characterized the law as ※a bold attempt to form a synthesis between the free play of forces and the national socialist princi-ple of ＆community interest before self-interest.＊ § Schmitt explicitly rejected the notion that the law created ※estates§ in the economy, pointing to the Reich Food Estate as an illustration of what he was not doing. Similarly, he made clear that the DAF was not to conduct union activities and that Germany no longer had either trade unions or employer organizations. The DAF＊s purpose was rather to create a ※community of labor,§ and it was toward this end that the new economic organizations and the DAF were to collaborate. The text of Schmitt＊s interview was accompanied by one of those typically ecstatic exchanges of telegrams de-signed to suggest a unity of intention (and to veil the intense differences) among the new leaders. Ley, who sent the telegram to Schmitt on March 20, praised the law and expressed complete accord with the Schmitt interview, both of which he had just read on his return from two weeks abroad. Ley saw the arrangement be-tween the new economic organization and the DAF as an illustration of how the liberal age and Marxist class struggle had been overcome and as a demonstra-tion that ※Germany is the frst and only land in the world to have eliminated the nation-subverting ideas of the French Revolution of 1789.§ While no match for Ley as a rambling purveyor of National Socialist discourse, Schmitt showed that he was not without promise when it came to linguistic adaptation by joyously responding that the ※heartfelt and manly solidarity of the leaders is the precon-dition and deepest guarantee for the success of the National Socialist people＊s community.§86 
Not everyone in the business community was equally enthusiastic about Schmitt＊s organizational measures. Reichsbank President Schacht thought the entire legislation was nonsense and likely to do more harm than good, as he made a point of telling Hilgard after replacing Schmitt as economics minis-ter. But Hilgard saw the matter differently and considered the legislation a 
85 Cabinet meeting of Feb. 27, 1934, Akten der Reichskanzlei, Regierung Hitler 1933每1938, Teil I, 
Bd. 2, pp. 1169每70. For the law, see RGBl, 1934,I,S. 185每6. On the Reich Groups and this reor-
ganization, see Boelcke, Deutsche Wirtschaft, pp. 95每100. 86 For these documents, see Hilgard an die dem Reichsverband angeschlossenen Fachverb.nde und 
Verbandsgesellschaften, 21. M.rz 1934,GDV,RS/5. 
masterstroke on the part of Schmitt designed to preempt DAF efforts to gain control over the economy. Schmitt＊s cause had, to be sure, been well served by Ley himself, whose confused presentation of ideas alarmed those with whom he spoke; so that even party leaders like Rudiger Graf von der Goltz, whom Schmitt asked to take over the leadership of the industrial economy organizations, felt that something had to be done.87 Schacht was not a man to extol the achieve-ments of others, and Hilgard probably was right in viewing Schmitt＊s preemptive strike as something of a triumph 每 especially since the DAF was far from neu-tralized and was actually in the process of building a substantial empire with its leisure time organization ※Strength through Joy§ and other social programs. This said, however, Schmitt＊s actions in the interest of the business community did create mechanisms that made state intervention in economic affairs far eas-ier than they had been under the more diffuse prior organization. 
Insurance was to be one of the eleven Reich groups to be established under the new arrangement, and Hilgard was soon to become its ※Frer.§ To their credit, the leaders of the Reich Association did not seem to take their potential roles as ※Frer§ with too much seriousness. Reich Association Managing Director Heinrich Lippert treated the whole matter as a change of terminology, suggesting that the chairman become a ※Frer§ with a narrow council of ※Frer§ cor-responding to the present Pr.sidium and an expanded committee of ※Frer§ corresponding to the existing main committee. There were then to be ※Frer§ for the organizations for the branches of insurance, which would presumably have counterpart structures. In short, their basic character as self-governing bodies would continue. Lippert＊s proposal was made in early March 1934,but Hilgard warned against voting on anything until Schmitt＊s intentions were clear. He then proceeded, however, to propose a structure 每 with a ※Frer§ at the top and a group of ※Frer§ rings 每 that did not deviate much from the Lippert proposal. Although there was general consensus that Hilgard be the ※Frer§ of the Reich Association, Hilgard urged that all ※Frer§ be subject to a yearly vote of confdence.88 
Matters were not necessarily to be so simple and convenient, however. This the Presidial Committee of the Reich Association discovered in their discussion with another ※Frer,§ Rudolf Lencer, who on March 8, 1934, was given the charge of establishing and leading the projected Reich Company Community for Banking and Insurance of the DAF. Lencer, a bank offcial and enthusiastic National Socialist who was a signifcant fgure in the DAF, gave a speech at a rally held on February 27, 1934, in which he contended not only that the em-ployer associations should disappear (now that the trade unions were gone) but also that the Reich Association would gradually disappear as well and be re-placed by the DAF company group. Hilgard thought it wise to learn more about 
87 Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2/7, pp. 92每6. 88 Niederschrift er die Sitzung des Allgemeinen Pr.sidialauschusses, 8. M.rz 1934, pp. 7每10, 
GDV, RS/13. 

Reich Economics Minister Schmitt giving a speech about the reorganization of the Ger-man economy to senior representatives of political and economic management in the conference hall of the Reich Economic Council, March 13, 1934. Next to him are Under-secretaries Gottfried Feder and Hans Posse (wearing glasses). 
Lencer＊s plans, which Lencer 每 arriving so late to the meeting that many insur-ance managers had already left 每 described in extraordinarily confusing but very discomfting terms. Naturally there was the usual verbiage about the ※educative§ functions of the DAF (i.e., its allegedly crucial role in infusing National Social-ist ideas into the factories and offces of Germany), but the substantive point seemed to be that the DAF had plans to abscond with the idea of forming Reich Groups by establishing such groups for itself in the form of its company groups, which would effectively organize the entire economy. Thus, the DAF would have a branch group devoted to insurance and composed of private insurance, the publicly chartered companies, and social insurance. Most importantly, Lencer sketched a scheme under which both social and economic matters would come under its control. Thus, questions of basic wage and working conditions would be discussed in the company groups, and the labor trustee would be called in only as an agency of last resort. Similarly, in response to a question by Allianz director Walter Eggerss 每 who was clearly alarmed at the prospect of DAF inter-ference in anything 每 Lencer recognized that the technical side of the insurance business needed expertise in the initial phase; however, he went on to suggest that the DAF and economic organizations would frst work parallel to one an-other but would then grow together in one organization. Thus, the ※educative§ function now appeared to be merely a transitory phase during which DAF off-cials would learn to interfere in every aspect of the insurance business. Lencer also implied that he would end up being the ※Frer§ of them all: the person in charge of assuring that both social and economic policies fulflled the goals of the DAF.89 
Although the questions raised by the insurance executives demonstrated that they found Lencer confusing and inconsistent, Hilgard was careful to treat him with studied politeness and to express warm support for the high tasks and func-tions of the DAF. Privately, he detested Lencer, whom he considered ※a proto-type of the young guard of the Party. He sought to compensate for his inadequate general education with a considerable amount of arrogance and thoughtless un-reliability.§90 For Hilgard, as for Schmitt and others, the rambling ambitions of Ley and his cronies were prime evidence favoring anticipatory self-organization by the business community in ways that would at once conform to the expecta-tions of Germany＊s new rulers and preserve the fundamental structures they had built up over the years. Thus, when Schmitt asked Hilgard to assume the position of leader of the new Reich Group for Insurance, the latter, as he frankly admitted, 
hardly gave any thought to the question of whether I should accept or not. Far more, it was self-evident that I should place myself at his disposal, since I had the feeling that I could satisfy the tasks of the position and could administer it to the beneft of the pri-vate insurance business. I therefore undertook the job in good spirits and never had any 
89 Ibid., pp. 11每17. 90 Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2/7,p. 96. 
thought that this activity would later be interpreted as work in the service of the NSDAP. Such a view was all the more distant from me since I was personally completely opposed to Hitler and his Party, and I actually viewed the summons to be leader of the Reich Group for Insurance as a chance, at least in our area, to be able to fght against encroachments by the Party.91 
Nevertheless, Party membership was a prerequisite for his new position, and Hil-gard applied for membership in February 1934. At the time, the Party had issued a ban on new memberships, but an exception was made in Hilgard＊s case at the request of the Reich Party Leadership. Hilgard later claimed he never requested a Party book nor knew his number.92 
As leader of the Reich Group for Insurance, Hilgard was on the front line of his industry＊s relations with the government as well as on the front line of re-lations between his industry and the outside world. He no longer represented the private insurance business alone. When the Reich Group was formally es-tablished on June 20, 1934, Hilgard surrendered his position as chairman of the Reich Association for Private Insurance to General Director Christian Oertel of Colonia in Cologne. At the same time, a second and parallel group within the industry was placed in the Reich Group under his leadership 每 namely, those old competitors of the private insurance business, the publicly chartered insurance organizations. Professor Paul Riebesell, a noted insurance mathematician and general director of the Hamburger Feuerkasse, was made leader of this group. As Hilgard rapidly discovered, however, the real powers in the publicly chartered insurance business were two dangerous Nazis: Franz Schwede-Coburg, who was made Gauleiter and Governor of Pommerania in 1934, and Hans Goebbels. The former was a genuine Old Fighter, who led the SA in Coburg as early as 1922 and became mayor of the city in 1931 before being elevated to Gauleiter. Radical and (as it was to turn out) murderous, Schwede-Coburg took a special interest in publicly chartered insurance for ideological reasons and became active in its organizations.93 Hans Goebbels was also a fanatical Nazi who had made a ca-reer as head of the Provinzial-Feuerversicherungsanstalt der Rheinprovinz and enjoyed access to his more famous brother and the radical circles around him. Hilgard apparently earned their enmity very early on when, at an introductory meeting with leadership of the publicly chartered group, where Riebesell had in-troduced him and Hilgard had given one of his conciliatory and politically cor-rect speeches, Schwede-Coburg and Goebbels cornered him. Schwede-Coburg told him that his remarks were all well and good but that they would judge him 
91 Ibid., pp. 93每 4. 92 SeehisFragebogen, undated, FHA, NL 2 /3, and BAB,ehem.BDC,PK WalterGladisch (*2.1.1882). 93 See the articles celebrating his 50th birthday in Deutsche fentlich-rechtliche Versicherung, 1. 
M.rz 1938, and Vkischer Beobachter, 5. M.rz 1938,GDV, 0-012/2. For an enthusiastic but 
useful account of his career, see Herbert Gaede, Schwede-Coburg. Ein Lebensbild des Gauleiters 
und Oberpr.sidenten von Pommern (Berlin, 1939). See also Hermann Wei. (ed.), Biographisches 
Lexikon zum Dritten Reich (Frankfurt a.M., 1998), p. 424. 
by his adherence to the will of the Party. Hilgard＊s response was that he was legally subordinate to the Reich Economics Minister and intended to follow the latter＊s directions.94 
The trouble was that Hilgard＊s friend and Reich Economics Minister Schmitt was in less and less of a condition to give directions to anyone, and his public ca-reer was coming to a very unhappy end. He had grave diffculties dealing with the polycratic competition and settling matters with Darr谷 and Ley. He also had to keep the lid on Feder, who had periodic bursts of energy during which he tried to make policy; this irritated the other RWM offcials and inevitably led to quarreling in the Ministry. Schmitt fnally managed to place Feder in charge of land settlement policy, which was one of Feder＊s old interests, but he remained a thorn in the side of the ministerial bureaucracy. For example, when RWM Press Offcer Herbert Rolf Fritzsche prevented Feder from placing a racist article on behalf of the Ministry in the press, Schmitt had to come to Fritzsche＊s defense.95 
This episode was indicative of Schmitt＊s most important problem: the extent to which his views on key questions differed from those of both the Nazi leader-ship and the most powerful elements in the Party＊s rank and fle. The tendency to openly discriminate against the Jews in economic affairs was an especially sore point. Schmitt made no secret of the fact that he viewed the economy as a kind of sanctuary for Jews from the ※Aryan paragraphs§ and that there was ※no Jewish question in the economy.§ Thus, to at least some extent, he kept his promise to his Jewish business colleagues and made the acceptance of this policy by Hitler and Ging one of the conditions for his taking offce. Yet the limits of Schmitt＊s infuence, and also of his commitment, were apparent from the out-set. Thus, at the Cabinet discussion of the granting of public contracts on July 14, 1933, Rudolf He. (deputy leader of the NSDAP) announced that the boycott against Jewish enterprises was being lifted but also declared that public agencies would themselves fnd the means to end their connections with Jewish enter-prises. On July 19, Schmitt issued guidelines emphasizing the primacy of work creation in the giving of contracts. Conditions being equal, preference was to be shown to ※Aryan§ frms, but Schmitt warned against creating insecurity and un-rest by yielding to unwarranted pressures from those seeking to serve their own interests by pursuing the racial origins of shareholders and supervisory board members of companies seeking contracts. Schmitt thus had no objections to dis-crimination against Jewish enterprises per se and indeed declared it the goal of German economic policy ※to push back Jewish infuence in the economy§ and to promote the transformation of Jewish into non-Jewish frms. He objected, how-ever, to denying formerly Jewish frms public contracts, as was the policy of the Postal Ministry 每 and especially to explicitly giving the Jewish (or formerly Jew-ish) character of a frm as the reason for its exclusion from contracts. Schmitt feared that this would lead to reprisals abroad and to loss of jobs at home. He 
94 Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2/7, pp. 94每5. 95 Herbert Rolf Fritzsche an Schmitt, 31. Aug. 1948, FHA, NL 1/16. 
renewed this summons to moderation on September 5, noting that frms and government agencies were being fooded with inquiries about whether various companies were truly German-owned or -controlled.96 On September 27, 1933, he issued yet another pronouncement: 
I do not consider a distinction between Aryan and non-Aryan or pure Aryan frms in the economy and especially when engaging in business relations to be implementable. Such a distinction with the purpose of boycotting non-Aryan frms must necessary lead to se-rious disturbances of the economic reconstruction, since unfavorable effects on the labor market through reductions of operations by the frms affected by the boycott and negative consequences for the suppliers of these frms and their workers would be unavoidable.97 
In mid-December 1933, Schmitt sent around a circular to the state governments and chambers of commerce warning against any disturbing of Christmas busi-ness by ※special actions§ against ※non-Aryan§ businesses and department stores designed to prevent them from showing Christmas displays or selling Christ-mas articles and Christmas tree ornaments.98 If these were not ringing cries for tolerance and decency 每 and in fact masked Schmitt＊s willingness to support ac-tive measures to reduce the role of Jews in public life 每 they were nevertheless received at home and abroad as a substantial self-limitation by the regime on its anti-Semitic program. They led not only to criticism but also to outright non-compliance and even open defance by Gauleiter and other Nazi leaders. The Gauleiter of the Palatinate Josef Bckel, for example, bluntly stated that ※the utterances of some big-name Nazis don＊t mean a thing to old Nazis like us.§99 
96 Cabinet meeting of July 14, 1933, Akten der Reichskanzlei Regierung Hitler 1933每1938, Teil I, 
p. 677. Schmitt＊s ※Richtlinien er die Vergebung fentlicher Auftr.ge§ of July 19, 1933, as well as his subsequent statement of Sept. 5, 1933, are printed in the Ministerialblatt f die Preu.ische innere Verwaltung 94 (1933), Teil I, Bd. 1, pp. 983每5, 1279. The problems faced by Schmitt are well illustrated by the anti-Semitic policies of the Post Offce leadership, discussed in Lotz, Deutsche Reichspost, pp. 208每9. The evidence for Schmitt＊s support for the basic policy of reducing Jewish economic infuence and his desire to avoid making discriminatory practices public is to be found in the minutes of a meeting on November 13, 1933, of various ministries in the RWM at which Schmitt, Finance Minister Schwerin von Krosigk, and Post Minister Freiherr von Eltz-Renach were personally present; the issue of giving contracts to foreign companies was also discussed, with Schmitt taking a moderate line here, too. See ※Vermerk er die Chefbesprechung am 13. November 1933 er Auftragsvergebung der Reichspost,§ BAB, R 4701/22057, Bl. 8每11. 
97 RWM to the German Chamber of Industry and Commerce, with copy to the state governments, 
8. Sept. 1933,BAB, R 4701/22056. In general, see his postwar ※Judenpolitik w.hrend meiner Ministerzeit,§ FHA, NL 1/77, which quotes the policy statement in question. In his postwar self-defense, Schmitt never referred to an offcial document but rather to the publication of the statement in an article entitled ※Kein Arierparagraph in der Wirtschaft§ in the ※8-Uhr Abend-blatt,§ 27. Sept. 1933. The article is to be found among the exhibits in his denazifcation trial, AM, Spruchkammerakten Dr. Kurt Schmitt, Akten der Spruchkammer Starnberg, 1. Teil. 
98 See ※Keine Stungen des Weihnachtsgesch.fts. Eine Anordnung des Reichswirtschaftsministers,§ Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, 16. Jan. 1933, ibid. 99 For both the press and the Nazi reactions, see Schmitt＊s ※Judenpolitik w.hrend meiner Minis-terzeit,§ FHA, NL 1/77. 
The Nazi press simply did not report Schmitt＊s instructions on Jewish business, omitted portions of his speeches dealing with such issues, or consigned his policy statements to the back pages.100 Indeed, the Social Democrats in exile in Prague took note of Schmitt＊s problems, reporting that the Nazi left ※are raising a storm against Reich Economics Minister Schmitt, his capitalist course, and his moder-ate position on the Jewish question§ and that such protests against Schmitt were not a matter of single individuals but rather of the mass of Nazi supporters.101 
Schmitt＊s efforts did, to some extent, protect Allianz from attacks for hav-ing Jewish employees or Jewish shareholders. Thus, when the Breslau NSDAP spread reports that Allianz was not a pure German frm, Hilgard complained to State Secretary Feder. The latter not only confrmed that Allianz was ※a pure German enterprise in the sense of the NSDAP§ but went out to point out that ※our Frer would most certainly not have summoned the general director of this signifcant corporation to become Reich Economics Minister if there existed even the slightest doubt as to the pure German stance of your corporation with respect to its business.§ Feder authorized Hilgard to make use of this testimo-nial in its advertising and assured Hilgard that the Breslau Party offce would be appropriately instructed.102 Allianz did indeed make use of this letter by publishing it immediately in the Allianz-Zeitung, and it was not without posi-tive consequence. Thus, when the Mayor of Osterode wrote to the RAA asking whether Jewish capital did not play an important role in Neue Frankfurter, in which case he intended to change the insurer of the local schools, Neue Frank-furter＊s reaction was to point out that the company was largely under the control of Allianz and make reference to the Feder letter. The RAA not only responded to the mayor by repeating the company＊s remarks verbatim but also reminded him that the economics minister had instructed that ※the distinction between Aryans and non-Aryans [be] set aside in the economy.§103 
Although HitlerhadgivenSchmitt his verbalsupport onthisissueoneconomic grounds, Hitler himself did nothing to rein in his followers regarding their anti-Semitic practices. Schmitt＊s relations with Hitler seemed agreeable enough, the latter visiting Schmitt＊s Bavarian estate Tiefenbrunn on April 5, 1934. Family photos were taken of Hitler and Hitler＊s photographer Heinrich Hoffmann with the Schmitt family. It seems to have been a pleasant enough occasion, although Schmitt＊s efforts to discuss his Ministry problems proved disappointing. By this time, however, Schmitt was deeply distressed about his situation.104 
100 It is interesting that the Reich Association took note of this problem in an internal fle: ※Notiz. 
Berksichtigung der Kundgebungen des Reichswirtschaftsministers im Vkischen Beobachter,§ 
24. Okt. 1933,GDV, 8-020 P1/Kurt Schmitt. 101 Deutschland-Berichte der Sozialdemokratischen Partei Deutschlands, 1934,p. 20. 102 Feder an Hilgard, 24. Juli 1933,BAK,B 280/12237, Bl. 54. 103 Allianz-Zeitung 15 (1933), p. 214. RAA an den Bgermeister in Osterode, 5. Juni 1934, and 
related correspondence, BAK, B 280/13206, Bl. 58每61. 104 For the photos, see FHA, NL 1/174, 179, 182. On the visit, see Interrogation of Schmitt, July 9, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /58/3. 

Hitler and Schmitt at Schmitt＊s estate Tiefenbrunn, April 5, 1934. 
The acid test of Schmitt＊s performance as minister, after all, was his suc-cess in mastering the unemployment problem and reducing the trade defcit; his failure in both respects and inability to push through his policies weighed more and more on his spirits. He was also very concerned about improving Germany＊s external relations and had a highly successful visit to England in De-cember 1933, where he met the political and economic leaders, got on very well with Stanley Baldwin, and received favorable press as a German with whom one could do business.105 Similarly, despite considerable tensions between Germany and the United States, the American Ambassador Joseph E. Dodd (who consid-ered Schmitt a ※most loyal Hitlerite§) found his speeches on economic policy 
105 See the material in FHA, NL 1/65. 
※statesmanlike§ and even ※courageous in opposition to some Nazi policies,§ al-beit ※conservative.§106 
He was indeed conservative, and while willing to spend money productively in order to promote employment, he was sharply critical of unproductive expen-diture (especially for Party and military purposes) and of excessive expenditure on the Autobahns and other such projects instead of infrastructural and indus-trial constructions that were likely to have a longer-term payoff. Schmitt was particularly hostile to Hitler＊s policy of stockpiling chemicals and in other sec-tors potentially important for rearmament, regarding this as an uneconomic and wasteful approach to Germany＊s economic problems. He also opposed giving the German people the impression that some ※wonder§ was going to occur instead of giving them the sober news that they faced a hard upward economic strug-gle. While never particularly close to Reichsbank President Hjalmar Schacht, he nevertheless thought him an ally with respect to these questions when the two men agreed to visit Hitler at Obersalzberg in March 1934 to decide on future economic policy. Hitler was prepared to support Schmitt on all issues but one 每 military expenditure, which he viewed as the most ※productive§ expenditure of all because it was the only way Germany could overcome the disabilities created by Versailles and its inferior situation in the world. This meeting provided to be a ※turning point§ for Schmitt, not only because of Hitler＊s obvious insistence on military expenditure but also because Schacht immediately expressed agree-ment with Hitler, going so far as to say he was prepared to ruin the currency if necessary in order to achieve rearmament. Schmitt was horrifed by so ex-treme a statement coming from Schacht, not to mention what it suggested about Schacht＊s character, and while he was cautious enough at Schacht＊s postwar trial to say simply that he was disappointed that Schacht had not withheld comment until they could discuss the issue, Schmitt＊s account in his private reminiscences did report Schacht＊s pandering response to Hitler.107 
Schmitt now felt utterly trapped; while he soldiered on, he poured out his daily grievances over conditions at the Ministry to He.. He also became increasingly indiscreet. In a conversation with Ambassador Dodd on June 1, Schmitt rhetor-ically asked how one could make a trade treaty with the United States when German policy toward Jews and others produced such hostility. As Dodd noted: ※I have never seen a German statesman so much distressed, and I was quite sympathetic when he again and again referred to the folly of Hitler＊s policy.§108 Apparently, the fnal straw for Schmitt came when Dodd and a number of Amer-ican bankers who had given credits to the Saxon State Bank complained about 
106 See William E. Dodd, Jr., & Martha Dodd, Ambassador Dodd＊s Diary, 1933每1938 (London, 
1942), entries for July 14, 1933 (p. 26), January 31, 1934 (p. 89). 107 Zeugenaussage Schmitts in dem Spruchkammerverfahren gegen Hjalmar Schacht, 22. April 1947 
und 4. Aug. 1948, FHA, NL 1/77. The private comments on Schacht are to be found in FHA, 
NL 1/14. For the effect on the meeting at the Obersalzberg, see Schmitt to He., Nov. 26, 1945, 
FHA, NL 1/20. 108 Dodd, Diary (June 1, 1934), p. 116. See also the entries for June 13, 15, and 23 (pp. 121每2, 126). 
the arrest of the president of Saxon State Bank, Carl Degenhardt, and a number of other Saxon bankers by the Gauleiter of Saxony Martin Mutschmann on the basis of denunciations. Mutschmann rejected Schmitt＊s plea on the grounds that Schmitt was too new a member of the Party; when Schmitt went to Hitler, the latter handled the issue in a very dilatory manner. Degenhardt and the others were fnally released after a month in custody, but the entire episode 每 along with the other strains to which he was subjected 每 seem fnally to have broken Schmitt down, and he collapsed after giving a speech on June 28. He. had been with him shortly beforehand in the Tiergarten, and he noted that Schmitt did not want to put on another of his obligatory and increasingly frustrating speak-ing engagements and actually became so agitated that he turned pale and threw up. Although the basic cause of the collapse was a heart problem, there can be little question that the constant stress to which he had been subject played no small role in his condition.109 
It was a timely collapse, not only because it paved the way for Schmitt＊s res-ignation but also because he thereby missed the grim events of two days later: the Blood Purge of June 30, 1934, when Hitler, Himmler, and Goering moved against the SA and instigated the murder of Rm and other SA leaders as well as other opponents. Hitler, who paid the recuperating Schmitt a personal visit at his Berlin home on July 2, expressed sympathy with Schmitt＊s plight but also ※stated that he too was suffering in consequence of the attempted putsch launched by some of his closest collaborators.§110 Initially, Schmitt took a six-month leave because Hitler asked him to stay on as economics minister. Schmitt, who was also visited by Dodd, told the Ambassador that he wanted to resign but felt it was his duty to stay on. Dodd, however, had the impression that Schmitt feared being murdered if he resigned.111 Subsequently, Schmitt was able to persuade Hitler that his health would not permit his continuation in offce, and he was able to resign effective January 30, 1935. Hitler parted from Schmitt with a hand-shake and expressed the hope that they would be friends. He gave Schmitt a standing invitation to come to lunch at the Chancellory without going through offcial channels.112 Thus, Schmitt emerged from his high offce a persona grata, rather than the corpse that Dodd and perhaps Schmitt himself had feared he might soon become. Schacht, who took over as commissarial economics minis-ter, effectively inherited Schmitt＊s position and its problems. Schmitt had always felt that Schacht was more ※robust,§ and Schacht did survive his tenure as com-missarial minister (and, indeed, the Third Reich) in much better physical and psychological condition than Schmitt. 
109 Boelcke, Deutsche Wirtschaft, pp. 68每9; He. to Schmitt, Nov. 8, 1945,FHA, NL 1/20; and 
Schmitt expos谷 of June 1, 1945, AM, Spruchkammerakten Dr. Kurt Schmitt, Akten des Gene-
ralankl.gers, Teil II, pp. 11每12. 110 Interrogation of Schmitt, July 9, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2/58/3. 111 Dodd, Diary, July 4, 1934 (p. 129). 112 Interrogation of Schmitt, July 9, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2/58/3. 
As for Schmitt himself, he was overjoyed to leave offce and (after recuperat-ing for six months) return to Allianz in February 1935. He could not, of course, resume his old job, but he was well placed to infuence the fate of his old con-cern by his appointment as chairman of the supervisory board of Allianz Leben and deputy chairman of the supervisory board of Allianz. Schmitt had no inten-tion of resting on his laurels but instead anticipated using his positions, as Emil Bebler reported after a visit to Schmitt in Berlin, ※to again win decisive infuence on the leadership and fate of the ＆Allianz＊ companies. He is thinking of structur-ing his position in a manner analogous to that of a delegate in Switzerland. He has his own offce at ＆Allianz.＊ He does not simply want to visit ＆Allianz＊ daily but as before be exclusively active on behalf of the company.§113 
Nevertheless, Germany was not Switzerland, and Schmitt＊s position was for-mally an advisory one. The less lucrative but also less binding connection to Al-lianzencouragedhimtotake advantageofinvitationstodiversify hisinterestsand employ his restored energies. Thus, in 1935, Schmitt took on the chairmanship of the supervisory boards of AEG and Deutsche Continental Gas-Gesellschaft (Dessauer Gas). Signifcantly, his appointment to both companies was strongly promoted by Hans Fstenberg and Otto Jeidels of Berliner Handelsgesellschaft, the dominant bank in their supervisory boards. The two companies were in bad odor with the Nazis. The AEG, whose General Director Hermann Bher was a friend of Schmitt＊s, was viewed as a ※Jewish§ company because of the Jewish founder of the company, Emil Rathenau, his son Walther Rathenau (who served as Germany＊s Foreign Minister before being assassinated by right-wing killers in 1922), and the Jewish General Director Felix Deutsch. The company had ex-perienced considerable fnancial diffculties in the Weimar period. Bher was anxious to promote its recovery and improve its position for government con-tracts. As for Dessauer Gas, it had been rocked by a fnancial scandal connected with its General Director Bruno Heck, who went to jail and was replaced by Ministerial Director Eduard Schalfejew.114 
As an ex-minister with good contacts in high places, Schmitt was a political asset not only to Allianz but also to these corporations. His disappointments as economics minister by no means changed his attitude toward working with the regime for the good of the business community. Apparently wishing to main-tain contact, he took up Hitler＊s invitation to lunch three or four times prior to the 1938 Munich Crisis, after which the luncheons ceased. While he found that the luncheons 每 involving as they did some ten or ffteen people 每 did not pro-vide much opportunity to talk directly with Hitler about anything serious, his attendance did place him in a special category of persons. Furthermore, his SS connections intensifed after he left offce. While Schmitt had offered to resign from his honorary SS position when he left offce, Himmler would not consider 
113 Bebler report, July 11, 1935, SR, Feuer 11. 114 See his statement of June 1, 1945,FHA,NL 1/73, and Fstenberg to von Stau., May 11, 1935, 
BAB, R 8119 F/P 496, Bl. 213每15. 
it; indeed, Himmler promoted Schmitt to the rank of Brigadefrer shortly after-ward. About the same time, Schmitt became a member of Himmler＊s ※circle of friends§ through Fritz Kranefuss. The model for the Himmler Circle was the so-called Keppler Circle, a group of businessmen organized (by Hitler＊s economic adviser, Wilhelm Keppler, before the seizure of power) to provide economic ideas to the Party and support the Nazis. Kranefuss was Keppler＊s nephew and had been his aide, but he now struck out on his own in the service of Himmler with a similar circle. At the behest of Himmler, Kranefuss had issued a number of invitations to Schmitt to attend meetings of the Circle, and eventually Schmitt did show up at one of them. He also took advantage of his connection with Kranefuss to try to stop the SS publication Das Schwarze Korps from regularly attacking Allianz. Kranefuss obliged Schmitt, but then suggested that Schmitt (and the companies with which he was involved) should make a contribution to the Circle in return. Schmitt felt it was only reasonable to do so in light of present and potential future services, but he soon discovered that what he thought would be a one-time contribution for 1935 turned out to be an annual request made by the Circle＊s treasurer, the Cologne banker Kurt von Schrer. Thus, until 1941每1942, Allianz and AEG provided the Himmler Circle with 12,000每15,000 RM yearly; Munich Re gave 6,000 RM a year and Dessauer Gas provided 6,000每 8,000 RM a year.115 
It was not long, however, before the restive Schmitt was able to return to a full-time general directorship in the insurance business, thanks to the retirement of Kisskalt from his post at Munich Re in late 1937. Given the close relationship between Munich Re and Allianz (which was to become even closer), this ap-pointment increased Schmitt＊s engagement with both concerns. He. was active in promoting Schmitt＊s appointment in negotiations with von Finck and Kisskalt, but he also felt that Schmitt should adhere to a standing principle that he him-self had introduced: that concern directors and certainly the general director should dedicate themselves exclusively to their jobs and should not hold super-visory posts in other large concerns. Schmitt, however, made his continuation as supervisory board chairman in AEG and Dessauer a precondition of his taking the general directorship of Munich Re; to He.＊s irritation, he later entered the supervisory board of Lwenbr.u brewery and then joined (and became head of) Sdeutsche Zucker AG, whose headquarters were located in his native Palati-nate. When Schmitt tried to palliate He. by informing the latter of his decision 每 recounting how many offers he had turned down and assuring He. that he had a special interest in the sugar business 每 He. could not refrain from reiterating his principled objections and calling for a formal abrogation of the principle that Schmitt had broken, even though He. had no intention of taking advantage of 
115 See Interrogation of Schmitt, July 9, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2/58/3, which dis-cusses the luncheons with Hitler and these other matters. On Kranefuss, see the references in Turner, Big Business, pp. 244, 257, 432 n68; on the Himmler Circle, see Reinhard Vogelsang, Der Freundeskreis Himmler (Gtingen, 1972). 
it. Schmitt＊s response was to claim that the principle in question applied only to banks, since it was important for Allianz not to favor one bank over the other. Yet this claim rings rather hollow, and Schmitt＊s second argument appears more to the point: 
My entry into some large enterprises as chairman of the supervisory board had its cause in my special situation as former Reich Economics Minister and my temporary departure from the insurance business. It would have been both personally and objectively false for me to give up this so important and strong position, for there can be no doubt about the fact that my important infuence also with respect to Munich Re and Allianz, is not only based on my earlier ministerial position and the personal connections tied to it but above all on my present infuence with large enterprises.116 
Schmitt had certainly lost whatever political ambitions he may have had. It is noteworthy that he turned down the offer of the very important Ambassador-ship to Great Britain in 1936, suggested to him by von Ribbentrop and formally offered by Hitler himself, and that he later refused requests by Himmler and Ging that he go back to the Economics Ministry after Schacht was forced to resign in early 1937. In both cases he pleaded health as the reason.117 What all this suggested, however, is that he felt healthiest doing what he knew how to do best; he intended to capitalize on his political connections and expand his power and infuence in the world of business. Whatever his bad experiences and dis-appointments as one of Nazi Germany＊s rulers, he was not going to let them interfere with his ambitions. 
116 Schmitt to He., July 15, 1940; see also Schmitt to He., June 26, 1940, and He. to Schmitt, July 
1, 1940, FHA, NL 1/161. 117 See Interrogation of Schmitt, July 15, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /58/3. 
3 

Adaptation and Aryanization 
the extent and limits of nazification at allianz 
The Allianz concern fared quite well during the years before the Second World War. The new regime did create certain novel diffculties and demands, and these intensifed once the Four-Year Plan for German rearmament was launched in late 1936 and the radicalization of its domestic and foreign policies acceler-ated. Nevertheless, the necessary adaptations were made with reasonable suc-cess. It is useful to remember that the German business community 每 thanks to war, revolution, infation, and depression 每 had ceased to have the experi-ence of engaging in ※normal§ business activity for a sustained period of time since 1914 and had reached the point where even the appearance of normal-ity was welcome. The Nazi regime had the advantage over its predecessors of being able to stamp out the old rebelliousness of the businessmen through its dictatorial practices. Some of the atmosphere of these years was captured tren-chantly in 1936 by a well-known and well-connected Jewish industrialist who had fed to Turkey and there encountered some of the major German industrial leaders with whom he had worked over the years: ※The industrial and personal manner of operating of all these gentlemen has hardly changed from what it was before. One hardly speaks of politics, and one always has the feeling that they also actually do not know anything and also do not at all want to know anything.§1 
This was indeed to the point, as leading businessmen concentrated primarily on business. In 1938, Allianz collected 204,599,046 RM in premiums, thus sub-stantially exceeding the 196,226,938 RM collected in 1930 (the previous best year in the concern＊s history) and showing the extent of recovery that had taken place since its worst year, 1933, when total collected premiums were 145,670,886 RM. The same pattern holds for Allianz Leben, which collected 212,470,280 RM in 1938, thus also exceeding its previous best year of 1930 
1 Max von der Porten to Hans Sch.ffer, June 28, 1936, Sch.ffer Papers, Leo Baeck Institute (New 
York), Box II, Folder 2, O-Z, 1936. The industrialists to whom Porten was referring were Albert 
Vler, Peter Klkner, and Wolfgang Reuter. 
106 
(when it collected 151,009,019 RM) and demonstrating the substantial recovery from the 128,809,515 RM collected in 1933. There had been improvements in all types of policies provided by Allianz, but the biggest increases (as in 1937) were in automobile insurance, refecting the regime＊s emphasis on motorization, and in industrial fre insurance, which was a consequence of the massive increase in economic activity. Whereas in the early years of the regime Allianz had noted diminished profts due to the need to hire and retain redundant employees, by 1938 the pressure to employ more persons had been replaced with an empha-sis on rationalization, especially through the introduction of more machinery. The total size of the combined ※retinue,§ as the employees and workers were now archaically called, had been reduced at Allianz and Allianz Leben for the frst time in years, from 13,653 to 13,511 (i.e., by 1%). The trends of 1938 con-tinued into 1939, and Allianz had high hopes of massive cost and personnel reduction through the development, in cooperation with Siemens, of a book-ing and registration machine that would permit two employees to do the work 
2
of 200. 
Manifestly, it made more economic sense for Allianz (or any other company) to cut costs by rationalization than to lose money by hiring or retaining redun-dantemployees, but both policies were dictated by the regime＊s political decisions and the manner in which it defned both the economic situation and appropriate responses to it. It was precisely National Socialism＊s capacity to marshal pri-vate initiative and enterprise 每 and even to encourage forms of inventiveness and creativity useful to the regime 每 that explains so much of the system＊s success. The difference made by the regime lay in its exclusive power to defne the soci-etal (above all, racial) goals toward which members of the ※national community§ were to work and, once the regime had stabilized, to determine the imperialist international goals it was bent on realizing. 
At the same time, National Socialism also made itself felt on the level of everyday life by rewarding those who employed National Socialist language and ritualistic behavior in the conduct of their daily affairs and by requir-ing that activities be conducted in such contexts. While true believers had no trouble meeting these requirements, those who were not (and those who were skeptical) were necessarily driven on the path to various degrees of inner corruption by constantly having to behave in the required manner in order to protect and promote their interests. The more they internalized such be-havior, the less it mattered in a practical sense whether or not they believed what they were saying and doing. Their political correctness required ※cor-rect§ language as well, which in turn further reinforced the requisite ※cor-rect§ political behavior. This was especially evident in the case of Eduard Hil-gard, who as factory leader of Allianz and as leader of the Reich Group for 
2 Gesch.ftsbericht 1933,p. 52, and Gesch.ftsbericht 1938, pp. 7每11, FHA; Kisch, Ffzig Jahre Al-lianz, p. 134, 165, 208; Aktenvermerk Moesler, 5.Mai 1939, BAB, 80 Ba 2 /P 5787. 
Insurance became a master of the Lingua Tertii Imperii (Language of the Third Reich).3 
Hilgard＊s position as factory leader was made much easier by the end of collec-tive bargaining, which relieved him and his colleagues of a good deal of tedious negotiation and simplifed their industrial relations work. As Hilgard noted at the director＊s meeting of May 1934, the steward＊s councils had the sole function of advising management; but the fnal decisions lay with the plant leader and, ※in contrast to the old factory council, the steward＊s council has no independent functions.§ The new councils were not even allowed to meet without the plant leader being present, although a meeting had to be summoned if at least half the steward＊s council asked for one.4 
Nevertheless, this was no simple restoration of pre-1918 authoritarianism in labor relations, since neither simple obedience to employers nor paternalism was deemed suffcient. The DAF and its leaders were serious about promoting a new sense of ※community§ in enterprises and wanted to assure the workers that the new regime was looking out for the welfare of employees and not simply serv-ing the interests of management. In the case of Allianz, it is diffcult to tell how much the measures taken by Allianz refected its long-standing modern manage-rial policies and how much they involved pandering to the DAF. Although some of the actions taken by Schmitt in May 1933 with respect to employee bonuses and work creation obviously were politically motivated, there was considerable continuity with past practices in the social policies of the concern. Thus, in May 1934, the concern established a Dr. Schmitt每Dr. He. Foundation to pro-vide assistance to Allianz insurance salesmen who got into fnancial diffculty through no fault of their own; the concern also provided substantial sums for its sport clubs, vacation homes, canteens, pensions, and other company welfare programs.5 It is interesting that Allianz did not make signifcant mention of its social programs in its business reports until the Propaganda Ministry and the DAF began in early 1937 to pressure insurance companies to say more about their social programs in their business reports. Allianz complied by publishing an extensive social report within its business report for 1936, which came out in June 1937. The report mentioned that the company was exceeding the salaries stated in the existing scales, and it also noted the Christmas bonus amount-ing to 60% of a month＊s pay, a special bonus for the end of the fscal year, the special benefts provided to war-disabled individuals, and the increased vaca-tion time it had introduced. Allianz duly noted improvements made in recent years 每 its collaboration with the DAF＊s ※Strength through Joy§ program (in-tended to organize and control leisure and recreational activities for Germany＊s labor force), training programs for youth, and instruction for future mothers 每 and much stress was placed on how old were many of the social welfare benefts 
3 Viktor Klemperer, LTI. Notizbuch eines Philologen (Leipzig, 1975). 4 See Hilgard＊s remarks at the 23. erweiterte Vorstandssitzung am 4.Mai 1934,FHA,S 17.2 /4. 
5 
Ibid. 
(especially the sports programs, but also the pension benefts) provided by the company.6 
However, the important thing was to please the Nazis, a rather costly and try-ing affair. When the concern directors met in October 1935, for example, they seem to have decided to show some resistance to Nazi social demands. Thus, Hilgard, He., and Schmitt all agreed that it was impossible to hire more per-sonnel to improve employment. They were also concerned about rising costs because of increasing taxes and what they termed (with quotations inserted by the authors of the meeting＊s minutes) ※voluntary expenditures.§ The situation had certainly improved since the early days of the regime, when companies were exposed to wild and unpredictable demands of various kinds by the SA, SS, and other Nazi organizations and agencies for what was often tantamount to protection money. Donations to Nazi causes had now been organized and regu-larized in the Adolf Hitler Donation of the German Business Community. Nazi agencies and organizations were formally barred from solicitations of compa-nies that contributed to the Hitler Donation, and Allianz had actually used its certifcate of contribution to the Hitler Donation to refuse further donations to the SS Group East in September 1933. 7 Added to the Hitler donation, how-ever, were various donations made through the private insurance group of the Reich Group for Insurance; there were also ※winter help§ donations, which all employees made to assist the poor and which were usually collected by payroll deduction.8 There is good evidence, however, that neither the government nor the enterprises were able to free themselves from pressures for other donations, since the Curatorium for the Adolf Hitler Donation had to send out a circular in May 1937 warning frms against making other donations and thereby fnding it diffcult or impossible to contribute to the Hitler Donation.9 
Indeed, the insurance industry made substantial donations to the House of German Art in Munich, and the lead in the support of this pet project of Hitler＊s was taken by August von Finck, chairman of the supervisory boards of both Al-lianz and Munich Re. Exactly how fanatical a Nazi von Finck was is a contested issue that will be discussed later in connection with his wartime performance, but he was defnitely anxious to cultivate the National Socialists from the very beginning of the regime, if not earlier. His importance in Bavarian business cir-cles, as well as in the banking industry, made him a logical choice to head the Curatorium of the House of German Art. Von Finck was to prove a champion fundraiser, collecting 12 million RM between the laying of the cornerstone of 
6 For the pressure to include social reports in the business reports, see the Sitzung des Beirats der 
Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung, 11. M.rz 1937, pp. 16每21,GDV, RS/14. For the frst Social 
Report of Allianz, see Gesch.ftsbericht 1936, pp. 13每16,FHA. 
7 Sitzung des Allgemeinen Pr.sidialausschusses des Reichsverbandes der Privatversicherung, 19. Sept. 1933,p. 10,GDV,RS/12. 8 See the Rundschreiben of May 5, 1933, June 12, 1933, July 21 and 27, 1933, and Sept. 17, 1934,in FHA, S 17.7/61; the Rundschreiben of Sept. 10 and Oct. 3, 1935, in ibid./62. 9 Rundschreiben vom 8.Mai 1937, ibid./63. 
the building in October 1933 and its grand opening in 1937, and then collecting another 8 million RM between 1939 and 1942 for a second structure intended by Hitler for the display of architectural designs (because of the war, it was never built). At Hilgard＊s instigation, the Reich Association for Private Insurance pro-vided 300,000 RM in 1933. Von Finck sat to the right of Hitler at the banquet to celebrate the laying of the cornerstone and at subsequent gala events connected with the museum, and he frequently accompanied Hitler when the latter visited the museum. In these activities, he worked closely with the Gauleiter of Mu-nich, Adolf Wagner, to whose pet charities and causes he and other prominent businessmen (among them insurance executives of the Allianz concern) gave sub-stantial donations.10 
Munich Re was especially engaged in the House of German Art events, and used the occasion of the cornerstone laying in 1933 to invite no fewer than 76 foreign business leaders for the purpose of providing them with a more favorable view of the new Germany. They were given choice seats at the theatre and other events, especially those where they could gain a more favorable impression of Hitler than they had received from their newspapers. The Munich Re leadership felt that their guests came away with a more positive view of the Nazi regime. It reported approvingly, for example, of one Swedish insurance executive and city council member who had not only attended the festivities in Munich but had also taken advantage of his stay to tour a concentration camp. He then wrote articles asserting that conditions were not as bad as had been claimed, and he also reported favorably on the trial of the Communists accused of burning down the Reichstag.11 
Even where one could escape courting the new regime with cash payments 每 apparently quite diffcult in Munich, the ※Capital City of the Movement,§ which was under the sway of the especially rapacious Gauleiter Adolf Wagner 每 one still courted it with demonstrations of ideological loyalty. The DAF was an especially money-hungry organization (which caused much complaining among employ-ees) whose fnancial demands Allianz also sought to resist as best it could. At the October 1935 meeting of the directors, Hilgard made it clear that he wanted ev-eryone in the concern (including the leading offcials) to join the DAF, but he also declined to make any contributions to the fnancing of ※Strength through Joy§ tourist trips because expenditures on Allianz holiday homes ※has already reached the limits of the bearable.§12 Hilgard was thus anxious to display his enthusiasm for the DAF but to keep its costs within reason. This policy was demonstrated 
10 See the interrogation of August von Finck of Sept. 23 and 25, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, 
FINAD, 2/57/4, and the acknowledgment of the Reichsverband donation of Jan. 4, 1934,inGDV, 
RS/5. 11 Bericht er die Einladungen ausl.ndischer G.ste zum ※Tag der Deutschen Kunst§ durch die 
Mchener Rkversicherungs-Gesellschaft und Auswirkungen dieser Besuche, Okt. 1933,MR, 
B 3/3. 12 26. erweiterte Vorstandssitzung am 29. Okt. 1935,FHA,S 17.2 /4. 
on February 3, 1936, when 3,000 Berlin employees of Allianz assembled in the Kroll Opera House for a ※comradely evening§ to celebrate that 每 ※fnally,§ as the Vkischer Beobachter remarked13 每 the entire staff of the Allianz concern in Berlin had joined the DAF. DAF leader Robert Ley himself graced the meeting with his presence, and Hilgard＊s speech on the occasion stressed that the success of bringing everyone into the fold was more than a matter of the concern＊s re-cruitment effort: ※We see in it the united manifestation of the will of our frm to bear witness to the Frer and his work, and believe that there is no better way to celebrate the anniversary of the transfer of power to National Socialism than through the manifestation of this will.§ Since this was the frst time Ley had vis-ited a private insurance company, Hilgard made a special point of reciting all the social benefts and expenditures Allianz provided its employees. Nevertheless 每 and typical of the speeches Hilgard gave during these years 每 he also stressed the importance of maintaining the enterprise＊s proftability and competitiveness. The task of the ※true plant leader in the National Socialist State§ was not to make himself popular at the expense of the viability of the concern, but rather to serve the community and make social expenditure possible by remaining f-nancially strong and competitive.14 
This effort to cast principles of private enterprise into the mold of National Socialist rhetoric and thereby drive home a political point in no way deterred Ley from suggesting that other things counted more than proft and making his own political points. Unlike the Allianz newspaper, the Vkischer Beobachter reported Ley as saying that the ※Strength through Joy§ movement, which he de-fned as a great idealistic venture, depended on supplementary funds of at least 200每300 million RM but had received only a small portion in the past two years and was likely to receive nothing in the current year.15 The point could hardly have been lost on Hilgard. Ley, caught up as usual in the spell of National So-cialist rhetoric, responded more generally to Hilgard＊s report by defning two worlds: one, ※that of the present, the German, Nordic, productive people who have found their realization in National Socialism, and the other, that of the past, in which all the elements of decomposition express themselves.§ He went on to argue that it was indeed false to treat idealism and economy as being in opposi-tion since ※we National Socialists have demonstrated in three years that there is only one economy, one reality: it is faith and nothing else!§ National Socialists were certainly fexible; Hitler himself had declared at the Nuremberg Party rally that the essence of their economic doctrine was to have no doctrine whatever. What counted was performance. This was as true in insurance as anywhere else and, as Ley pointedly remarked: ※If the private companies perform more than 
13 Vkischer Beobachter, 5.Feb. 1936, pp. 1每2. It is interesting to note that while Allianz was men-
tioned in the caption showing Ley speaking to the assemblage, the article refers only to ※an§ 
insurance company. 14 Allianz-Zeitung 18 (1936), pp. 47每9. 15 Vkischer Beobachter, 5.Feb. 1936,p. 2. 
the public, then the private ones are the right way. But if the public companies perform more, then the public ones are the right way. Show what you can do!§16 
Most of the performance that interested Ley, however, had little to do with proftability or work effciency but rather with worker mobilization and ideo-logical indoctrination 每 as well as empire building of the DAF. Employers and workers were expected to devote not only money but also time and energy to the new order. At Allianz, adaptation to donating employer and worker time to regime celebrations, announcements, and events was already evident in March 1934, when the Propaganda Ministry ordered all working places in the Reich to participate in the March 21 Great Fighting Day, slated to open the Labor Struggle that would be introduced by Hitler himself at the construction site of the Autobahn running from Munich to the Austrian border. The management not only set aside an hour of the regular working day to hear Hitler＊s speech but also instructed the various branches of the concern to purchase the neces-sary sound equipment and radios, since renting them for such occasions (which could be expected to repeat themselves) would be very expensive.17 This was indeed a sound and necessary investment, because there were to be numerous occasions when work would cease and both employers and employees would be expected to listen in common to speeches and pronouncements. Even more im-portant were the plant roll calls, organized demonstrations, and celebrations, as well as other events during and outside the working day where attendance was expected. Bayerische Versicherungsbank, for example, held no less than three such events in the spring of 1938 in connection with the annexation of Aus-tria. The demonstration on April 6 before the plebiscite of April 10 (aimed at securing public acclamation of the Anschlu.) was attended by everyone in the company, from General Director Arendts to the youngest apprentice. Arendts, who had joined the Party on May 1, 1933, gave an enthusiastic speech, while the DAF representatives emphasized the importance of voting positively in the ※election.§18 The Allianz orchestra was regularly featured at the November 9, January 30, May Day, and other National Socialist occasions, both festive and solemn, in Berlin. So were leading directors, not only Hilgard but also his deputy Paul Lux, a member of the Party, and Director Georg Kig. Choral speaking and singing were an important part of such events.19 At Allianz Leben in Stutt-gart, Directors Arno Eberhard, Hans Parthier, and Alwin Dietz 每 all identifed as members of the Party 每 assembled on December 31, 1937, to celebrate the past year, look forward to 1938, and listen as plant steward Willi Haag (who had be-gun his career in insurance back in 1913 and was a veteran Party and SA man who had founded the NSBO cell in Stuttgart in 1931) expressed his appreciation 
16 
Ibid. 17 Rundschreiben der Verwaltungsabteilung an die Zweigniederlassungen, 14. M.rz 1934,FHA, S 
17.6/8. 18 Allianz-Adler, May 1938, pp. 17每18, FHA, B 3.6/2. 19 The Allianz-Adler is flled with such reports, e.g., Feb. 1939, pp. 12每13, ibid. 
to management for the day＊s festivities. Eberhard himself, in a speech flled with military imagery, emphasized the need for solidarity between the internal and external service in the company and celebrated Hitler and his works.20 Such plant roll-call meetings were held every month at Neue Frankfurter, and one had to admit that it was no easy task to make them equally interesting and stimulat-ing. Thus, Neue Frankfurter was praised by the DAF in 1939 for its imaginative approach in proposing a kind of ※question and answer game§ in which Party comrade and Director Alfred Wiedemann would stand at the microphone (with his fellow comrade and plant steward Finzer and his DAF colleague Simon) and respond to questions about company matters and problems of concern to the ※retinue.§ Although questions from the audience were planned, time proved too short for the projected question-and-answer period to take place. The focus was on bread-and-butter issues, like rumors that there would be no yearly bonus or organizational questions in the automobile insurance sector.21 Critical com-ments or thinking that went beyond such matters obviously were not in order. As the Socialist underground reported of one Berlin insurance company: ※Any sort of critical conversation is impossible in this company, although the employ-ees in part were very active before the revolution. There is so little collegiality that no one trusts the other a bit, and anyone who at some time said a word too many speedily strives to wipe away the bad impression.§22 What employees and managers actually thought of all the aforementioned roll calls and meetings mat-tered little. Attendance was compulsory, and the courts ruled that unexcused absence was suffcient reason for immediate dismissal.23 
The goal of Ley was to create a community of labor with a new identity using the omnipresent Swastika, rituals, and activities at the workplace 每 the ※second home§ of employees. The intention was to ※educate§ employees to accept a new value system. An important element in this process for Ley and the DAF was the creation of uniformed plant brigades of young male workers over 18 who would serve a vanguard function in the factories and plants in carrying out DAF goals. The effort to create such brigades began in 1935 and was viewed with some sus-picion by other high Nazi authorities. They viewed (and not without reason) the program and Ley＊s other bursts of organizational energy as efforts to build up his DAF empire with yet another uniformed troop as well as costly enterprises aimed, like the ※Strength through Joy§ program, at securing popular support and participation. At the Berlin offces of Allianz, the local DAF leadership in No-vember 1936 recruited some SA men and other volunteers to set about organizing 
20 Allianz-Adler, Feb. 1938, pp. 8每9, ibid. On Haag, see ibid., April 1938,p. 18. Eberhard ap-
plied for membership in the Party on May 1, 1933, and formally become a member in 1935. See 
his denazifcation proceeding before the Spruchkammer in Stuttgart, Oct. 21, 1946, Staatsarchiv 
Ludwigsburg, E902 /20,AZ 17/8068. 21 Allianz-Adler, April 1939,p. 11,FHA,B 3.6/2. 22 Deutschland-Berichte der Sozialdemokratischer Partei Deutschlands 1937,p. 820. 23 Allianz-Adler, Dec. 1938,p. 8,Feb. 1939,p. 11,FHA,B 3.6/2. 

Wilhelm Arendts, general director of Bayerische Versicherungsbank, making a speech to the headquarters staff in Munich, March 13, 1939: ※The plant community of the kind we need must be formed out of the good will of each individual member. Each person must be consumed with the consciousness that ＆this is my plant＊.§ Note the company brigade behind the lectern. 
a brigade. Following a roll-call meeting in March 1937 at which Director Lux announced Allianz＊s support of the effort and the program was explained to the ※retinue,§ 80 employees joined the 55 that had already signed up. Thanks to fur-ther organizing work at various solemn ceremonies 每 one of them, in celebration of the summer solstice, a public display of the brigade＊s capacities in marching, choral singing, and choral speaking at a craftsmen＊s congress in Berlin 每 the mem-bership rose to 172. This paved the way, ※at long last,§ for the ※marching out§ of the brigade on Saturday, January 22, 1938, in Berlin-Zehlendorf, where it put on a display of its marching skills and the talents of its mouth-harmonica band. Bayerische Versicherungsbank also had a very active and visible brigade of 144 men, which included its own marching band and a conductor who produced a special march, ※Comrades Are We.§ The Allianz-Adler,24 a DAF newspaper that frst appeared in January 1937 intending to report on activities of ※plant commu-nities§ throughout the Allianz concern (but totally separate from the concern＊s Allianz-Zeitung), made no bones about the military character of the brigade. 
24 The Allianz-Adler is to be found in FHA, B 3.6/2每3. 
In contrast to other efforts to create special bodies of workers like the guilds, the Christian organizations, and the political trade unions, the brigades would be successful precisely because they were uniformed. Military forms were most ※natural§ for Germans, and the brigade was ※the visible expression of the ac-tivistsmarchingtogether,thedisciplinedSocialistfrontintheplants.§ Ontheone hand, the brigades were intended to replace the NSBO and assume its previous functions plus new ones. On the other hand, they were part of an effort by Ley to link up with the SA, which had been cast into the shadows after the Rm purge. Thus, SA men played an important role in organizing the brigade in Allianz＊s Berlinoffcesand, inStuttgart, theAllianzbrigadejoinedwithotherbrigadesand the local SA to celebrate January 30, 1938, by inducting 500 persons (presumably from the brigades) into the SA. While the more grandiose hopes Ley placed in the brigades were to be disappointed as they remained restricted to the plant level, they were nevertheless a prominent presence in Allianz＊s self-presentations dur-ing these years and seem to have attracted some of the younger male employees.25 
Furthermore, the brigades were expected to play a leading role in connection with other programs launched by Ley that kept Allianz managers and employ-ees busy during these years: the Performance Competition of German Factories, the Reich Skills Competition, and various DAF prizes culminating in being des-ignated an NS Model Factory. One of Ley＊s major goals was to have the DAF take over vocational training; one of his chief inspirations was Professor Karl Arnhold, who had organized the German Institute for Technical Labor Training (Dinta) during the Weimar Republic and was a major proponent of the anti每 trade union plant community concept favored by many industrialists. Arnhold strongly supported a more militaristic organization of the labor force and fa-vored a combination of technical and ideological training 每 just the sort of thing Ley believed. The Dinta, along with Arnhold (who joined the Party), was ab-sorbed into the DAF, and it was Arnhold who cooked up the various individual skills competitions, a sort of Olympics for works, and competition among plants for recognition as models of National Socialist organization. These programs were an important accompaniment to the Four-Year Plan launched in 1936,but they also provided the DAF with a mechanism by which to investigate and evalu-ate practically every aspect of the competing enterprises: productivity; relations between employers and employed; social policies and welfare measures; and, of course, the ideological disposition of management and ※retinue.§26 Promoted with a vast amount of advertising, it was impossible for a concern so prominent as Allianz not to take part, although business and various government ministries and agencies worked to temper some of the more excessive ambitions of Ley in 
25 On the brigades, see Smelser, Robert Ley, pp. 204每7, and Allianz-Adler, April 1938, pp. 11每13, 
FHA, B 3.6/2. For the Bavarian brigade, see the publication celebrating the new building of the 
Bayerische Versicherungsbank, ※Dies Haus ist Euer Haus! Unser Betriebsjahr 1938,§ pp. 52每3, 
FHA B 3.6/4. 26 Smelser, Robert Ley, pp. 191每7. 
connection with these programs. Allianz, with its long-standing emphasis on corporate welfare programs, sports, good working conditions, vacation homes, pensions, and the like, had a good foundation for scoring well in such compe-tition. It is not impossible that even He., otherwise cold to National Socialist ideology, may have respected some of Arnhold＊s ideas, and it is signifcant that a picture of He. standing alongside Arnhold 每 the latter in Party uniform with a Swastika armband 每 was chosen for the volume of photos accompanying the Allianz fftieth anniversary volume. It most certainly would not have appeared without He.＊s approval.27 
Allianz＊s participation in these competitions, which began in 1937, was politi-cally important, especially given its conficts with the DAF and the publicly char-tered insurance companies. Thus, considerable notice was taken of the number of Allianz personnel throughout Germany who competed with varying degrees of success in the Reich Skills Competition.28 In 1939, Allianz boasted two vic-tors at the Reich level, fourteen at the Gau (regional) level, and a substantial number at the district level. Especially important, however, was the success of the various branches of Allianz in the Performance Competition of German Fac-tories. In 1939, seven Allianz branches or offces qualifed for the lowest level of prize, the Gau Diploma for outstanding performance, while another eight re-ceived honorary mention and yet another for its support of the ※Strength through Joy§ and its training program. In 1941, the Frankfurt branch and Bayerische Ver-sicherungsbank, as well as branches or offces in Danzig, Halle, Cologne, and Nuremberg, had received the Gau Diploma three times, while the Augsburg offce was a four-time winner.29 
The competition for these diplomas was keen, and they were not given with-out a thorough investigation of conditions at the branch＊s offces. Happily, the reports on the Cologne branch survived; they provide an interesting picture of conditions at the branch and also at Allianz more generally. Although the con-cern was deconcentrated, many of the basic policies toward labor were uniform throughout the company. The Cologne branch did have the advantage of one of the most modern buildings in the Rhineland; it had been opened in 1933 and by 1941 was considered by the DAF to be a serious candidate for the status of a Model Plant. It employed 640 persons (200 of them women) and its plant leader was Director Otto Wz, who was a Party member. Indeed, the Cologne branch had 115 Party members in its ranks, along with 19 members of the Hitler Youth and 23 members of the League of German Girls. DAF membership was required for employment, and the brigade consisted of 22 men. Hence the Cologne branch was politically a very correct place, but it was also praised for being a good place to work. Special provision was made for female employees, especially if they 
27 See Allianz-Zeitung, 1937,p. 225, and 50 Jahre Allianz. Eine Chronik in Bildern (Berlin, 1940), 
p. 68. 28 Allianz-Adler, April 1938,p. 10,May 1938, pp. 12每13,FHA,B 3.6/2. 29 Gesch.ftsbericht 1940,p. 14, FHA, and Allianz-Adler, May每June 1941,p. 1,FHA,B 3.6/2. 

New building of Allianz branch in Cologne on Kaiser-Wilhelm-Ring 31, opened May 1933. 
became pregnant. The apprentice training program met DAF standards, and young workers were given an opportunity for both schooling and sports within working hours. The pay and bonus arrangements were in conformity with the rest of the concern, and employees had access to the fve vacation homes main-tained by the company. The DAF offcials were especially impressed with the modern, well-lit, clean, and comfortable work facilities, the new and modern canteen used by 90% of the staff, the spaces allocated for sports, the growing library and its regular use by the ※retinue,§ the attention given to health, the facilities for rest and relaxation, the vacation program, and the participation in ※Strength through Joy§ programs. Labor relations were deemed excellent. It was, in other words, precisely the sort of workplace that the DAF sought to promote, and one has the sense that the Cologne branch 每 like Allianz it-self 每 found it relatively easy to adapt many of the practices and policies it had already been pursuing to the special demands of the DAF; they were simply poured into a National Socialist mold, and this apparently was not a diffcult task.30 
How deep nazifcation went is a more diffcult 每 indeed, impossible 每 ques-tion to answer, and undoubtedly the degrees of commitment to the regime varied 
30 For the reports by and on the Cologne branch of 1938 and 1941, see BAB, NS 5 IV/260, Bl. 1每19. 
from individual to individual and also at different times between 1933 and 1945. If Cologne were to be taken as a measure then the number of Party members among employees was signifcant, but there is no evidence that it was typical in this regard. Certainly there were enough genuine National Socialists employed at Allianz to ensure that the proper ※spirit§ and ※attitude§ were maintained by the mass of their colleagues. It is reasonable to suppose that, as in the case of Hilgard, Party membership among the directors was often opportunistic and involved little personal conviction. Among the so-called plant leaders (e.g., Hil-gard, Lux, Arendts, and Wz) it was a virtual requirement. After the war, Arendts, who had been a member of the Bavarian People＊s Party and was a practicing Catholic, admitted that he had joined the Party in 1933 partially in the hope that it would take an evolutionary path but also because it appeared advisable as the general director of a major enterprise in the ※Capital City of the Movement.§ To all external appearances, Arendts seemed to have trans-formed himself into a devoted National Socialist, was a member of several Nazi organizations in addition to the Party, and was known to deliver National So-cialist speeches on public occasions. Indeed, the Bavarian Minister of Justice in 1933每1934 (and later head of the Generalgouvernement in Poland), Hans Frank, had asked Arendts to be a founding member and treasurer of the Academy for German Law in 1933, just as he had asked Kisskalt to serve as head of the Acad-emy＊s committee on shareholder law and von Finck to serve as chairman of the committee on banks and stock exchanges. Arendts was not a jurist and was ob-viously chosen for his business connections to help Frank in his fundraising. At the same time, however, Arendts developed something of a reputation for pro-tecting political opponents of Nazism and even Jews, half-Jews, and persons related to Jews. He was plagued by a particularly fanatical Nazi cell, which actually complained to (Gauleiter of Munich) Adolf Wagner in late 1938 or 1939 that Arendts and his family were devout Catholics with Jewish relations who protected political undesirables while sending Party loyalists in manage-ment to other posts. They lamented the protection that he seemed to enjoy from Hans Frank. As later developments were to show, there were good reasons to be suspicious of Arendt＊s devotion to National Socialism, but Arendts was stun-ningly successful in appearing ※brown on the outside§ while remaining ※black on the inside.§31 
He.＊s situation was simpler by comparison. Although general director, he had deliberately refused the plant leadership (which he left to Hilgard and Lux) 
31 It was a measure of Arendts＊s success that Frank chose to appoint him an honorary member of the economic law group of the NS Lawyer＊s League. See Lasch to Mckmeier, June 5, 1939, in Arendts＊s Party fle, BAB, ehem. BDC, PK Wilhelm Arendts (*6.2.1883). A full investigation of Arendts＊s political performance was undertaken after the war, and the undated attack against him by the Nazi cell in his company, as well as the defense of his behavior by the factory council after the war and by others protected by him, can be found in AM, Spruchkammerakten Wilhelm Arendts. On the appointments of Kisskalt and von Finck, see the interrogation of von Finck of Sept. 25, 1947,inNA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2/57/4. 
so as to continue avoiding Party membership. While he could not manage to escape membership in the DAF, which Allianz managers and employees joined as a body, he managed never to attend a roll call, which certainly must have been noticed. Indeed, he deliberately abstained from leading the Allianz di-rectors and employees to the May Day 1934 celebration at the Tempelhof Air-port, as had been demanded of the concern heads in Berlin. He studiously limited his speeches to company events, where he was often surrounded by Swastikas but did little or nothing to identify himself with them. He appar-ently enjoyed an authority and popularity, even among the National Socialists at Allianz, that protected his exposed position and enabled him to let Schmitt, Hil-gard, and others do the saluting, parading, singing, and delivering of pandering speeches.32 
Others could not always afford these luxuries, especially once they had made the decision to join the Party and wanted to move forward with their careers. One could feel belated distaste but not act upon it. This was illustrated by Hans Goudefroy, who was one day to be He.＊s successor. Goudefroy, who came of modest circumstances and had struggled considerably to secure his legal educa-tion, joined the Party on May 1, 1933, primarily because he was planning to be-come a judge at the time and knew he would not be accepted otherwise. He later claimed he felt comfortable in his decision because Hitler had been appointed by Hindenburg and was committed to fghting unemployment. He rapidly became disaffected, however, owing to Party interference in judicial matters. He decided to accept a job with the legal division of Allianz in 1934 and, once hired perma-nently, gave up his plans for a judicial career. He soon became head of the legal division and a member of the board of directors in 1938. He. had taken early notice of Goudefroy and found him to be talented, dedicated, and personable, which undoubtedly played no small role in Goudefroy＊s rapid rise. He. seems to have been especially impressed with Goudefroy＊s willingness to buck Party pres-sures in legal issues affecting the concern. Thus, when the Party tried to collect the accident insurance of Gregor Strasser and SA-Obergruppenfrer Karl Ernst (two victims of the Rm purge) in the name of their survivors, Goudefroy re-fused on the grounds that they were subjects of an execution, not an accident. He did so despite warnings that as a member he stood under the jurisdiction of the Party and of the Nazi Lawyer＊s Organization as well. In other cases he also resisted pressures from high Party offcials. Apparently, Goudefroy was so in-censed by Nazi attitudes toward the law that he wanted to resign from the Party in 1935, but He., who feared that Goudefroy would also announce his reasons, warned him that such a step would be damaging to both himself and the concern. As a result, Goudefroy remained in the Party but was to have diffculties dur-ing the war with the Gestapo and other Nazi agencies because of his protection of politically suspect persons and employees with Jewish spouses 每 although, as 
32 See He.＊s expos谷, ※Meine politische Einstellung, in Sondernheit [sic] zum Nationalsozialismus,§ Aug. 5, 1945,FHA S 17.13/165, and his Fragebogen of Feb. 2, 1946, FHA, NL 3/6. 
demonstrated in Chapter 5, he was not always as fastidious about legal niceties as was later claimed.33 
It is important to recognize that Goudefroy＊s efforts were not made at the expense of Allianz＊s otherwise quite satisfactory relations with the Party and the State. In fact, Allianz cultivated its relations with the Party, which proved to be a source of considerable business from early on in the regime. Despite the aggravation caused by Schwede-Coburg, Hans Goebbels, and those of their cronies desiring to socialize the insurance business, the reality was that 70% of the Party＊s insurance business was done with the private companies, 25% with the publicly chartered societies, and 5% with the DAF companies. Allianz received the lion＊s share of this business, which consisted mainly of group in-surance 每 that is, an insurance contract made directly with an organization or company that entitled its members to participate in an insurance plan involving fxed rates and benefts. The Allianz contract providing life and burial insurance with the National Socialist Teachers＊ League brought in 2.5每3 million RM in premiums annually between 1934 and 1945. A similar important group insur-ance policy was with the Reich Lawyers＊ League, which paid 2 million RM in annual premiums during the same period. Allianz also provided accident insur-ance for the National Socialist Women＊s Organization between 1936 and 1945. This policy, half of which was later divided with the publicly chartered societies, brought in 300,000 RM per year, and Allianz remained the leader of the consor-tium. Allianz provided insurance for the National Socialist organization for the care of war victims. Although other major private insurers (e.g., Agrippina and Gerling) also had signifcant contracts with Party organizations, Allianz nor-mally received preference whenever some policy had to be concluded quickly; it also had some lucrative small contracts with the Party that brought in 80,000每 120,000 RM per year between 1936 and 1945. It insured the Party congresses, for example, and the machines in Party buildings. This, in any case, was the in-formation provided by Georg Amend (head of the NSDAP insurance offce and, after October 1939, president of the RAA) at his interrogations after the war. While Amend was no great friend of the private insurers and may have been at-tempting to place them in as bad a light as possible, Allianz＊s group insurance policies with at least some of the organizations mentioned can be verifed from other sources. As early as August 1933, for example, Allianz sent an obviously celebratory circular to its branches informing them about its recent contracts with ※national organizations.§ Topping the list was the collective life insurance policy developed with the National Socialist Reich Association of German War Victims, headed by Hans Oberlindober, which had at least 800,000 members. Allianz did have to share some, with 15% of this business going to Deutscher Ring and another 15% to Karlsruher Leben, but then the latter company was in 
33 The most important information on Goudefroy is in his denazifcation fle, Staatsarchiv Ham-
burg, 221-11/F 17350. See especially the letters of Hans He. of Aug. 6, 1945, and Sept. 10, 1946, 
as well as Goudefroy＊s own statement of Nov. 10, 1945. 
the Allianz group. Similarly, the circular noted the conclusion of various poli-cies with the Fraternal League of German Police Offcials in Berlin, which will be discussed shortly.34 
Indeed, there can be no question that the number and signifcance of group policies increased dramatically in 1933 and then between 1933 and 1938. Thus, the number of new insurance certifcates increased from 180,000 in 1932 to 1,572,000 in 1933; thenumberof newcertifcateswas 728,000 in 1934 and 583,000 in 1935.In 1933 there was an actual decline in large life policies (concluded with individuals in the amount of 2,000 RM or more with a yearly premium) and an increase in small policies (less than 2,000 RM and based on a monthly premium) of 43,000, and increases in such individual policies amounted to 51,751 for 1934 and 62,343 for 1935. Therefore, the increase in insurance certifcates was obvi-ously a result of (and was, in fact, attributed to) group policies in the Allianz business reports. These group policies were calculated according to the number of ※risks§ 每 that is, persons certifed to be entitled to benefts under the policies 每 and the total number of such persons increased from 308,039 at the end of 1932 to 2,739,697 at the end of 1938. Although group policies were also contracted with industrial enterprises, those with National Socialist organizations involved a few hundred thousand persons and thus were quite signifcant.35 
According to Amend, Schmitt had played an important role in negotiating these contracts. Amend frst met Schmitt in 1933 at the offces of his father-in-law (NSDAP treasurer Franz Xaver Schwarz), who told Amend to favor Allianz in the Party＊s insurance business. This led to frequent meetings between Schmitt and Amend about such contracts. Manifestly, Schmitt＊s early support of and ties to the Party had proven very useful indeed. Amend also claimed that Schmitt had procured the National Socialist Lawyers＊ League contract through connections with Hans Frank, who headed the organization. Schmitt, in his postwar interro-gations, could not remember any signifcant contact with Frank and suggested that General Director Arendts was the more likely contact with Frank.36 This is quite plausible given the appointment of Arendts as treasurer of the Academy for German Law when it was founded in June 1933. Needless to say, lower-placed persons could also serve Allianz well in gaining contracts. Thus, Amend re-membered that one of the general agents in Frankfurt or Wiesbaden had good connections with Oberlindober, head of the National Socialist organization of war victims. 
Nevertheless, Amend certainly was on target when he claimed that Schmitt＊s connections with Reich Master of the Forests and Reich Master of the Hunt 
34 Interrogation of Georg Amend, July 2, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /56/2. The Al-
lianz contracts with the NS-Lehrerbund and the NS-Rechtswahrerbund are mentioned in a letter 
from the RAA to the RWM of July 10, 1936,SM, 1458/1/172 /Bl. 52每4. On the contracts with 
the NS-Kriegsopferversorgung, which dated from Dec. 13, 1933, see BAK, B280/1519. For the 
circular of August 15, 1933, see FHA, AZ 5.1/3. 35 Allianz Leben, Gesch.ftsberichte, 1932每1935, FHA; Kisch, Ffzig Jahre Allianz, p. 163. 36 Interrogation of Kurt Schmitt, July 15, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /58/3. 
Hermann Ging played no small role in securing an Allianz monopoly, worth some half million RM a year, on the obligatory hunting liability insurance in-troduced at the turn of 1936每1937. Ging was unhappy about the competi-tion among private insurance companies for this business, the high rates being charged, and the complexities involved in the settlement of liability issues by a variety of companies. His solution was to create a new publicly chartered lia-bility corporation solely for hunters that would impose a single premium with the granting of licenses. The Economics Ministry was unhappy with this solu-tion and engaged Schmitt to persuade Ging to fnd an alternative. Schmitt, in a series of memoranda and negotiations, argued that it was a mistake to deprive the private insurance industry of income in this manner, given its importance to the fnancing of the recently launched Four-Year Plan. Most importantly, however, Schmitt warned that the creation of a new organization to regulate complicated problems 每 where the private companies already had experience 每 would be costly and cumbersome. Ging apparently found these arguments persuasive, but only on condition that one concern (namely, Allianz) assume full responsibility for the regulatory activity and establish the necessary appa-ratus at its headquarters. This put Schmitt in a pleasant but awkward position, since there were complaints from other frms and insurance agents that they were being cut out, but ultimately Schmitt was able to persuade the Association of Private Accident and Liability Insurers that the alternative was to have the pri-vate insurance business cut out altogether; Schmitt promised the continuation of existing contracts on the basis of a uniform premium in return for its ad-ministrative services. It is doubtful that everyone was satisfed but in the end there was considerable gratitude to Schmitt for using his connections and for the power and organization of Allianz＊s newly created ※Obligatory Hunting Liabil-ity Insurance Bureau for German Hunters§ to serve the interests of the private insurance business.37 
Schmitt also took a direct role in negotiating yet another group policy of great importance to the National Socialist leadership 每 namely, the Fraternal League of German Police Offcials. The organization had been founded after the disso-lution of the old police unions in 1933. Ging, as Minister President of Prussia, had decided to purge rather than disband the Prussian police, once considered a strong support of the vanished Republic, and he and Police General Kurt Daluege were anxious to instill a National Socialist spirit and a sense of comradeship in the police force. The Fraternal League was viewed as the best mechanism for doing so, and the provision of low-cost insurance and other social benefts was considered an important instrument in the service of this cause. Allianz was 
37 The lengthy negotiations are to be found in SM, 1458/1/263. See especially Schmitt＊s memos and notes to Ging of Dec. 11 and 18, 1936 (Bl. 35每44) and Ging to Schmitt, Jan. 1, 1937. See also the documents in BAK, B 280/12352. See also the Sitzungsbericht er die ordentliche Hauptver-sammlung des Reichsverbandes der Privatversicherung am 12. M.rz 1937,GDV, 205-3, pp. 31每2, and the Allianz Rundschreiben of 9. M.rz 1937, FHA, AZ 7.1/9. 
ideally positioned for this purpose, not only because of the personal connec-tions of its leaders but also because it was such a strong concern. In August of 1933, the Fraternal League concluded fve-year group insurance policies with Allianz and Allianz Leben amounting to 300 million RM in coverage. The po-lice and their wives were covered under these policies for death, accident, theft, fre, and liability at a particularly low single rate for the combined policy. Cal-culation of the life insurance component was based on term insurance rather than the higher costs entailed in capital coverage insurance. The basic obliga-tory insurance was 600 RM for men and 400 RM for wives and widows, but members had the option of taking out multiple insurance up to three times the basic amount. The terms of the police group insurance had been personally negotiated with Schmitt, who (as one of the offcials of the Fraternal League re-ported) ※as general director in the Allianz concern had a great interest in the conclusion of an insurance agreement for the beneft of the police.§ Indeed, it was anticipated that Schmitt would retain an interest in continuation of the contract.38 
However, the contract with the Fraternal League faced two serious challenges. The frst came in 1934, when it seemed that Interior Minister Frick wished to integrate the police into the Civil Service League, which would have led to the dissolution of the Fraternal League and the raising of insurance rates for the pol-icy by 100%. This caused considerable unrest among the police because of the popularity of the Fraternal League and its insurance program, but the danger was averted by the insistence of Daluege that police retain their independence and their organizations and that all state police forces be included in the group insurance agreement. At the end of 1936, Himmler (who had taken charge of the police throughout Germany) and Daluege ordered that the uniformed Order Police join the Fraternal League in the new year. This, of course, added substan-tially to the number of those falling under the group insurance policy.39 
The second challenge to the group contract of the Fraternal League came from the RAA, which disapproved of term policies as being risky because members of the group insurance inevitably included older persons with each renewal of the contract; the RAA also considered these policies a form of unfair competition. Thus, in 1934 it required special RAA permission for the renewal of such poli-cies and also issued guidelines that would have required a substantial increase 
38 Polizeioberst Dillenburger an Admiral von Levetzow, 14.Feb. 1934, AZLB, Akte ※Kamerad-
schaftsbund Deutscher Polizeibeamten, 187/1955, Originalvertrag, Ordner I.§ The materials in 
these fles as well as in SM 1458/1/72 provide a detailed picture of the evolution, problems, and 
character of this group contract. 39 In addition to the letter of Dillenburger of Feb. 14, 1934 (cited previously), and the various testi-
monials from police organizations connected with it, see also the projected draft by the Minister 
of the Interior attempting to integrate police and civil servants and the Aktennotiz of Sept. 5, 
1934, in which Daluege insisted that the police retain their Fraternal League. On the Order Po-
lice, see Fraternal League to Allianz Leben, Dec. 21, 1936, with copy of Daluege＊s order to the 
Order Police of Dec. 19, 1936, ibid. 
of premiums. This regulation was a severe threat to the Fraternal League con-tract, which was to expire in 1938. It was an important and lucrative contract, and its continuation meant a great deal both to the Fraternal League and Al-lianz. The number of persons covered under the basic policy, which had been 187,219 in 1933, had risen to 252,869 in 1936 每 128,590 men, 115,045 women, and 9,234 widows. The number of those who had taken out multiple insurance had increased by 37,406,from 111,889 in 1933 to 149,295 in 1936. The com-bined premiums had been 1.5 million RM in 1933 and were 3.6 million RM in 1936. In the latter year, 3.1 million RM had been paid in death benefts. Saving the contract, therefore, was worth the effort put into it.40 
The Allianz Leben directors Schloe.mann and Werner Krause joined forces with Major B.cker of the Fraternal League as early as August 1936 to ward off this danger. Allianz was planning to approach the RWM about the problem, and B.cker intended to send a memorandum to Daluege and Himmler stressing the unrest that would be caused by a change of the contract. B.cker thought it important that Allianz hold back with its inquiries at the RWM and promised confdentially to supply Allianz with his own petition, with the purpose of hav-ing Schmitt contact Himmler and stress the importance of the contract to the SS leader. This collusion between Allianz and the Fraternal League proved quite ef-fective and went so far as to involve collaboration in reviewing and revising the draft of Himmler＊s letter to the RWM of February 1, 1937. Allianz, for exam-ple, advised providing less problematic detail than that contained in the original draft. In any case, Himmler stood behind the arguments of Allianz and the Fraternal League that the death rates among the police were very low while re-cruitment of younger men was increasing. At the same time, Himmler noted that the police could not afford long-term policy premiums. Himmler consid-ered it essential for economic reasons and for reasons of State that the policies be renewed, and he asked that the RAA guidelines not be imposed in this in-stance. Indeed, Party authorities were pointing out to the RAA just at this time (in the spring of 1938), in connection with other insurance contracts, that the RAA was not always suffciently sensitive to ※National Socialist needs§; they re-ceived assurances from Ministerial Director Kurt Lange that the RAA had every intention of basing its decision on National Socialist principles. Insofar as the Fraternal League contract was concerned, the RAA informed Allianz Leben on April 21, 1937 that, ※in view of the reasons of State put forward by the Reich SS leader and chief of the German police,§ it accepted the extension of the contract between Allianz and the Fraternal League. The history of the group insurance of the Fraternal League and its prolongation well illustrates the business rela-tions between Allianz and the regime and the importance of Schmitt＊s contacts with the SS.41 
40 See the expos谷 by Krause of Feb. 23, 1937, ibid. 41 Aktennote Besprechung vom 6. Aug. 1936, correspondence about drafts of the Himmler letter, 
Oct. 1每5, 1936; RAA an Allianz, 21. April 1937, ibid. Also, see Kler to Lange, May 6, 1938, 
allianz, its jewish employees, and aryanization 
An important test of Allianz＊s adaptation to National Socialism was, of course, the ※Jewish question§ as it evolved between 1933 and 1939. The problems of Al-lianz and its Jewish customers will be examined in Chapters 4 and 5; Allianz＊s treatment of its Jewish employees and its role in Aryanization of Jewish property present distinct problems that are the subject of this section. 
Allianz＊s treatment of its Jewish employees, the full number of which is in-determinable, suggests that Schmitt＊s notion of there being no Jewish question in the economy seems to have been shared by the top leadership of the concern and maintained for as long as possible. It was a losing battle, but it was fought with some honor and attention to elementary decency. This was especially true with respect to the treatment of the two Jewish directors in the concern, James Freudenburg (director of the Frankfurt branch) and Maximilian Eichbaum (di-rector of the Magdeburg branch). Having already departed from the board of Neue Frankfurter at the end of 1933, Freudenburg apparently found the situa-tion at the Frankfurt branch, where he remained as director, so uncomfortable that he decided to resign at the end of 1934, a year before his contract formally ran out. Freudenburg did so while reserving his contractual rights, and Allianz chose to handle his entitlements unbureaucratically and give him his full salary for 1935 so that his pension would then start in 1936. Given the circumstances, the parting went beyond decency and politeness. Thus, the letter accepting his resignation (because of the ※existing circumstances§), signedby He. and Koenig, concluded: 
We gladly use this opportunity to give you our honest and heartfelt thanks for the services which you have performed in so outstanding a measure for our corporation in your long years of activity. Your name will remain unforgotten in our corporation. Throughout the entire period, we have not only seen in you the prudent and experienced head of our branches in Stuttgart and Frankfurt a.M.; we have above all valued you as a person and are bound to you through bonds of friendship well beyond the confnes of business rela-tions. It is therefore our honest wish that, after your offcial departure from the service of our corporation, you will remain not only professionally but also personally associated with us.42 
Freudenburg, obviously touched by the letter, responded gratefully, pointing out that ※I leave your service with a heavy heart. I have been an Allianz man with my entire soul and will remain one to the end of my life.§43 Needless to say, Freudenburg had not departed from Allianz voluntarily. 
and Lange＊s reply of May 19, 1938,SM, 1458/1/72, Bl. 275每6; on the police insurance question, 
see Himmler to RWM, Feb. 1 1937, ibid., Bl. 151每5, and Allianz＊s expos谷 concerning the policies 
of Feb. 27, 1937, ibid., Bl. 77每160. 42 Allianz an Direktor Freudenburg, 3. Dez. 1934, FHA, B 2.4.5/134. 43 Freudenburg an den Vorstand der Allianz (z.Hd. Herrn Dr. He.), 11. Dez. 1934, Ibid. 
Freudenburg＊s life ended at the age of 68 in Auschwitz, from whence, on Jan-uary 10, 1944, he was reported dead of ※debilitas corporis et senilis enteritis acuta,§44 the cynical terminology used to cover up what most certainly was death either by gassing or caused by the general conditions and mistreatment at Auschwitz. As his wife Erika (who was not Jewish) told an Allianz offcial work-ing at the pension offce in Frankfurt 每 who had asked after her husband in June 1943 每 Freudenburg had been summoned to the Gestapo and had not returned, but the Gestapo refused to tell her his whereabouts. After the news of his death, she collected her widow＊s pension. While he was still alive they had received his regular pension, although he had assigned it to her for safety＊s sake in 1940.Ap-parently, Freudenburg had realized the advisability of such security even though the top executives at Allianz had faithfully resisted pressures to cease paying or curtail such pensions 每 following a ruling by the Reich Court of July 12, 1939, that it was ※unfair§ for an employer to pay pensions to persons dismissed for racial reasons after the exclusion of Jews from economic life ordered on Novem-ber 12, 1938. The DAF sought to interpret the ruling as being relevant also to persons who had been dismissed or had resigned for such reasons before No-vember 12, 1938, and Director Lux in Berlin was repeatedly asked by the plant committee at the head offce whether the concern should not terminate pension payments to Jewish pensioners. Lux, however, took the position that the few Jewish pensioners in question, among them Freudenburg, had paid into the fund and thus had a claim. As he informed the man who was Freudenburg＊s successor in Frankfurt, General Director Alfred Wiedemann, the legal obligation to pen-sioners who had paid into such funds was not obliterated by their having to retire because of race, and he wanted Wiedemann to be aware of this position should the question of Freudenburg＊s pension come up.45 This was, in any case, the po-sition Wiedemann took in dealing with the DAF leadership in Frankfurt. The Allianz management, therefore, was intent to watch over Freudenburg＊s pension interests even if he chose to take some measures of his own to protect them. 
The fate of Director Eichbaum was a much happier one than that of Freuden-burg, andhistreatmentalsospeakswellfortheAllianzleadership每andespecially for General Director He. and Kurt Schmitt. As Eichbaum pointed out in 1947 in a very moving letter to He., with whom he apparently had a strong personal friendship, it was largely because of He.＊s protection that he was able to remain head of the Magdeburg offce until the fall of 1935. When Eichbaum＊s contin-uation became untenable, He. and his wife personally travelled to Magdeburg to help organize his future. He initially worked at the head offce in Berlin, and his name came up both before and after his departure for Berlin in connection with possible attempts to gain control of Allgemeine Versicherungs-Gesellschaft Phix (Elementar-Phix) in Austria. This was the non每life insurance part of 
44 Reichsvereinigung der Juden in Deutschland an Erika Freudenburg, 22. Jan. 1944, ibid. 45 Lux to Wiedemann, Oct. 5, 1939, ibid. The court judgments and interpretations are also con-
tained in this fle. 

James Freudenburg and his wife Erika in Marienbad, April 31, 1929. 
the Phix insurance company in Austria, which was already in visible fnancial diffculty, and Kisskalt of Munich Re apparently looked to Allianz to take over the non每life insurance portions of the company. In a discussion with He., Hil-gard, and Schloe.mann, the idea was rejected by Allianz leaders because of the anticipated diffculties with Lebensversicherungs-Gesellschaft Phix (Phix Life) and the unlikelihood that the German government would allow use of foreign exchange for this purpose. As Kisskalt noted, however, ※this is regret-table for one reason, namely because Allianz in the person of Herr Eichbaum would without doubt have at hand an outstandingly suitable head of Phix, since Herr Eichbaum is having increasingly diffculties with his work in Magde-burg.§46 Eichbaum, like Freudenburg, was very much an ※Allianz man§ and was not prepared to depart Germany unless he could somehow remain part of the concern. The problem was solved in 1937 when he was sent to represent Allianz at the South African Liberal Insurance Company, which Allianz had acquired in 1932. Most striking, however, is Eichbaum＊s praise for He.＊s open expressions 
46 Aktennote, 1. Juni 1935, MR, A 2.13/46. 
of friendship and respect, which 每 as Eichbaum knew altogether too well from the behavior of others 每 demonstrated a rare courage: 
For as long as we were in Germany, we were able to openly visit with you and you with us, and indeed more than before. Also on the professional public scene, for example at the anniversary of the Bayerische [Lebensversicherungsbank] and the end of fscal year conference in Munich in May 1935, you insisted on my participation and praised me pub-licly 每 a risky thing to do!47 
In contrast to Freudenburg, who was nearing retirement age, Eichbaum could continue to be of service to the concern abroad. This was an increasingly tricky business. Eichbaum was sent to South Africa thanks to an agreement between Kurt Schmitt and Economics Minister Schacht, and this was viewed as useful in promoting Germany＊s colonial ambitions. The attitude toward the employment of Jews abroad toughened up under Schacht＊s successor, Funk, in part because of the radicalization of policies toward the Jews and in part because of the tight-ening of foreign exchange controls. Thus, in September 1938, the RWM required that continued employment of Jews abroad (and payment to them) be subjected to careful scrutiny and agreement on the part of the relevant agencies and that companies make every effort to terminate all contracts with Jews as rapidly as possible.48 The employment of Eichbaum, ostensibly in a special category, nevertheless produced minor and major problems. Among the former was that Schmitt was hounded in 1939 by a disgruntled insurance regulator and his wife, who charged that the concern was showing an insuffcient understanding of the Jewish ※intriguing§ by sending Jews like Eichbaum as representatives to South Africa and paying them ※fantastic settlements.§49 Much more signifcant, how-ever, was that the RWM began raising questions aboutthe status of South African Liberal and whether it was bringing in foreign exchange. The underlying reason for this concern was pressure from the Party in connection with Eichbaum, and offcials at the ministry privately told Allianz executives they did not think Eich-baum could be retained. Nevertheless, Eichbaum continued on actively 每 indeed, too actively for some of his South African colleagues, who were not free of anti-Semitism, either 每 and this led to pleas by the Berlin directors that Eichbaum stay in the background as much as possible. While Eichbaum was greatly admired for his competence by Schmitt and He., his forceful personality seemed to have irritated others, and this made him something of a target.50 As Uexkl reported to Hilgard and Lux in June 1939, Eichbaum was very much in the foreground as far as Julius Streicher＊s anti-Semitic Der Stmer was concerned. Although 
47 Eichbaum to He., Johannesburg, June 28, 1947, FHA, NL 3/6. 48 RWM an die Reichsstelle f den Au.enhandel, 13. Sept. 1938, betr. Abbau jischer Auslands-
vertreter, BAB, R 3101/9040, Bl. 1每2. 49 Erna Liedtke to Schmitt, Dec. 28, 1939, and other related correspondence, FHA, NL 1/10. 50 Hilgard disliked him and felt that he failed to win the sympathies of his co-workers; see Hilgard, 
※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7,p. 51. 
the Stmer people sometimes made arrangements with the RWM to be silent about Jews working for German companies abroad, Eichbaum was held to be ※one of the most typical Jews, who must and would be rendered harmless.§ Der Stmer had been pursuing the matter for some time, had even sent inquiries to Reich Leader Martin Bormann at the Party chancellory, and wanted proof that Eichbaum was bringing in foreign exchange or was useful in some other way to the German economy. It was now threatening to publish articles; since the Stmer was considered a semioffcial organ of the government in all Jewish questions, Eichbaum＊s position became very tenuous indeed. It was highly un-likely that Gauleiter Ernst Bohle, head of the foreign bureau of the NSDAP and who watched over such matters, would be helpful in defending Eichbaum＊s posi-tion any longer.51 The outbreak of the war terminated this discussion, however, since Allianz no longer directly controlled the company. Eichbaum set himself up as an insurance consultant and had considerable success. When invited by Schmitt to return to Germany and help rebuild Allianz after the war, he admit-ted that he was attracted by the prospect ※to be able to work again in the circle of men who have proven themselves to be friends through the entire time,§ but concluded that he ※could not recover and cleanse himself from the poison of the last thirteen years§ and chose to stay in South Africa until his death in 1950. 52 
We know a great deal less about the number and fate of other Jewish employ-ees of the Allianz concern. It is a measure of the pressure placed upon Allianz that the legal department felt it important to answer attacks against it for still employing Jewish lawyers by explaining that these were by and large old cases to which such lawyers had previously been assigned. Also, in liability cases involv-ing Jewish customers, the concern felt it necessary to heed the wishes of their clients and employ lawyers they trusted, especially since ※Aryan lawyers cannot and do not want to take over the representation of non-Aryan policyholders.§53 The available evidence suggests that the Allianz concern retained Jewish employ-ees for as long as it could. This is hardly surprising, given the attitudes of He. and Schmitt. There is a cryptic mention of the ※Aryan question ... the present legal conditions and the shortly to be expected legal regulation§54 at the October 1935 meeting of the concern directors 每 that is, shortly after the announcement of the Nuremberg Laws in September defning who was an Aryan and who was not. A year later, however, the SS publication Das Schwarze Korps carried a lengthy article sharply critical of Neue Frankfurter and Allianz. The former was accused of giving well-paying jobs to Democrats and Social Democrats who had held positions in the Weimar period as well as employing a full Jew (Martin Bruck) as head of its Breslau branch and a Romanian Jew (Joseph Rittberg) as 
51 Uexkl to Hilgard and Lux, June 20, 1939, Lux to Schmitt, Nov. 30, 1939, and Aktennote, 10. 
Juli 1939, FHA, S 17.14 /83. 52 Eichbaum an Schmitt, 1. Sept. und 15. Dez. 1946, FHA, NL 1/14. 53 Rundschreiben der Allianz vom 9. Okt. 1935, FHA, AZ 5.1/4. 54 26. erweiterte Vorstandssitzung am 29. Okt. 1935, FHA, S 17.2 /4,p. 5. 

List of Neue Frankfurter employees leaving the company, including dates of resignation, the departments concerned, and reasons for leaving. In the cases of Hedwig Merkel, Ilse Friedl.nder, and Willi Baer, the words ※Jin§ and ※Jude§ are recorded as grounds for dismissal. 
an inspector in its Dresden branch. Neue Frankfurter was not alone in hiring and retaining such persons, and Das Schwarze Korps suggested that ※certain other frms not upset themselves about the ＆Frankfurter＊ but rather look to themselves a bit in order to spare us these efforts, which are always felt to be ＆an interference with business.＊ This is not directed against the 20 employed Jews at ＆Allianz,＊ but only against the corporation that apparently cannot separate itself from them.§55 The appearance of this article led RAA to have a discussion with Di-rector Goudefroy, and the result was ※a series of dismissals§ aimed at satisfying these criticisms.56 Exactly how many persons were involved is impossible to say, but a good indication of the pressures at this time is the record of employment terminations of Neue Frankfurter, which explicitly records four cases of persons departing the company because they were Jewish: one in late November 1936, two on December 31, and another on January 31, 1937. 57 
55 ※Heimst.tten f abgetakelte Bonzen,§ Das Schwarze Korps, 19.Nov. 1936,BAB, B 280/13206, 
Bl. 95. 56 See the marginal notations of various RAA offcials, ibid. 57 Verzeichnis der ausgeschiedenen Angestellten der Neuen Frankfurter, FHA S17.8/19. Needless 
to say, other terminations recorded in the book may also have been for racial reasons, but the 
reasons given in these cases are specifc. 
An especially good indication of the infuence of the Schwarze Korps was the termination (effective March 31, 1937) of one of those singled out, Martin Bruck, who had built up and headed the Breslau branch of Neue Frankfurter since 1931. Bruck, whose contract ran until 1940, ceased to exercise any managerial duties at the beginning of the year and negotiated a settlement that he hoped would enable him to join his son and brother in Brazil. The evidence suggests that Gen-eral Director Wiedemann and Director Re were willing to help him 每 both with respect to the fnancial settlement and with a strong letter of recommendation 每 although efforts to keep him in the pension fund were to no avail because Direc-tor Alfred Haase of Allianz felt it impolitic. The recommendation was of special concern to Bruck, who wanted to continue his career, and he was taken aback when he received a rather laconic and cool certifcation of his work for Allianz. After he complained to Re, however, Bruck received a much more detailed let-ter that described his virtues and capacities; it demonstrated that his leadership of the large Breslau offce had been exceptional and thus made obvious that his departure, which was described as the product of ※mutual agreement,§ was a genuine loss.58 
Hence, it obviously required some pressure and threats of negative publicity to induce the management of Allianz to dismiss Jewish employees. At the same time, however, employees in signifcant positions could hardly escape the real-ities of the situation. Such an individual was Hans Gerson (a section head of Hermes), who had joined the company in 1925, when he also joined the pension fund. Born in 1894, Gerson had volunteered for military service in 1914, served four years, was wounded, and left the army an offcer. He had also performed various patriotic acts during the French occupation of the Ruhr. Nevertheless, he anticipated being let go but wanted to ease his situation as much as possible, since he was married and had a very small child. The dilemma was that, even though he was the most senior person in the pension fund, he would qualify only after attaining the age of 45 and after ffteen years of membership 每 that is, in 1940. Although Allianz made exceptions to this rule by predating membership in the fund when recruiting persons who had paid into a fund elsewhere, Gerson petitioned in February 1937 for exceptional consideration on the grounds that he was not responsible for his anticipated separation and that Hermes had no economic reason to let him go, either. Yet in this case 每 as in other cases of sep-aration from non-Aryan employees 每 the Allianz pension fund refused to make an exception to its rules and would only pay back his contributions. It would seem, however, that Gerson anticipated a negative reply but wanted to have it in writing because he had connections (through his father) with persons in bank-ing and industry who were prepared to help him out if he could demonstrate his non-entitlement to a pension. There is no record available as to when Gerson actually left the concern or his subsequent fate, but he clearly recognized that 
58 The correspondence on the Bruck case, which runs between Dec. 2 /3, 1936, and Aug. 23, 1937,is to be found in FHA, B 2.5.1/7a. 
his days with Allianz were numbered irrespective of his record and his services to Hermes.59 
The company initially displayed considerable reluctance to terminate its rela-tionship with Jewish salespersons and agents. A telling example was provided by a Frankfurt insurance agent named Hans Grebaum, who had worked for the Stuttgart branch of Allianz and for Neue Frankfurter since 1929.In 1933, Al-lianz extended the contract for fve years and then prolonged the contract again in June 1936 until the end of August 1941. They were clearly intent on maintain-ing the relationship, but Grebaum＊s continued service for Allianz inevitably attracted the attention of the authorities, becoming the subject of unpleasant newspaper articles and, fnally, a letter from the Gauleiter＊s offce expressing as-tonishment that Allianz continued to employ a Jewish agent in this manner. At this point the pressure was too great, and Allianz terminated the contract in early June 1938. Apparently, Grebaum, who subsequently emigrated to the United States, negotiated directly with General Director He.; an agreement was reached that he receive his full annual commission of 35,000 RM 每 that is, to the 
60
end of 1939. 
A central argument for retaining Jews as insurance agents was that their em-ployment was necessary to service the needs of Jewish customers. Thus, at a meeting of the branch heads of Neue Frankfurter in late June 1937, General Di-rector Wiedemann declared that 
insofar as the Aryan question with reference to the sales representatives is concerned, we stand in agreement with the authoritative bodies of the Labor Front and the industrial economy that, in view of the maintenance of Jewish business, in taking the position that so long as all the operating corporations in Germany have not realized the Aryan princi-ple, the dismissal of non-Aryan sales representatives can only lead to substantial damage to business that is neither in the interest of the corporation nor in the public interest.61 
By 1938, however, these arguments were becoming less and less effective in the face of the organized effort to reform the external service of the insurance business and ※cleanse§ it of undesirable elements. As in so many other areas dealing with the relations between business and the State in these years, the poli-cies of Allianz and other insurance companies were pre-empted by policies of the regime 每 as promoted, mediated, or transmitted by the Economic Group for Private Insurance and the Reich Insurance Group. As we shall later see, Hilgard (as leader of the Reich group) had agreed to the appointment of Andreas Bra., a 
59 See the Aktennote of 17.Feb. 1937, Gerson an die Allianz-Versorgungskasse, 20.Feb. 1937, and 
Allianz-Versorgungskasse an Hans Gerson, 23.Feb. 1937, FHA, O 1.4.2 /6. 60 On this case, which will receive further discussion in Chapter 9, see BAK, B 215/Fall Nr. 1401; see 
also Allianz an die Allianz Pensionsverwaltung, 27. Juli 1951,inFHA,O 1.4.2/9, and HessHStA 
Wiesbaden, Wiedergutmachungsakten, Ffm-6516 (Harry Gray). 61 Niederschrift er die Tagung der Gesch.ftsleiter am 28. und 29. Juni 1937 in Frankfurt a.M., 
p. 9,FHA,S 17.3/121. 
dedicated Nazi, to head the Economic Group for Private Insurance. Anti-Semitic as he was, Bra. was still willing to tolerate the employment of Jewish agents to take care of Jewish customers, a position he frst enunciated in March 1937 and then repeated on a number of occasions. In 1938, however, Bra. responded to the growing tendencies to eliminate Jews from economic life by announcing a change of position; in October, he sent a confdential note to insurance compa-nies that still had contracts with Jewish agents, telling them that 
a new situation has developed as a result of the measures generally introduced by the Reich government against Jews in the economy, under which a new situation has also been created for the insurance business. We have to take this into account and now give up our contractual relations to Jewish agents insofar as this has not already happened. This is all the more desired since otherwise the relevant agencies will be inclined to in-troduce a legal regulation with particular emphasis on the role of the insurance business. But this is not in the interest of the companies as well as the entire sector. With the disso-lution of the existing ties to Jews, it will also be possible to prevent the insurance business from being singled out in the press and elsewhere as one of the economic circles which still has to be considered a domain of Jewry.62 
In fact, the government had on July 6 already issued a change in the commercial code that excluded Jews from a variety of business activities, including real es-tate and the right to be traveling salesmen. The new regulation was to go into effect on September 30, 1938, and it also deprived the affected Jews of any right to compensation for the economic damage thus done to them. Lencer, the DAF leader charged with banking and insurance, petitioned the RWM for similar leg-islation in the insurance feld, arguing: 
The insurance agent should from a purely temperamental point of view be a cheerfully affrmative supporter of Adolf Hitler in the carrying out of his duties. One must there-fore consider the consequences of the spoken word and consider how much damage can be visited by the thousand Jews still in the insurance feld in the hundred thousand con-versations carried on yearly.63 
The case of one of Allianz＊s general agents in Magdeburg, Moritz Goldmann 每 who had served at the front as an offcer from 1914 to 1918, had been wounded three times, and had received a host of medals 每 demonstrates what this growing movement to drive out the remaining Jewish insurance agents (for the grotesque reasons given by Lencer) meant in concrete and human terms.64 Goldmann had 
62 See the form letter of Bra. of Oct. 7. 1938,GDV,RS/15; for his earlier attitude, see the Sitzungs-
bericht er die ordentliche Hauptversammlung des Reichsverbandes der Privatversicherung am 
12. M.rz 1937, pp. 21每3,GDV,RS/25. 63 Lencer an Pg. Alf Krer, RWM, undated, SM, 1458/1/113, Bl. 84每5. RS of the WG Privatver-
sicherung, 25. Juli 1938,GDV,RS/20. 64 The correspondence is to be found in FHA, O 1.4.2/8. Especially important for the general his-
tory of the case is Goldmann to He., Sept. 10, 1937, and Allianz to Rechtsanwalt Beutner, Nov. 
25, 1954. 
taken over the agency for the Magdeburg branch in 1931 and had proven quite successful, receiving an annual income of 8,000每9,000 RM that was based on commissions for new policies and for collecting premiums on those already in his charge. Thanks to his war record, he experienced few problems in the frst years of the regime. In November 1935, however, Allianz imposed a contract that restricted him to the acquisition and servicing of Jewish clients. It is diff-cult to say whether this refected a general policy of forcing Jewish agents to give up their Aryan clients or a specifc response to the kinds of conditions in Magde-burg that led to Eichbaum＊s departure that same year. Increasingly, however, the legitimation of retaining Jewish insurance agents was that they were needed to tend Jewish customers; this implied, as did the Nuremburg Laws, having Jews deal as little with Aryans as possible. Whatever the case, the only positive aspect of the contract was that it was formally guaranteed until the end of 1937, with continuance verbally promised until the end of 1938. Goldmann＊s dilemma was that only 1,200 remained of the Jewish community in Magdeburg, and most of these persons were already his clients. He thus found himself in the humiliating position of not having enough business to cover even the commission guaranteed by his contract. 
In September 1937, Goldmann turned to General Director He. about his plight, since ※it is said that every employee of Allianz is met by you with under-standing and an open heart in his distress and anxiety.§65 Goldmann pointed out that he was being ruined not only materially but also spiritually by the in-activity imposed upon him by the 1935 contract, and noted that other insurance companies were not concluding such contracts with their Jewish agents in other large cities. He pleaded with He. to be allowed to serve as a general agent in Berlin, where he had good familial and business contacts, and expressed the hope ※of fnding with you the help that would make it possible for me to secure a fu-ture which, even if modest, secures me an honorable existence.§ He. agreed to see Goldmann, although the latter ended up meeting with Director Alfred Haase instead, and Haase told Goldmann he would be transferred to Berlin. A grateful Goldmann responded by assuring Haase that he would work with all his strength to fulfll the expectations placed in him and, as if to prove the point, announced that he had just secured three life insurance policies at a publishing house in Berlin.66 Despite the good intentions all around, however, the plans to transfer Goldmann took a turn for the worse in January 1938 because, as Director Haase learned from his colleague Director Kig, it was not at all certain that Jewish agents could be further employed in Berlin. By February, it was clear that a move to Berlin was out of the question, and Goldmann decided to seek a settlement and then emigrate. Allianz proposed to give him a settlement of 5,000 RM in return for his portfolio that brought in yearly premiums of 20,000 RM. The advantage 
65 Goldmann to He., Sept. 10, 1937, ibid. 66 Haase to Goldmann, Sept. 22, 1937; Goldmann to Haase, Oct. 23, 1937; Goldmann to Haase, 
Oct. 29, 1937, ibid. 
for Allianz, as Director Haase noted, was that ※the entire portfolio will go over to us free of commissions.§67 Goldmann, however, found the proposal ※indis-cussable,§ and asked that he continue to work under his old contract. Thereupon he was warned not to have any ※illusions,§ since he could not be promised a re-newal of the contract. In July, Goldmann 每 who now intended to emigrate very shortly 每 tried to improve the terms of the settlement but was told that he could only receive what had already been offered. This was especially the case since it was by no means certain that the portfolio would have the same value in the fu-ture, presumably because of the number of Jewish policies involved.68 On these icy exchanges, therefore, the good intentions of the previous year and the rela-tionshipbetweenGoldmannandAllianzexperiencedtheirinevitabledissolution. 
Good intentions aside, real assets were involved in the termination of con-tracts with Jewish insurance agents. This was evident not only in the case just discussed but also in that of another signifcant insurance agency working for Al-lianz: Pototzky & Co. (Aktiengesellschaft f Versicherungswesen) in Berlin and Breslau. Allianz＊s connection with this agency dated back to 1926 and had been renewed in the spring of 1933. Once again, however, the pressure on Allianz to end the relationship increased by 1937 to the point where the Pototzky Breslau branch agreed to give up its Aryan business to the local branch of Allianz in re-turn for a fxed pension totaling 6,000 RM a year 每 to be divided between the two brothers in Breslau, Hans and Fritz Pototzky. In 1938, the pressure was on to terminate the contract with Ludwig Pototzky, who headed the Berlin branch; in contrast to the Breslau settlement, no direct mention was made of Allianz taking over the portfolio because Director Kig expressed fears that the Party would get wind of such an arrangement and object to the purchase of such business from a Jew. Ludwig Pototzky therefore agreed to a pension of 4,950 RM a year, but it was fairly obvious (as Pototzky＊s lawyer argued after the war) that a 49-year-old businessman earning between 18,000 and 20,000 RM a year would not consider this ※pension§ to be genuine compensation. To make matters worse, when Pototzky decided to emigrate to England in August 1939, he could not col-lect his ※pension§ there and thus agreed to a settlement of 25,000 RM; of this, however, only 2,500 RM could be taken out the country 每 the rest was eaten up by special taxes or put into a blocked account. Pototzky thus ended up losing both his portfolio and his ※pension,§ and here the gainer was clearly Allianz, even if never so planned.69 
No less deplorable was the case of Martin Lachmann, a subdirector of Allianz in Berlin. As he wrote to his daughter on October 20, 1938: 
67 Haase to Bischoff, Jan. 12, 1938; Aktennote Haase, 12.Feb. 1938; Aktennote Haase, 17.Feb. 1938, 
ibid. 68 Aktennote Boetius, 18.Feb. 1938; Allianz, Organisations-Abteilung an Zweigniederlassung Mag-
deburg, 21.Feb. 1938; Zweigniederlassung Magdeburg an Goldmann, 12. Juli 1938, ibid. 69 See the extensive documentation of the Ludwig Pototzky case in WGB, Ia 6059, Bayerisches Haupt-
staatsarchiv, MW 25275. 
My future is now completely unclear. I do not to be sure think that Allianz will leave me in the lurch; that would certainly be the absolute worst. After 31 years of strenuous work in building up a portfolio, the likes of which almost no one else has, being dropped would be a catastrophe for me. I have regarded my portfolio as a security for my old age and to be sure with full justifcation, for the contract with guaranteed portfolio was made with me for life, so that a breach of faith to me in this respect will be almost like suicide. But I cannot and will not believe it since only a short time ago I have received assurances on their word of honor from my highest superiors. 
A few days later, He. and Kig informed him that he would have to be let go at the end of the year, but that they fully recognized his achievements and hoped to get him a position in Switzerland. This would mean leaving behind a portfo-lio which brought him an annual income of 36,000 RM; if things did not work out in Switzerland, Lachmann would become a pensioner at the beginning of the new year. Yet the big problem, as He. and Goudefroy informed him, was that his long-standing contract could not be carried out because he was a non-Aryan: 
I could not get my pension from this portfolio because, from a portfolio whose largest portion has to be termed Aryan, a non-Aryan cannot derive income. This is completely mysterious to me since this business was made at a time when such laws did not exist and, as my contract expressly states, constitutes a specifc portion of my honorably earned commission. 
Apparently, his prospects in Switzerland did not work out, and his efforts to get out of Germany were not successful, either. In return for his portfolio, Allianz gave him a pension of 12,000 RM a year as well as 4,800 RM a year for his wife. He remained in Germany, was later deported, and died in a Minsk concentra-tion camp on November 16, 1941; his wife was murdered in front of her house in Munich on January 13, 1942. 70 
We have seen that the handwriting was very much on the wall even before the November 1938 Pogrom and the subsequent elimination of Jews from German economic life. One of the numerous diffculties of Hilgard＊s position was that, as leader of the Reich Group, he found himself mandating policies that contra-dicted those that he and his fellow directors pursued at Allianz. All he could do was pander to offcial sentiment, try to play down the issue, and seek to up-hold the sanctity of contracts as best he could. In a speech in late 1938, Hilgard insisted that accusations of the external service in the insurance business being flled with Jews were unfounded. There were 20,000 full-time insurance agents in Germany and 250,000每300,000 part-time insurance agents. Of these, only 680 were non-Aryan, according to a survey taken in August. Three quarters of 
70 Martin Lachmann to his daughter Ruth Haas and her husband, Leopold, Oct. 10, 1938; Martin Lachmann to Leopold Haas, Oct. 26, 1938. These letters and further information were generously provided by Lachmann＊s grandson, Peter Haas. See also Charlotte Johann an den Treuh.nder der Milit.rregierung f zwangsertragene Vermen, 22. Sept. 1950, WG., 1 WGA 3745/50 (Ruth Ernestine Haas), and Allianz-Zeitung 14 (1932), p. 287. 

Martin Lachmann (1884每1941), subdirector of Allianz. 
these could be expected to leave by the end of the year, while the few that re-mained had long-term contracts but could also be expected to depart soon.71 It was thus clear that the policies pursued by the government in 1937每1938 were leading to the complete elimination of Jews from the insurance business in Ger-many, and that the efforts of Allianz (such as they were) and other companies to retain Jewish employees were coming to naught.72 
It is diffcult to draw a precise balance about Allianz＊s treatment of its Jewish employees, and it is important to bear in mind that there were differences among 
71 Undated speech of Hilgard to insurance salesmen and agents, probably late 1938,p. 10, FHA, 
S 17.6/8. 72 Thus, at a meeting of the Fachgruppe Versicherungsverteter und Versicherungsmakler on Jan. 31, 
1939, the departure of large numbers of Jewish salespersons and agents was reported; see SM, 
1458/1/112, Bl. 46. 
the various branches of the concern that refected local conditions and attitudes of the personnel running those branches. It is also hard to make comparisons between Allianz and similar companies in insurance and banking because of asymmetries in the available information. However, the study by Dieter Ziegler of Aryanization in the Dresdner Bank enables comparison in some important re-spects: Allianz appears to have had fewer Jewish employees to start with and to have made great efforts to treat them well; Dresdner Bank suffered from a con-siderable willingness on the part of some of its employees to take advantage of the disappearance of Jewish competitors to rise through the ranks. We have no evidence that such motives played a signifcant role at Allianz, but this does not mean that such motives were not present. Dresdner Bank certainly was much more Nazifed at the top than Allianz.73 
In general, the company＊s leadership was solicitous of tried-and-true Jewish colleagues in high positions. It also sought to hold on to Jewish agents and sales-persons insofar as they had served the concern well and could be useful in dealing with Jewish portfolios, although it was not above taking advantage of the abil-ity to acquire the non-Jewish portfolios of such agents at minimal cost. Insofar as lower-level employees were concerned, Allianz seems to have responded to government pressures without much resistance but not to have taken initiatives itself. As in the case of James Freudenburg, the leaders of the concern showed a strong distaste for suggestions emanating from a Reich court decision accord-ing to which ※it had to be deemed as improper for an enterprise to pay a pension to a Jew who left his position because of his race and in the context of polit-ical developments.§74 They also resisted demands by rabid anti-Semites from the Party (like Anton Ro.mann, plant steward at Bayerische Versicherungsbank) who wanted to take away the pensions of three Jewish members of the pension fund in 1939. A survey showed that there were only about twelve Jewish pen-sioners involved in the fund; though some consideration was given to a one-time fnancial settlement, the matter was put off in the expectation that the issue would be legally settled after the war.75 
Thus, dealing with the regime as it consolidated and then became more radical required increasing levels of engagement and involvement in National Socialist goals and practices 每 whether one liked them or not. A good illustration was Al-lianz＊s place in a project dear to Hitler＊s heart: redesigning the capital city of the Reich under direction of architect Albert Speer. Speer was appointed general in-spector of buildings for Berlin on January 30, 1937, after Hitler became fed up 
73 See the illuminating study by Dieter Ziegler, ※Die Verdr.ngung der Juden aus der Dresdner Bank 
1933每1938,§ Vierteljahrshefte f Zeitgeschichte 47 (1999), pp. 187每216, which benefts from a 
great deal more data than is available for Allianz and has some general things to say about the 
banking sector. It would be interesting to compare the use of Jewish representatives abroad. 74 Reichsgerichtsbriefe 35 (1939), Nr. 39, 25. Sept. 1939,inFHA, O 1.4.2 /31. 75 Lux to Arendts, Nov. 22, 1939. There is a list of Jewish members of the pension fund as well as 
correspondence about them between 1939 and 1951 in FHA, O 1.4.2 /31. See especially the Ak-
tennote of Nov. 17, 1944. 
with foot-dragging by Berlin city authorities. The major concern of Hitler and Speer was the construction of the great new north每south axis intended to run through the city and the gigantic civic structures in which they were to termi-nate and serve as monuments to the (megalomania of) the regime. These plans required a major restructuring of the entire center of the city and involved im-portant new real estate acquisitions and construction for Allianz.76 
The physical expansion of Allianz, as it was fnally conceptualized, was to occur in two areas of the center of the city shown. Allianz was to increase its holdings on the Tauben-, Mohren-, Mauer-, and Kanonierstra.e 每 an area right near the Reich Chancellory, flled with major banks and businesses 每 into one large complex intended primarily to serve Allianz Leben. An entirely new ad-ministrative building was to be created on what was to become the Runder Platz, a new large square for business; this involved tearing down existing structures on the Potsdamer-, Eichhorn-, and Linkstra.e. The new building was intended to house the Berlin branch of Allianz, then located on the Bellevuestra.e. Allianz was to share this square with another imposing structure that would include the House of German Tourism and the Reich Association for Private Insurance.77 
After 1945, Allianz claimed that the projected new administrative offce build-ing on the Runder Platz was ※forced§ upon them and that they had ※no actual interest§ in a new building after having spent a great deal of money before 1930 modernizing their existing properties in the city center.78 The surviving records show that this claim simplifed a complicated story in a rather tendentious man-ner. In reality, Allianz had plans to expand its Berlin facilities since at least 1933, when Hitler took a personal interest in Allianz＊s plans by expressing the wish that Allianz hold back the intended expansion of its main headquarters on the Mohren-and Taubenstra.e through the purchase of additional properties there. Instead, he proposed that Allianz and Allianz Leben construct one large building at the point where the Potsdamer Stra.e would cross the projected north-south axis 每 that is, on what was to be later named Runder Platz in the formal plans for redesigning the city. An alternative idea then developed of putting the Berlin branch of Allianz at the Runder Platz location while also creating a single (and quite imposing) structure on the Mohren-and Taubenstra.e complex. In all probability, Kurt Schmitt himself had made the proposal to put up a new building 
79
for Allianz on the Runder Platz when he was Reich Economics Minister in 1934. 
76 On the general program, see Albert Speer, Inside the Third Reich. Memoirs (New York, 1970), 
Chs. 6 and 10; Gitta Sereny, Albert Speer: His Battle with Truth (New York, 1995), pp. 140每8, 
219每20, 265每67. See also Joachim Fest, Albert Speer. Eine Biographie (Berlin, 1999). 77 See the description and pictures in ※Die Allianz baut,§ Allianz-Zeitung 20 (1938), pp. 165每8, and 
the documents in BAB, R 4606/2786. 
78 
Allianz an den Senat von Berlin, Wiedergutmachungs.mter, 6. Juni 1951,WG., 13 WGA 444/51 (Rose Hirschberg). 
79 
Allianz an das Kammergericht Berlin, 15. Zivilsenat, 30. Dez. 1953,WG., 6 WGA 264 /51 (Berta Feige), and ※Vom Bauvorhaben der Allianz und Stuttgarter Lebensversicherungsbank Aktienge-sellschaft an der Mohrenstra.e in Berlin,§ Der Allianz-Adler, Dez. 1938,p. 2,FHA,B 3.6/2. 

Map of Berlin, 1941; 1: Allianz headquarters; 2: central administration of Allianz Leben; 
3: greater Berlin Allianz branch; 4: new building planned for Allianz at Runder Platz. 
All these plans hung in the air until early February 1937, when it is highly likely that the appointment of Speer as general inspector inspired or forced decisions to be taken. Allianz had already submitted plans for new construction and recon-struction of its existing buildings on the Mohren-and Taubenstra.e to the city authorities, but it had not worked them out in detail because of the possibility that all its offces would be moved to a new location at the Runder Platz. Allianz＊s director in charge of real estate and construction questions, Clemens Maiholzer, had discussed their plans with Speer on February 9, and a further meeting was planned with Maiholzer, Speer, and Schmitt to examine a model submitted by the Dseldorf architectural frm that worked for Allianz, Wach und Roskot-ten. Delays continued, however, quite probably because Allianz was reluctant to construct a new building at the Runder Platz. This is suggested by a meeting in early June, where Maiholzer proposed that the Allianz branch headquarters building on Bellevuestra.e be reconstructed. Speer vetoed this proposal, urg-ing that Allianz solve its space problems by expanding on the Kanonierstra.e (i.e., purchasing new properties adjacent to the buildings on the Mohren-and Taubenstra.e) and also creating a new building on the projected Runder Platz. At this point, Maiholzer himself seems to have personally determined the site where the new building was to be constructed and also asked Wach und Roskot-ten to work on the plans with Speer. The latter envisioned the Runder Platz very much as a commercial area, with shops on the ground foor of the build-ings, eight-meter-high arcades, and substantial electric advertising signs. It was to be graced with a sculpture area in front of the square with works by one of the leading Nazi artists, Arno Breker. Speer＊s object also was to create a ※subor-dination§ of commercial area to the political structures on the north-south axis. This, he argued, would ※allow the few large buildings on the NS-axis to appear still greater and more monumental, that is, to be made more prominent by the contrast.§80 
By the fall of 1937, the plans had advanced considerably, including the ques-tion of who was to inhabit the other structures on the Runder Platz. Allianz agreed to pay the 4.25每5.52 million RM for the property, demolition work, and new construction required at its site on the Runder Platz 每 provided the Belle-vuestra.e building not be torn down until the new building was fnished. Speer agreed to recommend these plans to Hitler and urge approval for the expansion of Allianz holdings in the Mohren-and Taubenstra.e complex. In addition, Al-lianz was planning to spend another 4 million RM on new construction costs at the Mohrenstra.e. At this point Allianz had holdings on the Mohren-, Tauben-, and Friedrichstra.e worth 27.5 million RM, of which 19 million RM＊s worth were to be used exclusively for Allianz purposes with the remainder to be rented out to friendly and allied companies. This was to be thought of as reserve offce 
80 Protokoll der Besprechung am 23. Juli 1937,BAB, R 4606/2786. See also Allianz an Speer, 18. 
Feb. 1937, Wach & Roskotten an Speer, 25.Feb. 1937, Besprechung, 9. Juni 1937, Vermerk, 25. 
Juni 1937, ibid. 

Model of the planned building of Allianz on the Runder Platz not realized owing to World War II. The structure was meant to be used as head offce of the greater Berlin branch of Allianz. 
space for the future. Thus, by the end of 1937, the basic decisions about the ex-pansion of Allianz＊s offce space in Berlin had been taken, and the process of acquiring the necessary properties and designing the new quarters could begin. In the case of the Runder Platz, the city of Berlin itself undertook to act as agent and trustee of Allianz in the acquisition of the properties on Potsdamer Stra.e 19每23, Eichhornstra.e 3每10, and Linkstra.e 34每39 每 to have them vacated by October 1, 1938, and cleared for new construction by January 1, 1939. The basic plans became public in the spring of 1938, and work on the details of the de-sign continued on into 1940 and even beyond. It is hard to tell how enthused Maiholzer and his colleagues at Allianz became about the project on the Runder Platz, but some of the megalomania connected with the reconstruction of Berlin must have been infectious: in June 1940, Speer had to ask that a new sculptor be hired to design the Allianz eagle, since he did not want it to appear as an ※em-blem of Sovereignty§ but rather as simply a company logo.81 
It was stretching things quite a bit, then, for Allianz executives to have claimed (after the war) that they had been ※compelled§ to plan the construction of a 
81 Aktennote, 19. Juni 1940, Protokoll der Besprechung, 21. Okt. 1937, Allianz an Speer, 16.Nov. 1937 (3 Briefe), Oberbgermeister Berlin an Allianz, 20. Dez. 1937, ibid. 
new building on the Runder Platz and to have been sated, so to speak, with re-spect to their offce space needs. Although the concern＊s preferences may have been pre-empted, it did have plans to expand. The real problem was that the arguments that they had no interest in the project 每 to which were added claims that everyone in the affected area had to sell off their properties or be subject to eminent domain 每 were made in connection with restitution claims of Jewish houseowners who had been forced to sell their properties to make way for the Allianz buildings. The conditions under which these properties were acquired suggest that Allianz＊s postwar leaders were disingenuous about their involvement in the Runder Platz. As noted before, the City of Berlin had the task of acting as Allianz＊s agent and trustee in the purchase of the properties connected with the Runder Platz and, on the basis of the legislation governing the reconstruction of German cities of October 5, 1937, 82 could use the power of eminent domain to take over and decide on the compensation for properties in cases where an agree-ment on price could not be reached. It had the responsibility to keep its costs as low as possible and to inform Allianz of the prices it was offering and of any intention to use its powers of eminent domain. 
Of the nine properties taken over for the project on the Runder Platz, four were owned by Jews and three by ※Aryans§; one had already been Aryanized, and one was in the hands of the Reich Treasury. While it was certainly true, as Allianz argued after the war, that all the properties in question were subject to eminent domain and had to be sold, three of the non-Jewish properties were sold for 25%每30% above their assessed worth and another, that of a high SS offcer in the Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler, was sold for 250% above its assessed worth; yet another, held by the Treasury, was sold for 320% above assessed worth. By comparison, three of the four Jewish properties were sold for between 3% and 18% below their assessed worth.83 
It is important to realize that the assessed value was usually kept artifcially low for tax reasons, so that a higher price 每 especially in cases where property was being sold unwillingly and under threat of eminent domain 每 was fully ap-propriate. Thus, despite the ban on price increases in force at this time, the government permitted payments over assessed value. This was always allowed when Aryans were involved, but sometimes it was even permitted with Jews in order to make matters simpler. This may well have been the case with respect to a well-known Jewish gynecologist who was able to sell his valuable property above assessed value in 1938, used a good portion of the return to get his daugh-ter out of Germany, and then committed suicide in 1943 at the age of 82 rather than be deported. In the postwar restitution case brought by his heirs, which lasted a decade, the former director of the chief real estate offce of Berlin (Willi Mler-Wieland, who had handled the property sales in question in the Nazi 
82 RGBl, 1937,I,p. 1054. 
83 
Allianz an Kammergericht Berlin, 15. Zivilsenat, 7. Dez. 1953,WG., 6 WGA 264 /51 (Berta Feige), Bl. 137每40. 
period) testifed that there was no discrimination against Jews in the settlements presided over by his offce prior to the economic legislation taken against Jews after November 1938. 84 It is diffcult to imagine, however, that the individual in question would not have bargained more rigorously were he a non-Jew. In any case, the evidence shows that the Jewish property owners received amounts below the assessed worth. Most telling, however, was the method by which such low prices could be extracted by persons working in Mler-Wieland＊s offce. Thus, one of the victims, who sold in December 1940, was told by the city off-cial handling the matter that ※you know that you are Jews. If you do not accept our offer, we will take other measures against you.§85 
These words were spoken by a government rather than an Allianz offcial, but it would be absurd to think that those involved at Allianz were not aware of the difference between what was being offered to Jews and non-Jews and of the pres-sures on Jewish property owners at so advanced a stage of the expropriation of Jewish assets. Indeed, a good example of how aware Allianz offcials were of such facts can be found in the case of the property at the corner of Friedrich-stra.e 184-Mohrenstra.e 52 in October 1938 每 whose purchase was, however, a far cry from the kind of thuggery exercised by government offcials at the Run-der Platz. In this instance, the property was purchased for 590,000 RM, which was only 60,200 RM above the assessed value of 1935. The property was needed to round off the holdings at the site of Allianz＊s other big construction program and was considered especially valuable. Maiholzer justifed the price to Speer by pointing out that the Jewish owners were anxious to sell because of their tax debts and so that the sale would beneft the Treasury, but also that it was im-portant to have them sell it to Allianz and thereby avoid the problems connected with turning the disposition of the property into an eminent domain issue.86 
It is impossible to tell whether a sense of fairness played any role in this trans-action along with the opportunistic reasons mentioned, and such sentiments toward Jews certainly would not be stated in a letter to the authorities in 1938. The businessmen at Allianz and in other companies were no longer functioning in a political and social environment that put much stock in civilized behavior to-ward Jews. In 1935, for example, a Jewish real estate agent offered to sell Allianz a property in Berlin-Charlottenburg for a Jewish businessman who had built it in 1927 with the intention of using it for his family and for renting apartments. He had devoted considerable attention to detail in the construction of the house, and it was a very attractive property that he obviously never would have sold un-der normal conditions. Allianz claimed after the war that the sale was made at a time when the seller still had considerable freedom to accept or decline con-ditions, but that was not how the seller (who had fed to Brazil) remembered it. 
84 
Verhandlungsprotokoll, 27.Feb. 1954, WG., 3 WGA 2642 /50, Bd. 1 (Walther Czempin). 
85 
Beschlu. des 15. Zivilsenats des Kammergerichts Berlin, 18. Dez. 1953,WG., 6 WGA 264/51 
(Berta Feige). 86 Allianz an den Generalbauinspektor, 17. Okt. 1938,BAB,R 4606/2785. 
He recalled Director Maiholzer saying: ※You Jews should save what you can and get out of here.§87 After the war, Maiholzer could not remember saying such a thing and Allianz argued that this was not his ※style.§88 What is depressing is that it was actually good advice 每 whatever the ※style§ in which it was given. 
This is amply demonstrated by another Allianz real estate acquisition to which Maiholzer was a party, that of Kaufngerstra.e 22 in Munich, which housed a number of businesses in the heart of the city＊s shopping center. The property belonged to Julius and Else Basch and was purchased by Allianz in January 1940. Maiholzer did not deal with Basch himself but rather with SA Ober-sturmfrer Hans Wegner, whom Gauleiter Wagner had appointed head of the ※Munich Property Utilization Agency Ltd.§ that had been set up after the No-vember 1938 Pogrom. Its basic function was the Aryanization of Jewish property and enterprises. Wegner and his organization were later to take on the function of ※trustee§ for Jewish assets when the Jews were deported. In this instance, Basch was ※represented§ by an engineer and businessman, Hanns Stumfall, who worked closely with Wegner in such cases to his own considerable proft and to the detriment of the Jewish sellers of properties and enterprises. Stumfall had been appointed to ※negotiate§ for Basch in 1939, and he received 72,000 RM for his services as a commission on the sale price of 1,674,000 RM. In 1937, the City of Munich had offered Basch 2,225,000 RM for the property, but the Baschs turned them down. This unfortunate attachment to Germany cost them dearly. Following the Pogrom of November 9, 1938, Basch (along with many other wealthy Jews) was dragged off to Dachau and was ※persuaded§ to sell his assets and leave Germany. The Baschs decided to join their son in the United States, but their decision came too late. Julius Basch took ill and died soon after the property was sold, and his wife was subsequently deported and died in Theresienstadt.89 
In 1949每1950, when the surviving son (Ernest B. Ashton) launched a restitu-tion case against Allianz, the concern initially claimed, rather astonishingly, that Basch had not negotiated under duress and that the intention to emigrate and the ※retaining§ of Stumfall antedated the November Pogrom. They also claimed that 
87 
Willi Meyer an das Magistrat von Gro.-Berlin, 21.Nov. 1950,WG., 5 WGA 4664 /50 (Ludwig 
Jansen). 88 Allianz an der Senator f Justiz, Berlin, 2. M.rz 1950, ibid. 89 The documentation on this complicated case, which shall be discussed again in the fnal chapter 
of this book, is to be found in the fles of the WGB, Ia 919, Bd. 1每3. See especially Allianz an die 
Wiedergutmachungsbehde Oberbayern, 12. April 1949, Bd. 1, Bl. 15每16; Samuel Ackermann 
& Co. an die Wiedergutmachungsbehde Oberbayern, 26.Mai 1949, ibid., Bl. 24每5; Kaufver-
trag 20. Jan. 1940, ibid., Bl. 45每9; Allianz an die Wiedergutmachungskammer beim Landgericht 
Mchen I, 19. Juni 1950, ibid., Bl. 120每1; Treuh.nder an Maiholzer, 28. Dez. 1939, and related 
correspondence in Bd. 3. For a frst-rate discussion of the Aryanization process in Munich, see 
Marian Rappl, ※ ＆Arisierungen＊ in Mchen. Die Verdr.ngung der jischen Gewerbetreibenden 
aus dem Wirtschaftsleben der Stadt 1933每1939,§ Zeitschrift f bayerische Landesgeschichte 63 
(2000), pp. 123每84. 
the price Allianz paid was 20% above the assessed value of 1,399,200 RM in 1935, that purchasing so substantial a property was a risky business for an insurance company, and that the RAA would not have allowed them to pay more under the conditions of 1940. It is signifcant to note that Allianz had lost important doc-umentation on the case during the war and that it changed its position once new information was placed at its disposal, although it continued to claim that the price it paid was fair and even asserted that its supervisory board fnance com-mittee members recalled twice turning down the price for being too high before fnally accepting it. In reality, however, as Allianz told the RAA in requesting per-mission to make the purchase, the fnance committee ※particularly welcomes the purchase of the property,§ whose real worth it considered to be 2.2 million RM in normal times. Indeed, Allianz＊s valuation was precisely that stated in the fles of the Munich Property Utilization Agency, Ltd. in January 1939 and in a list gen-erated by the City of Munich itself in April. Allianz described Kaufngerstra.e 22 as※acommercialbuilding ... withauniquecommerciallocation ....Forthis reason we did not hesitate to consider the proposition when the property was offered us for sale so that later our corporation can set up business offces there. The property is also extraordinarily suitable for effective advertising.§ Allianz thus viewed it as a very good and by no means risky investment. Most signif-cant for the discussion here, however, is that Allianz knew full well that it could strengthen its case by employing the immense tax problems faced by the Basch family after the various impositions on Jews following the November Pogrom: 
The present sale of the property is also of signifcance to the public interest. We submit a letter of the Trustee in conformity to the decision of the Government President of Up-per Bavaria of September 28, 1939 in which it is pointed out that the sale is absolutely necessary for the covering of the Jewish Property Levy, etc. Thus, after deduction of the assumed mortgages, at least 90% of the remaining approximately 600,000 RM pur-chase price will be left for the Reich Financial Administration for the trusteeship fee, for the still unpaid fve installments of the Jewish Property Levy owed by the former Jewish owner,90 for the regular and extraordinary levy owing the Jewish Religious Community under Reich regulations, for the Reich Flight Tax since the emigration of the Jew Israel Basch is immediately impending, as well as the unredeemable levy to the Gold Discount Bank for emigrant merchandise. The remaining amount of at the most 10% will initially stay in a blocked account and then be transfered to an emigrant account after emigration. In view of this public interest in the sale of the property, all of the relevant offcial agen-cies, especially the Special Plenipotentiary for Economic Matters for the Capital City of the Movement, President Christian Weber, have supported a sale to us and have opened up the prospect of a speeding up of the necessary approvals.91 
90 The so-called atonement tax imposed on the Jews after the Pogrom of November 9, 1938,to be 
discussed in Chapter 5, was payable initially in four installments, but the tax was then increased 
and a ffth installment added. 91 Allianz an das RAA, 22. Jan. 1940,SM, 1458/1/143, Bl. 63每4. For the valuation by the Vermens-
verwertung Mchen GmbH, see Staatsarchiv Mchen, NSDAP/38; for the valuation by the City 
of Munich, see Stadtarchiv Mchen, Film 22 (originals in Yad Vashem, Signatur M-1/DN 17). 
I am grateful to Marian Rappl for these references. 
Allianz thus presented itself as performing a public service in purchasing Kaufn-gerstra.e 22, and one cannot help wondering whether those involved gave a moment＊s thought 每 let alone serious contemplation 每 to the fact that they were thus serving as accomplices in the systematic despoliation of the Baschs and vio-lating the most elementary principles of business ethics, equity, and good faith. 
The entire episode refected the degree to which the Aryanization of Jewish assets 每 whether the price was fair or unfair and whether the money went to the property owner or the State 每 had become a part of ※normal business.§ How much this was the case is demonstrated by a consideration of the number of Jewish properties purchased during these years. According to available busi-ness reports, the Allianz concern purchased 433 properties between 1933 and 1948每1949. Purchases for the period 1941每1949 are dealt with collectively in the available report, but one can assume that there were few purchases in the years immediately after the war. The vast majority (336) were purchased by Al-lianz Leben, four of these in common with Allianz, which itself purchased 91 properties. The other ten properties were purchased by daughter companies of Allianz (Badische Pferde, Hammonia, and Neue Frankfurter). Of the 433 pur-chased properties, 348 were on the territory of what became the West German Federal Republic and, of these, 61 (or 17.5%) became the subject of restitution cases after 1945. The bulk of the remaining 85 properties were in the former German Democratic Republic, Poland, and the Soviet Union, where there was no restitution. In Breslau, 27 properties were acquired by Allianz, 16 of them in 1938每1939, while 14 properties were acquired in Leipzig. Both cities had sig-nifcant Jewish populations. How many of these 85 properties 每 many of which are multiple addresses on the same street, counted here for convenience as one 每 belonged to Jews? Satisfactory information is not available, but there is at least one case to be found where a Jew sought restitution for losses in the East. Hugo Benjamin, who lived in Tel-Aviv in 1950, sought recompense for underpayment in the amount of 85,555 RM for properties at Schmiedebrke 46/47 in Breslau that had been auctioned off and purchased by Allianz in 1939. 92 
Mortgages, like real estate, were among the assets used by Allianz and other insurance companies to cover their obligations; here, too, one could follow in the wake of an Aryanization to transfer the mortgage once given to a Jew to his successor. An interesting example is the textile frm Landshuter Leinen-und Gebildeweberei F.V. Grfeld, which had its main offces in Berlin and its factory in Landshut, Upper Silesia. It was Aryanized and taken over by the Max Kl Kommanditgesellschaft in 1938. Allianz Leben decided to offer the latter a mort-gage loan of 1 million gold marks in September 1938 and to transfer the 3 million 
92 The statistics on property acquisitions and restitution cases were developed for me by the research team at the Center for Corporate History of Allianz AG. For the Benjamin case, see WG., 5 WGA 484/50 (Hugo Benjamin). Allianz, of course, was not the only insurance company taking advantage of the real estate opportunities created by the persecution of Jews. The Aryanizations by the Alte Leipziger and the Gothaer Lebensversicherung are recorded in the approvals granted by the RAA, BAB, R 3104 /20544 and 21966. 
marks in mortgages it had previously given to Grfeld under the same condi-tions. In asking for the supervisory board＊s approval, Allianz directors pointed out that 每 although they had not yet assessed the full value of the properties for which the mortgages served as a guarantee 每 the property at the Kurfs-tendamm, corner of Joachimsthaler Stra.e in Berlin-Charlottenburg, was alone worth the 1 million of the new loan, to which had to be added the security that the Max Kl frm offered in the form of its building on Leipziger Stra.e in Berlin and the factory and villa in Landshut, Upper Silesia.93 Clearly Allianz was not responsible for the Aryanization of the Grfeld company, but it was a profting participant. 
The same holds true in the acquisition of shares that came on the market as a result of Aryanization. Thus, on November 1, 1938, Allianz wrote to the RWM that 
there is the intention of transferring into Aryan possession a block of Bayerische Ver-einsbank in Munich shares in the amount of about 4,000,000 RM (of a total capital of 31,000,000 RM) which are still in Jewish hands at the present time. In view of the pur-pose involved, we have declared ourselves prepared, presupposing the permission of the Reich Economics Ministry, to take over 1,300,000 RM in shares. In the case of the Bay-erische Vereinsbank, one is dealing with what is known to be one of the best Bavarian bank institutes. It has paid a 5% dividend in the last three years. The transfer will be made at 105% of par.94 
In making this request, which was granted in March 1939, Allianz made spe-cifc reference to conversations between Ministerial Director Lange and August von Finck, which is an important clue as to the source of the shares. Von Finck, acting for his own banking house of Merck, Finck & Co., was very much involved in efforts to keep Bayerische Vereinsbank in private hands despite Party interest in gaining control of it. He had purchased 4,200,000 RM in shares of the bank from the banking house of Mendelssohn & Co., itself undergoing Aryanization at this time, and there can be little doubt that the shares Allianz was seeking to gain came from this block.95 
Needless to say, Allianz kept a watchful eye out for insurance business oppor-tunities when there were Aryanizations. Thus, in April 1939, Hilgard wrote to Director Eduard Mosler of Deutsche Bank about the Schocken AG in Zwickau, a department store chain that had been renamed Merkur AG and whose capital had just been taken over by a bank consortium headed by Deutsche Bank. Neue Frankfurter had provided the old company with insurance against interruption of operations and was apparently now planning to change its fre insurance. Hil-gard hoped that Mosler would contact the new management and secure the fre 
93 Allianz Leben an Hans Rummel (Deutsche Bank), 27. Sept. 1938, BAB, 80 Ba 2/P 5774. 94 Allianz an RWM, 1.Nov. 1939,BAB,R 3104 /20524, Bl. 24每5. 95 See the very informative Vermerk des Parteistabsleiters Saupert of 13.Feb. 1939, BAB, ehem. 
BDC, PK, August von Finck (*18.7. 1898), and the interrogation of August von Finck, Sept. 23, 
1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /57/4. 
insurance contract for Neue Frankfurter as well, a request that Mosler granted.96 A few months later, Hilgard paid a visit to Director Karl Kimmich of Deutsche Bank to introduce his son, Hanns Hilgard, who was being sent to build up the insurance business for Allianz in the Sudeten area. Eduard Hilgard wanted his son introduced to the branch directors of banks associated with Allianz. As Kimmich reported to Director Paul Vernickel of the Reichenberg branch of the Deutsche Bank, Hilgard ※has in mind, among other things, also of the many Aryanizations and the insurance questions relating to them as well as industry in general.§97 
Thus, as the 1930s drew to a close, it had become a part of normal busi-ness to transfer old mortgages and insurance relationships to the new owners of Aryanized assets when it seemed proftable to do so. Efforts to be decent and fair sometimes coexisted with but more often simply gave way to the seizure of advantage and opportunity to gain from the plight of Jewish insurance agents forced to give up their professions and portfolios and of houseowners compelled to sell their properties. Even Schmitt could not rise above the temptation to sacrifce principle and honor to advantage in his role as chairman of the AEG supervisory board, and in 1936每1937 he joined with Hermann Bher (general director of AEG) in taking over the Gesfel/Ludwig Loewe AG in a manner that violated their previous agreements with Erich Loewe, who was considered a Jew by Nazi defnition. Both Schmitt and Bher had opposed anti-Semitic measures in the economy, but the tide had turned and giving way to Nazi pressures was a price worth paying for recapitalization of AEG via the takeover.98 Thus, it is dif-fcult to escape the impression that, by the time the more extreme radicalization began in 1938每1939, resistance to Aryanization 每 of one＊s own concern or of the careers, properties, and enterprises of others 每 had not only evaporated but had given way to a goodly measure of cynical opportunism. 
96 Hilgard an Mosler, 14. April 1939, and Mosler an Hilgard, 15. April 1939, BAB, 80 Ba 2 /P 5786. 
On the Schocken Aryanization, see Helmut Genschel, Die Verdr.ngung der Juden aus der Wirt-
schaft im Dritten Reich [Gtinger Bausteine zur Geschichtswissenschaft, Bd. 38] (Gtingen, 
1966), pp. 239每40. 97 Kimmich an Vernickel, 10. Juli 1939, BAB, 80 Ba 2 /P 779, Bl. 18. 98 See Peter Hayes, ※State Policy and Corporate Involvement in the Holocaust,§ in Michael Beren-
baum & Abraham J. Pecks (eds.), The Holocaust and History: The Known, the Unknown, the 
Disputed, and the Reexamined (Bloomington, Ind., 1998), pp. 197每218, esp. p. 201. 
4 

Allianz and the Reich Group: Politics of the Insurance Business in the Period of Regime Radicalization, 1936每1939 
While it is impossible not to deplore the role of Allianz executives and other businessmen in Aryanizations, it is necessary to understand that they were not operating in a context where either traditional business ethics or capital-ist economic rationality counted for much anymore. Having once persuaded themselves that they could ※prevent the worst§ by joining the Party and work-ing within the context of the regime, they increasingly found themselves in a situation where ※preventing the worst§ became a daily activity and where in-creasing engagement with the regime and its goals was the necessary result. This had profound consequences for the investment policies of banks and in-surance companies. These were, it must be remembered, regulated institutions that had remained under the cloud of recent scandals and fnancial collapses and whose social worth was constantly being challenged by powerful elements in the regime. 
The cloud was indeed made much heavier in March 1936 by the collapse of the Austrian Phix Life,1 the causes of which were painfully similar to those of the Favag＊s demise. Like the latter, Phix Life was a very large company 每 in fact, the third largest on the European continent 每 and one that did busi-ness in no fewer than 22 countries.2 Just as Favag owed its rise and fall to Paul Dumcke, so was Phix Life＊s fate intimately bound up with its leading direc-tor, Wilhelm Berliner 每 by all accounts a remarkable personality with extraor-dinary talents as a linguist, mathematician, fnancial expert, and lawyer, and a man who had close connections with the Austrian government. Like Favag, Phix Life overexpanded after the war and for similar reasons. In order to handle existing obligations, it took on new ones that were often of a highly speculative nature, which was obviously an expensive and dangerous way of doing business. These methods could hardly escape notice. Munich Re, for example, retreated from its engagements with Phix Life at the beginning 
1 Although they cooperated closely, it is important not to confuse Phix Life with Elementar-
Phix, which handled property insurance. 2 For good discussions of the Phix collapse, see Isabella Ackerl, ※Der Phix-Skandal,§ in Ludwig 
Jedlicka & Rudolf Neck (eds.), Das Juliabkommen von 1936. Vorgeschichte, Hintergrde und 
Folgen. Protokoll des Symposiums in Wien am 10. und 11. Juni 1976 (Vienna, 1977), pp. 241每79, 
and Marita Roloff & Alois Mosser, Wiener Allianz. Gegrdet 1860 (Vienna, 1991), pp. 135每55. 
150 
of the 1930s, as Kisskalt came to the conclusion that its management and fnancing were unsound, that its costs were too high, and that its premiums were too low. 
As noted earlier, he had hoped Allianz would purchase part of the still f-nancially sound Phix Elementar and put Eichbaum in charge.3 When General Director Michele Sulfna of the great Italian concern Generali showed an interest in buying up Elementar-Phix in September 1935, Kisskalt again recommended Eichbaum. It would be impossible to make a non-Austrian Jew the general di-rector at this point, but one could appoint someone suitable 每 like Eberhard von Reininghaus, who had a distinguished career frst with Anglo-Danubian Lloyd and then as deputy general director of Wechselseitige Brandschaden-und Janus Allgemeine Versicherungs-Anstalt a. G. in Vienna 每 and then ※give him an energetic man like Herr Eichbaum at his side for the actual work.§4 But Elementar-Phix, as will be shown, would be taken over in a different way. 
That Phix Life survived in the 1930s was due to three factors: Austrian distrust 每 after the collapse of the Creditanstalt in May 1931 每 of banks in com-parison to insurance companies; Berliner＊s close contacts with the government; and the laxity and corruption of high offcials in the Austrian supervisory au-thority. As was the case with Dumcke, Berliner＊s malfeasance, which was almost baroque in its breadth and complexity, came to light only after his unexpected death in February 1936. This was followed by the discovery of lists of all those he had bribed and the turning over of the true accounts of the concern to Berliner＊s successor, Eberhard von Reininghaus. The result of the exposures, needless to say, was a major international scandal and produced economic diffculties of very serious proportions. This was actually a much larger collapse than that of Favag, involving many more countries and policyholders. 
In contrast to Favag, whose insurance portfolios had been taken over by Al-lianz, it was the Austrian State that regulated the affairs of Phix Life by sepa-rating the insurance from the fnancial side of the company, liquidating the lat-ter, and requiring the Austrian business community more generally to guarantee a successor insurance company for the Phix Life insurance, .sterreichische Versicherungs-AG (.VAG). Participation in .VAG was made attractive by the aforementioned collective guarantee of the Austrian insurance business and var-ious restrictions on repurchase of insurance policies by their holders. Thus, both risk and the obligation to policyholders were reduced. Among its most impor-tant shareholders were Wiener St.dtische, the Italian Generali, and Munich Re. Indeed, Kisskalt and his colleagues considered it a matter of prestige to partici-pate and petitioned Schacht for special dispensation from the foreign exchange regulations in order to do so. 
3 See Chapter 3, pp. 126每7. 
4 Aktennote Kisskalt, 17. Sept. 1935, MR, A 2.13/46. In general, this fle contains important mate-
rial on the Phix Life affair and on Munich Re and Allianz＊s involvement with Elementar-Phix. 
On von Reininghaus, see his Lebenslauf in MR, D/8. 
Phix Life was regarded as a Jewish company. Berliner was a Jew, and the company had a large Jewish clientele. Indeed, the German government was specially hostile to Phix Life because Berliner had a reputation for helping German Jews rescue their assets. Von Reininghaus turned out to have a Jewish grandmother and to have expressed pride in having Jewish ancestry.5 In Ger-many, where Phix Life had been extremely active, there had been considerable anxiety about the concern＊s solidity; the supervisory agency had tried to obtain an increased bond from Phix Life and was worried about it having suffcient coverage. This was a real issue despite all the protective regulations, and while the public was told that there was nothing to worry about, there was a genuine danger that the German branch of Phix Life could go bankrupt if negotia-tions for its liquidation and the assumption of its policies failed. Thus, in May 1936, the Economics Ministry summoned the insurance industry organization leaders to discuss the situation. One could argue that the German insurers had no obligation to save the branch of a foreign company from a bankruptcy that it had brought upon itself, but insurance organization leaders dismissed such no-tions because ※they overlook the heart of the matter, which is that the existence of many German families is at stake and on the other side that the bankruptcy of the German branch of the Phix Life would be a heavy blow to the entire German life insurance business.§ The conclusion was that a common action by the insurers to prevent such a bankruptcy was necessary in the form of a guaran-tee for such losses as had been incurred. This was warmly supported by Kisskalt of Munich Re, who pointed out that his company had bowed out of the Phix Life long before but that he felt an obligation nonetheless. The Hungarian in-surance companies had put up a 3-million-pengguarantee for their Phix Life branch, and ※what the Hungarian insurance business can do is easily possible for theGerman enterprises which are much stronger incapital .... One has to avoid everything that is likely to promote the view that the German insurance business is not healthy.§6 There was only one negative voice, General Director Tiedke of Alte Leipziger, who argued that Phix Life had done nothing but ruin their business and that policyholders had gone to Phix Life primarily for speculative reasons and thus deserved no protection. The prevailing mood, however, was that the reputation of the German private insurance business de-pended upon them acting collectively. In the end, the guarantee was given and a new company, the Isar Lebensversicherungs-AG, was established to take over the German Phix Life policies. As we shall see, Isar was to present some spe-cial problems on the German insurance scene because it inherited a large Jewish portfolio from Phix Life. 
In contrast to the Favag case, where Allianz had saved the day and left share-holdersandfnancialcreditorstopaythebill, the Phix Lifeliquidationinvolved 
5 Gestapo an RWM, 23. Okt. 1933,BAB,R 3101/17325, Bl. 39每48. The reports of the German Em-
bassy in Vienna, headed by Franz von Papen, are very useful on the Phix Life affair; see ibid., 
especially Bl. 88每96 (1. April 1936), 258每9 (9.Mai 1936). 6 Meeting of May 12, 1936,BAB,R 3101/17325, Bl. 120每7. 
a great deal more direct government action as well as collective action to cover the losses and protect policyholders. It is signifcant that the Phix Life issue in Germany was solved under the auspices of the RAA, whose powers had been greatly increased. There were some who even argued that the RAA should, in effect, run the peak association of the private insurance business, and the volun-tary collective action of the private insurers undoubtedly refected their desire to show that they knew how to keep their own house in order. Also, there were im-portant forces in the National Socialist regime arguing for socialization of the insurance business. It was thus important to be able to argue that ※the events in Vienna give no cause for a strengthening of the tendencies which run in the di-rection of a nationalization of the private insurance industry, and certainly not among us, where the National Socialist economic policy by aiming at a spirit of community and securing the necessary state infuence has made the means of socialization superfuous.§7 
Between 1933 and 1936, much of business cooperation with government eco-nomic policies had been relatively voluntary. Schacht (Schmitt＊s successor as economics minister) was viewed as friendly to business, and the bureaucracy of the RWM and some of the other ministries was often a haven when having to deal with the new leaders. As noted earlier, there was considerable continu-ity between the regulatory fnancial regime established by Hitler＊s predecessors and that of the National Socialists. The effort to reduce interest rates, always a matter of great importance in the insurance feld, had frst begun with the Emer-gency Decree of December 1931, and the National Socialist interest in further interest reductions was hardly a novelty. The value of Allianz Leben＊s 670 mil-lion marks in investments in 1934 was inevitably affected by even the smallest change in rates. Also, Allianz Leben was the fourth largest holder of mortgages in Germany, and the value of these holdings and its coverage 每 and what it could offer its policyholders in dividends 每 obviously were tied to interest rates. Still, Director Schloe.mann viewed the reduction of average interest rates from 6.2% to 5.56%in 1933 as a welcome development in the effort to promote invest-ment and economic recovery. At the beginning of 1934, the mortgage rate was dropped voluntarily another half percent, but Allianz Leben responded to the situation by lowering its dividends on life insurance policies. This was not an action that one wanted to take very often, however, and the Allianz directors showed considerable concern in 1935 as they faced yet another reduction at the beginning of 1936 which would mean that the rate had been reduced from 8.5% in 1931 to 5% on both existing and new mortgages.8 
On the surface, this reduction of 1936 was ※voluntary.§ Both the RWM and the RAA had strongly recommended it, and Hilgard had negotiated various technical aspects with the RWM about the matter before formally urging the 
7 Joseph Winschuh, ※Phix-Gedanken,§ Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, April 6, 1936,BAB, R 3101/17324, Bl. 164. 
8 23. erweiterte Vorstandssitzung am 4.Mai 1934, pp. 6每7, 24. erweiterte Vorstandssitzung am 6. Nov. 1934, pp. 3每4, 26. erweiterte Vorstandssitzung am 29. Okt. 1935,p. 8,FHA,S 17.2/4. 
interest-rate reduction to all members of the Reich Group on May 21, 1935.A member of the Reich Group objected to the procedure on the grounds that it was a ※market regulating measure,§ claimed that the measure was damaging to the proftability of his company and, in effect, challenged Hilgard＊s right to use his position in the Reich Group to exert such pressure. For Hilgard this was a very serious matter, because he saw his role as precisely that of an intermediary between the government and the industry 每 negotiating the best possible arrange-ment and maintaining as much voluntarism as possible while at the same time getting his ※troops§ into line once a decision had been made and thus preventing the ※worst.§ Indeed, Hilgard was anxious to control the manner in which the interest-rate reduction was presented to the public and insisted that it be treated confdentially until he decided on how to describe it to the press.9 
Hilgard therefore orchestrated a response from the RWM to the rebel in his ranks in the form of a letter addressed directly to himself from State Secre-tary Hans Posse, wherein the latter at once defended Hilgard＊s procedure and provided a revealing illustration of how businessmen were supposed to think under the new order. Posse insisted that just because an interest-rate reduction could indirectly reduce profts did not mean that Hilgard＊s ※urgent recommen-dation§ for such reduction was a market regulating measure in any legal sense. He went on: 
There is no doubt in my mind as to your authority to call upon the leaders of the enter-prises belonging to your group with great vigor and seriousness to reduce the interest rate for long-term loans in the interest of the German economy and thereby to preserve unity. The necessity of climbing down from the excessively high interest rates on the capital market ought also not be contested by the head of the insurance enterprise in question. If he nevertheless turns against such a regulation because high-interest contracts make possible the distribution of high dividends to the insured and, as a result, relatively low insurance premiums in life insurance, then he fails to recognize that the insurance com-panies have also to consider frst and foremost the interests of the entire nation and to subordinate the special interest of their policyholders to these interests.10 
The insurance executive at whom these lines were aimed was probably Gen-eral Director Johannes Tiedke of Alte Leipziger, who was unusually outspoken in his attachment to market economy principles and hostile about compromis-ing what he considered to be sound business practice. Like He., he had a deep distaste for National Socialism and did not join the Party, although this did not prevent him from praising what he considered to be Hitler＊s achievements in for-eign and domestic affairs: restoring Germany＊s international position and ending 
9 Hilgard an den Leiter der Wirtschaftsgruppen Privatversicherung und den Leiter der Wirtschafts-
gruppe fentlich-rechtliche Versicherung, 21.Mai 1935 und 28.Mai 1935; Oertel an die dem 
Reichsverband angeschlossenen Fachverb.nde und Verbandsgesellschaften, 27.Mai 1935,GDV, 
RS/18. The interest-rate reduction measures were the subject of a host of guidelines and other 
circular letters from the Reich Group; see BAK, B 280/12237, Bl. 237每47. 10 Posse an den Leiter der Reichsgruppe Versicherungen, 26. Juni 1935,GDV,RS/18. 
class confict.11 Unlike He., however, Tiedke was impolitic and given to mis-steps, and he felt that Schmitt and Hilgard 每 with their ostentatious entry into the Party and their concessions on questions like the interest-rate reduction 每 were selling out the interests of the industry. Even if Tiedke was the executive in question, he remained quite dissatisfed and, at a meeting of the executive committee of the Reich Association in June 1936, complained that his company had lost 300,000 RM because of the interest-rate reduction, that Victoria had probably lost two or three times as much, and that the savings banks managed to get more concessions from the RWM (with respect, e.g., to revalued mort-gages, which retained their 6% interest rate if held by savings banks) than did the insurance business. He called upon the association to secure equal treatment. Schloe.mann opposed arguing for equality, since the savings banks had reduced their average rate to 4.8% while the insurance business remained at 5%. Hil-gard was especially irritated at Tiedke for suggesting that the savings banks had a ※life of their own§ while the insurance business had lost all autonomy, and he responded by saying that he believed, 
on the basis of ... numerous negotiations,... that there is hardly a group in the entire economy which enjoys a life of its own to such an extent as insurance. The fact that the insurance business has a life of its own is due exclusively to the fact that the Reich Eco-nomics Minister has great confdence in the leaders of the insurance business. The savings banks do not in the least have a life of their own; they do not even have the freedom to give even a single mark for donations; everything depends on the agreement of the RWM.12 
Therecordshowsthatthere was considerablediscussionfollowing theseremarks, and though the end result was an expression of confdence in Hilgard, it would be interesting to know if Tiedke stood alone in his criticisms and how concerned the other insurance leaders were about the consequences of further interest-rate reduction. 
In any case, there was no reason for optimism about the future, and by 1940 Schmitt told Funk (Schacht＊s successor as economics minister) that the average interest rate at Allianz was 4.6%, that he anticipated it going down to 4% and dropping further, and at that point ※then either the premiums for millions of policies in force will have to be raised or the amounts of insurance reduced,§ while new insurance policies would be calculated on the basis of a 3% interest rate. Funk responded by claiming that he intended no further reductions dur-ing the war but that he hoped to bring down interest rates afterward and that 
11 See for example his speech ※Zum 50. Geburtstag unseres Frers, 20. April 1939,§ and also his 
※Meine Stellung zum Nationalsozialismus erhaupt und die Grde daf, da. ich nicht in die 
Partei eingetreten bin,§ of July 5, 1945, NL Tiedke. I am grateful to Roland Knebusch for placing 
these materials of his grandfather at my disposal. There is a very useful discussion of Tiedke and 
his role as general director of Alte Leipziger in the unpublished manuscript, also kindly placed at 
my disposal by the author, Volker Wei., ※Ist das, was wir machen, auch gerecht? Zum Ged.cht-
nis an Generaldirektor Johannes Tiedke 1881每1947 (Oberursel, 1995). 12 Niederschrift er die Sitzung des Allgemeinen Pr.sidialausschusses des Reichsverbandes der Pri-
vatversicherung am 16. Juli 1936, pp. 12每14,GDV,RS/14. 
Table B. Securities Held by Allianz and Allianz Leben, 1931每1945 (Reichsmark) 

Year  Allianz  Allianz Leben  
1931  12,933,833.96  118,900,341.56  
1932  18,634,017.46  150,342,718.05  
1933  25,972,466.69  164,806,657.99  
1934  33,691,063.52  220,781,252.05  
1935  48,060,166.34  267,387,318.73  
1936  59,024,101.21  311,229,397.36  
1937  69,335,711.09  360,416,775.67  
1938  61,522,393.32  419,931,346.29  
1939  72,498,254.72  477,804,778.32  
1940  84,284,428.13  639,265,299.98  
1941  108,341,366.60  757,923,440.01  
1942  128,072,238.69  875,357,933.16  
1943  138,411,664.29  995,696,285.98  
1944  158,949,452.25  N/A  
1945  155,498,589.92  N/A  

Source: Business reports of Allianz and Allianz Leben, 1931每1945. 
starting to operate on a 3% basis early was a good idea.13 It was manifest that the autonomy of the insurance business had become very limited indeed; Funk had every reason to have confdence in the insurance industry organization, and the Allianz executives who led it, since they could be counted upon not only to adapt to the government＊s policies but even to anticipate them. 
Nowhere was this more in evidence than in the massive investment by the in-surance industry during these years in securities almost entirely attributable to the holding of government paper. Table B demonstrates the size of this increase in the holding of securities, largely governmental. Whereas the relative percent-ages of government securities and private stock issues of the total amounts of securities held by Allianz did not change much during the period in question, the change for Allianz Leben was dramatic. In 1931, 11.6% of the total securi-ties held were in government bonds and guaranteed loans; 39% were shares in banks, railroads, and industrial enterprises. In 1939, 54.6% of the total secu-rities were held in government bonds and guaranteed loans, and the 11% held in shares were all invested in Reichsbahn preferential stock. In 1931, 15%of Allianz Leben＊s securities holdings were in bonds of banks, railroads, and indus-trial enterprises; in 1939, the amount so invested was only 5%.14 
13 Aktennote Schmitt. Besuch bei Minister Funk, 24. Sept. 1940, MR, A 1/7. 14 Gesch.ftsberichte, Allianz Leben 1931 (p. 25), 1939 (p. 33), FHA. 
As in the case of interest-rate reductions, the process of acquiring increasing amounts of securities to help fnance the regime＊s programs began ※voluntar-ily.§ Thus, in September 1934, the Reich Finance Ministry approached Director Schloe.mann and asked if Allianz Leben was willing to take over a large port-folio of securities owned by the Reich to assist the work creation program. Not only did Schloe.mann agree, he also informed members of the Association of German Life Insurance Companies of the proposal with the result that 37 com-panies bought a total of 50 million of the fxed-interest securities. Allianz Leben took 20 million and Allianz took 5 million of these securities, thus together ac-counting for half the purchase.15 
This, however, was only the beginning. What could be more convenient and useful than deriving money from the investment of private enterprises in bond issues? 每 especially where (as with the insurance industry) funds had to be in-vested ※securely§ in order to cover obligations. Soon there was a renewed sum-mons to purchase bonds for the Reich railroads, the Reichsautobahn, and the general struggle against unemployment. A more or less standardized proce-dure developed. Thus, Hilgard would negotiate with the Finance Ministry, the amount and conditions would be determined, the Reich Group and its members would then be informed, and the level of subscription would be based on pre-miums received by the companies in question. The companies would be asked to pledge their subscriptions, and careful record would be kept of performance. In 1935, for example, the insurance industry was asked to subscribe 200 million marks worth of the Reich bond issue of May 1935, with Allianz alone taking 25% of the subscription. The insurance industry had in fact raised 204,768,500 RM, with 168,644,500 RM being contributed by the private companies. No sooner had these results been announced, in the Presidium of the Reich Group in No-vember 1935, then Hilgard indicated that the industry would be called upon to contribute to a 1936 bond issue 每 though he knew neither the amount nor the terms. He could only urge that they be prepared and not invest their avail-able money in long-term assets but rather in short-term interest-bearing assets like treasury bills. In fact, the insurance companies ended up with substantial quotas for not one but two government bond issues in 1936. The frst was for 195,047,800 RM in Reich bonds; 158,302,600 RM came from the private insur-ance sector. Allianz bought 5 million RM in these bonds, while Allianz Leben bought 25 million RM. The second bond issue quota for the insurance indus-try resulted in the purchase of 239,804,200 RM＊s worth of Reich-guaranteed bonds of Reichsautobahn-Gesellschaft, 198,562,700 RM of which came from the private sector. Allianz purchased 6.5 million RM of this issue, while Allianz Leben purchased 30 million RM. Although these offcially were ※voluntary§ investments 每 since Hilgard and the Reich Group had no more right to impose investment quotas than they had to impose interest-rate reductions 每 the Reich Group made a regular practice of ※reminding§ companies to pledge or asking them why they had refused to do so. Indeed, even foreign insurance companies 
15 Schloe.mann an Ministerialrat Bernard (RWM), 2. Okt. 1934,BAB,R 3101/17009, Bl. 199每200. 
doing business in Germany were expected to do something for their ※host land,§ and they did purchase 1,225,000 RM of the 1935 issue and a combined total of 2,527,250 RM of the two 1936 issues.16 
While the government needed to publicize these bond issues for the purpose of generating public support, it had an obvious interest in suppressing infor-mation about the extent to which its success depended on the compulsion be-ing exerted on the business community. The RWM and Hilgard thus regularly warned against unauthorized divulging of information to the press. For anyone employed at a major insurance company, however, it was diffcult not to notice what was happening. Thus, in 1937, Socialist informants at an insurance com-pany reported: 
The fnancial situation is viewed much more critically than the international position of the Reich. The employees are at least to some extent aware of the extent to which insur-ance monies are drawn upon for the compulsory loans of the Reich and ask themselves how the fnancial diffculties will be solved in the long run. They had expected Germany to join in when the Gold Bloc countries devalued and were astonished that this did not occur. There are already discussions as to whether or not the price increases in Germany are to be viewed as the beginning of an infation.17 
Certainly there must have been many vivid memories of the role played by gov-ernment bonds in the Great Infation and by their depreciation, although these could neither be discussed in public nor even put on paper. Nevertheless, there were grounds for concern because a fundamental change of economic policy was announced at the Nuremberg Party Congress on September 9, 1936. 
The Four-Year Plan 每 offcially the second such plan, since the name was intended to remind Germans of the frst and its alleged success in fghting un-employment 每 was intended to achieve rapid rearmament through mobilization of the economy. However, it ran counter to the conservative economic ideas of Schacht and others who felt that it was necessary to return to more normal eco-nomic and fnancial practices; instead, the Plan was intended to push forward preparedness by promoting high levels of self-suffciency and vastly increasing the management of the economy. Toward this end, immense powers were vested in the person of Hermann Ging, who was made Reich Plenipotentiary for the Four-Year Plan and given an organization to implement the plan on Octo-ber 16, 1936. Ging proceeded to coordinate the Economics Ministry with his 
16 See Reichsgruppe Versicherungen an RWM, 16. Aug. 1937, 5. Okt. 1937, Hilgard an den Leiter 
der Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung, 2. April 1936, Vermerke Kler, Nov. und Dez. 1937, 
and other related documents in SM, 1458/1/65, Bl. 4每5, 10每14, 34每5, 40每1; Niederschrift er 
die Sitzung des allgemeinen Pr.sidialausschusses des Reichsverbands der Privatversicherung am 
22.Nov. 1935, pp. 17每18,GDV,RS/13. For the lists of companies and the premiums and assess-
ments for the bond drives in 1935每1937 as well as correspondence and ※reminders,§ see GDV, 
unverzeichnete Akte (Az 20, XI); see also Bericht an die Aufsichtsratsmitglieder, 1. Okt. 1935, 
FHA, S 17.1/23. 17 Deutschland-Berichte der Sozialdemokratischen Partei Deutschlands (1937), p. 352. On the ef-forts to control press reports, see the Rundschreiben of May 22, 1935, Jan. 7, 1936, and April 2, 1936,GDV,RS/18. 
own organization to the point where he had the RWM apparatus at his disposal. Schacht resigned in December 1937 and was replaced by Funk in February 1938. Exactly what these personnel developments meant for Allianz was unclear. On the one hand, Schmitt had excellent relations with Ging and Funk, while he and Hilgard continued to have good connections in the ministries. On the other hand, Schmitt＊s fears about the regime＊s trajectory toward war could only be in-creased by the Four-Year Plan, and neither he nor Hilgard and their colleagues in the insurance business could be particularly happy about the expanding role of the government in economic affairs. One of the most serious potential threats came from the appointment of a Reich Commissar for Price Formation on Octo-ber 29, 1936, in the person of the hard-nosed Gauleiter of Silesia, Josef Wagner. The charge of the new offce was to fght infation, which could otherwise be expected to increase enormously under the Four-Year Plan. Wagner had extra-ordinary powers and, on November 26, 1936, issued a price-stop decree that subjected all price and wage increases to his approval. Needless to say, the effect of this price stop on insurance premiums was a source of great concern to the industry leadership, since Wagner considered insurance premiums to be prices subject to his authority.18 
The Four-Year Plan was a test of Hilgard＊s already well-honed talents for speaking the language of the regime at a time when he was confronting a new wave of confict 每 involving such issues as automobile insurance rates 每 between the private insurers, on the one hand, and the DAF and publicly chartered com-panies (as well as the Party radicals) on the other hand. The subject of auto rates had assumed special importance because of the Nazi craze for motorization, bad German driving habits, and pressures to tighten the restrictions on insur-ance salespersons and agents. The more the regime challenged liberal economic principles, the more Hilgard had to encase his defense of private insurer prof-itability in an ever more elaborate shell of what passed for economic thinking in the National Socialist context. 
A splendid example of Hilgard＊s skill on the National Socialist political tight-rope under these circumstances is provided by his speech, ※The Task of German Insurance in the New Economy,§ to the DAF＊s Reich Working Congress of the Reich Plant Community for Banking and Insurance on October 15, 1936 每 that is, virtually coincident with the announcement of the Four-Year Plan. DAF events werealwaysdiffcult occasions, especially since thisonewaspresidedover byDAF leader Paul Lencer. Hilgard shared the platform with Professor Paul Riebesell, who represented the publicly chartered insurance companies but was a man of moderate disposition with whom one could do business. Hilgard＊s right-hand 
18 The signifcance of the Four-Year Plan is often underestimated, but Richard Overy has rightly called attention to its immense importance for the development of the economy. See his working paper for the Arbeitskreis zur Rolle der Unternehmen im Nationalsozialismus of the Gesellschaft f Unternehmensgeschichte, Frankfurt, ※The Four-Year Plan§ (Frankfurt, 2000), as well as War and Economy in the Third Reich (Oxford, 1994), Pt. 3. It is worth noting that Wagner, although an old Nazi, retained his church ties and was thrown out of all his offces in 1943; he later became involved in the July 1944 plot against Hitler and was probably murdered because of it. 
man at Allianz, Director Paul Lux, went over Riebesell＊s speech carefully and also made a point of giving Riebesell a draft of Hilgard＊s speech together with assurances that there would be no critical remarks about the publicly chartered insurance companies. Hilgard decided to exercise similar restraint with respect to any mention of rate increases or deductibles for automobile insurance due to the increasing problems with reckless driving. Instead, mention would be made of the faith the insurance companies were placing in the government＊s ※traffc education program.§ One wanted to avoid public criticism of the pri-vate insurance companies at all costs and to tread lightly in dealing with nasty Nazi criticism emanating, for example, from the SS journal Das Schwarze Korps. Most recently 每 and to the great annoyance of Allianz＊s public relations director, Baron Edgar von Uexkl, and the director of Allianz＊s life insurance opera-tions, Rudolf Schloe.mann 每 Karl Samwer (former general director of Gothaer Lebensversicherungsbank AG and chairman of the German Association of Insur-ance Science) had responded to Das Schwarze Korps attacks in the newspapers, greatly irritating young editors in the Party press and potentially encouraging them to engage in further criticisms. Uexkl and Schloe.mann turned to Al-lianz＊s general director, Hans He., to intervene personally and restrain Samwer, an effort that met with success and nicely illustrates the kind of backroom poli-tics in which businessmen now had to engage.19 
It thus remained for Hilgard to further still these troubled waters by placing the interests of the private insurers in the context of a pandering National Social-ist discourse. The Frer＊s Four-Year Plan, Hilgard announced, had placed new tasks before the insurance companies and had thereby given ※the work of the in-surance industry a political meaning.§ What Hilgard conceded with a short sen-tence, however, he then relativized in a longer and more convoluted one: ※That should not mean that we see the political obligations of our work in politicizing and organizing, but rather that it exists in a clean, objective, forward-striving la-bor which takes its meaning from service to the State and the people.§ Hilgard went on to explicate this conception of the role of private enterprise in the new economic order: 
Whether we now seek to win over the individual comrade to enter into the community of risks of the insured, whether we have to regulate damage costs or whether we have to take into account certain social or demographic policy considerations in the setting of rates, whether we follow the leadership of the state in the investment of the capital trusted to us or whether we promote large constructive plans and works through the taking over of risks 每 we always have the obligation of testing each of our acts for their effect upon the entire national community.20 
Six weeks later, on December 2, 1936, in the more agreeable environment of the general meeting of the Reich Association for Private Insurance in Dresden, Hil-gard addressed the problems of ※The Tasks of Private Insurance in the Four-Year 
19 Lux an Hilgard, 8. Okt. 1936, FHA, S 17.6/8. 20 The speech is to be found in ibid. 
Plan§ more directly.21 To be sure, the concrete issues were once again embel-lished with dramatic language and embedded in the ideological discourse of the Third Reich, as Hilgard strove once again to save the basic principles of the capi-talist economy by bringing them in through the back door. Thus, the immensity of the tasks presented by the Plan were ※perhaps frightening,§ above all for those ※who perhaps want to operate on the basis of an economic viewpoint which be-longs to a time that has been overcome.§ Notions of ※the greatest proftability§ were antiquated and incompatible with the new way of thinking demanded by National Socialism 每 which was not to say, however, that economic considera-tions could be dismissed: 
Our task must continue to be to work for the proftability and the maintenance of the eco-nomic strength of our enterprises. For he, who perhaps out of a fanatical desire to serve the people throws economic effciency or the striving for proftability overboard and sac-rifces his enterprises in a falsely understood sense of sacrifce, will go to ruin just as well as he who does not take any heed of the demands of the general welfare. The one goes to ruin because he believes he can neglect the laws of the National Socialist world view, and the other suffers shipwreck because he believes that he can set aside the eternally valid laws of economics. 
Hilgard then moved from these spiritual and intellectual ※heights§ to the bread-and-butter issues presented by the Four-Year Plan. All areas of insur-ance would be affected in one way or another, but certain branches would be particularly involved 每 for example, fre insurance, machine insurance, liability insurance, and fight insurance. In every case, Hilgard was (not surprisingly) worried about the implications of the Four-Year Plan for his industry. Fires, ma-chine breakdowns, accidents and mishaps, and plane crashes were, after all, to be anticipated in an economy about to be so massively overheated. The dilemma was that it would be diffcult to increase premiums precisely because the greater risks were being incurred in the national cause. There had been, for example, enormous pressures on the fre insurers to reduce their premiums, and Hilgard claimed there had been substantial reductions during the past few years whose general invisibility refected the fact that most reductions were handled individ-ually. The high profts came from older policies, and Hilgard urged that they be put into reserves so as to have a basis for dealing with the anticipated in-creases in damages due to the Four-Year Plan. At the same time, he appealed to the branch to reduce premiums and improve the quality of protection for raw materials producers working for the Four-Year Plan. He expected the machine insurance branch to experience particular stress because of production demands and warned that only ※internally very powerful and strong corporations§ would be able to handle the insurance in this branch. The obvious implication was again that the big insurance companies would be best suited to meet the requirements 
21 The discussion and quotes that follow are based on the copy of the speech in the Sitzungsbericht 
er die ordentliche Hauptversammlung des Reichsverbandes der Privatversicherung am 2. Dez. 
1936,GDV,RS/9. 
of the Plan and that their fnancial soundness was of central importance. For such reasons, Hilgard had some particularly nasty things to say about the price competition and lack of discipline exercised by the liability insurance companies, warning that ※at no time and in no area has lack of regulation and discipline led to anything other than downfall.§ 
Hilgard＊s summons to self-discipline and to providing more service at less cost under the anticipated trying conditions was particularly pronounced with respect to fight insurance and to reinsurance questions. On the one hand, this branch was important as a source of foreign exchange, which the Reich desper-ately needed. On the other hand, the insurance industry was being criticized for having too passive a foreign-exchange balance, and Hilgard urged that the Ger-man companies undertake more of their own reinsurance and reevaluate their foreign reinsurance connections 每 without, of course, undermining Germany＊s international trading connections. Here again, the message was that stronger and richer companies were needed to meet the autarchy demands of the new program and still keep Germany active internationally. From this perspective, Hilgard worried greatly about the pressures emanating from critics of the indus-try in the DAF and Party, anxieties that came through even as he expressed their alleged commonality of interests. He warned against pressures to overregulate insurance agents and agencies, as demanded by the DAF, and was particularly opposed to the expansion of group insurance for each occupational group and profession, which he castigated as ※collective selfshness.§ If each occupational group joined together for insurance purposes, then nothing would be left but high-risk customers, an obviously undesirable situation for insurance compa-nies. In short, the private insurance industry had to be on its guard as it faced the new demands of the Four-Year Plan, for as Hilgard noted in a rare moment of straightforwardness, ※[w]e face the mighty block of the German Labor Front which, as you all know, is possessed with an extraordinary urge to activity.§ Hil-gard did insist that the task was not to fght the DAF but to work together with it. Nevertheless, the message was clear to those who understood the language being used. Somehow the industry had to demonstrate its worth in the Four-Year Plan or succumb to its enemies in the party and regime. 
The Four-Year Plan meant a substantial increase in the insurance industry＊s holdings of government paper, as well as a further reduction of the alleged ※vol-untarism§ in their purchase through the systematization of subscription levels and restriction of other investment options. This development became particu-larly evident in 1938. Whereas the insurance industry was supposed to contribute 125 million RM to the bond drive in the frst half of 1938, the contribution was raised to 200 million RM for the second half of the year. Furthermore, life in-surance companies were expected to invest a minimum of 15% of their yearly premium receipts in the bond issue, while other branches were required to invest at least 3% of their premium receipts. The RWM assigned the Reich Group the task of monitoring these contribution levels. The Finance and Economics Min-istries also expected the insurance companies to continue their existing level of subscription to longer-term Reich loans issued by the government, the 200 mil-lion RM bond purchase being considered a supplementary investment. Also, the regime had obviously learned from the experience of the First World War, when companies used previously purchased war bonds to pay for new ones; insurance companies were warned that the investments in question were to be made from current income and not from the sale of previously purchased state securities. Indeed, a secret Reich Economics Ministry decree ordered that the companies were to invest all available monies in Reich bonds, while the provision of money or granting of mortgages for new housing construction was banned. Similarly, the purchase of real estate was allowable only with special permission, and this explains the elaborate arguments in Allianz＊s purchase of Kaufngerstra.e 22 in Munich discussed earlier. The insurance companies hoped that both the size of subscriptions and the restrictions on investments would be reduced in 1939, but they were rapidly disabused of such fantasies. Indeed, Hilgard informed his colleagues in January 1939 that the life insurance companies were expected to provide a minimum of 30% of their premium income to the bond drive, while the Reichsbank reported in April that the insurance industry had purchased 620,231,600 RM in Reich securities issued by the Reich in 1938. It anticipated that the industry would provide 800,000,000 RM in 1939. In that year, Allianz bought 6.7 million RM and Allianz Leben subscribed to 57 million RM of the government loans. By 1940, insurance industry subscriptions reached 1.4 billion marks for the year. Hence, a fundamental consequence of the Four-Year Plan was that the assets of insurance companies were increasingly dominated by state securities. The engagement was made all the more problematic by the 1939 re-duction of interest rates on the bonds from 4.5%to 4%. In 1933, Reich loans amounted to 10% of the capital assets of the Allianz or 12% if one added in mu-nicipal and other public loans. The respective percentages for 1939 were 21% and 24%.22 
There were, of course, other important areas of investment aside from real estate, mortgages, and government bonds, but in some cases these had become problematic. Although Allianz held shares in a number of important banks and enterprises 每 Commerzbank, AEG, IG Farben, and Vereinigte Stahlwerke 每 share holdings averaged about 13% of securities and participations between 1933 and 1939. 23 The stock market, however, was not an institution that prospered in the Third Reich. The government had legislated a Dividend and Bond Law on December 4, 1934, which set a ceiling on dividends with the object of promoting 
22 See the extensive documentation in SM, 1458/1/66, especially Schreiben der Reichsgruppe, July 
2, 1938, August 8, 1938, January 1, 1939, and April 1, 1939. For the Allianz subscriptions, see Bl. 
218 and 232. See also Bericht an die Aufsichtsratsmitglieder, 19. Sept. 1938,FHA,S 17.1/2, and 
the Gesch.ftsberichte for 1933 and 1939. 23 The holdings are listed in the Gesch.ftsberichte for 1933每1938, FHA. After that time, they were 
not individually listed. In addition, of course, Allianz held majority control shares of the cor-
porations in the concern. Its shares in Munich Re and Hermes, however, were listed as normal 
shareholdings. 
its bonds and converting the public debt. Hence there was little incentive to issue new shares or to buy them. This was true of even so promising an enterprise as the ever-expanding Hermann-Ging-Werke, because such shares were not ac-cepted as primary reserve coverage by the RAA.24 More promising were loans to enterprises connected with the Four-Year Plan, and these were encouraged by the government although they were not without problems of their own. In 1937,for example, the Reich Economics Ministry encouraged Allianz to lend IG Farben the money needed to build worker housing at the new Buna factory in Schkopau near Merseburg, but the entire effort was aborted when the DAF intervened and offered to do the fnancing itself.25 Allianz had better luck with an 8-million-RM loan to Harpener Bergbau AG in 1936, which the latter company intended to use to buy shares of Essener Steinkohlenbergwerke AG from Vereinigte Stahl-werke. The latter intended to use the money it received to repurchase the shares of Vereinigte Stahlwerke that Friedrich Flick had sold to the Reich back in 1932. As part of the deal, Allianz also purchased 1.5 million RM in the shares of the Essener Steinkohlenbergwerke from Deutsche Bank. The money was thus being used to promote a reprivatization desired by industry and the government, and Allianz also received as security a mortgage on Harpener buildings worth some 22 million RM. In this case, the RAA accepted the mortgage as primary reserve coverage.26 
Such promising high capitalist transactions were not a daily occurrence, of course, but Allianz made major loans to utility companies 每 particularly those connected with Dessauer Gas, whose supervisory board chairman was Kurt Schmitt 每 and also participated in loan consortia with banks and/or other in-surance companies to provide substantial loans to big industrial frms such as Vereinigte Stahlwerke, Wintershall, Henschel & Sohn, and Braunkohle Ben-zin AG.27 The concern was indeed hungry for good loan investments, most of which were actually to be made by Allianz Leben, where Schloe.mann han-dled industrial loan negotiations. Hilgard complained to Director Kimmich of Deutsche Bank that the latter was not as forthcoming in serving as an inter-mediary for friendly companies, and pointed out that one needed to encourage industrial frms involved in building worker housing or productive facilities un-der the Four-Year Plan to seek such loans. The way to do this, Hilgard pointed out, was to have the company or its bank approach Reich Commissar Walter Kler (who handled Four-Year Plan matters in the RWM) and claim a need for a loan. Kler apparently was easy to deal with under the right conditions: ※No 
24 See James, ※Deutsche Bank,§ pp. 285每91. On the Hermann-Ging-Werke shares, see RWM an 
den Braunschweigischen Minister des Innern, SM, 1458/1/59, Bl. 19. 25 See the correspondence between Warncke and Mansfeld, Feb. 9每25, 1937,SM, 1458/1/59, Bl. 3每5. 26 See Steinbrinck an Staatssekret.r Posse, 1. April 1930, and RAA an RWM, 4. April 1936, Ver-
merk, 7. April 1936, and other relevant correspondence, BAB, R 3101/17078. 27 For a utility loan to Stassfurter Licht-und Kraftwerke AG (1935), see BAB, R 3104/20500, Bl. 
60每4; for the industrial loans, which were given in 1938每1940, see BAB, R 3104/20492, Bl. 39每40, 
46, 57, 62, 121, 132. 

Eduard Hilgard, head of the Reich Group for Insurance, giving a speech at the celebration of the 125th anniversary of the Berlinische Feuer-Versicherungs-Anstalt in the conference hall of Berlin City Hall, December 11, 1937. 
hard boundaries are drawn, but rather, if someone has special contacts, permis-sions beyond this narrow program are granted.§28 Thus, Allianz had been able to give out 30 million in loans to such companies, and Hilgard added that Al-lianz was prepared to act as an intermediary with other insurance companies if the amounts involved were too large for it to handle alone. Kimmich was careful to take note of the information, although his own inclination was to approach other friendly insurance companies directly rather than have Allianz act as the go-between. Also, as Kimmich told Hilgard on another occasion, it was not easy to offer Allianz good prospects because Allianz was very selective and ※sets the strictest conditions with respect to the quality of the loans. For example, loans to armaments plants are made only with the greatest reluctance by Allianz 每 most 
28 Aktenvermerk Kimmich, 13. Dez. 1939,BAB, 80 Ba 2/P 5779, Bl. 35每6. 
favored are utilities, or consumer industries, for example breweries, but even here there must be accessory guarantees such as securities, etc.§29 
One senses from such statements that Allianz, Hilgard, and the industry were seeking to reduce the risks of the Four-Year Plan as much as possible even as they became more and more involved in its fnancing and in making sacrifces to ensure its realization. Allianz certainly sought to demonstrate such a spirit of sacrifce, with Hilgard leading the way. Thus he personally intervened to have the concern renounce all profts on its fre insurance contracts for new facto-ries that were providing raw and other materials for the Four-Year Plan. Allianz also led a consortium of ten insurance companies to insure the Hermann Ging Werke in Germany and Austria.30 Such ※virtuous§ acts, however, were part of an elaborate political effort to meet the challenges to the insurance industry on a very broad front, and Hilgard＊s strategic position as head of the Reich Group for Insurance (with its direct subordination to the economics minister) was an im-portant instrument in his defense of Allianz and the private insurance industry as well as a useful means of exercising a certain restraint on the publicly char-tered companies. 
It was not a comfortable position to be ※leader§ of both types of enterprises. As Director Bebler of Swiss Re reported after a June 1935 conversation with Hil-gard in Berlin: 
Herr Hilgard complains a great deal about the burden and unpleasantnesses which his offce as leader of the German insurance business places on him. His position is espe-cially painful because of the publicly chartered companies, who go their own crooked way. While his heart now as before beats for the private insurers, he must powerlessly look on and see how the publicly chartered companies under the leadership of Goebbels, the brother of the Reich Minister, fghts the private insurance business by every means, fair and foul. He, Hilgard, stands there as a kind of buffer between the private and the publicly chartered insurance groups.31 
Hilgard was on edge, and his tolerance for criticism was minimal. While he seemed to have no choice but put up with problems coming from the Party, he was infuriated when Artur Lauinger (of the Frankfurter Zeitung), who had played such an important role in exposing the Favag scandal, continued to probe the insurance business: 
Herr Hilgard expressed himself very angrily about the Frankfurter Zeitung, where the previous economics editor Lauinger had as a Jew to resign but who unoffcially is the director and allows himself to criticize and interfere in a way that has become really un-bearable. He demands information about all kinds of details from the companies that 
29 Kimmich an Rummel, 17. Dez. 1940, ibid., Bl. 66. 30 Aktenvermerk Moesler, 14. Dez. 1936,BA, 80 Ba 2 /P 5787; Allianz an das RAA, 27. Juli 1938, 
and other relevant correspondence, BAK, B 280/12237, Bl. 312每14. 31 Bericht er Besprechung am 13. Juni 1935 in Berlin, SR, Feuer 11. 
are none of his business. Herr Hilgard intends to move against Lauinger in an energetic manner and put him on ice defnitively.32 
There is no record as to what action, if any, Hilgard took. Lauinger remained in Germany until 1938, was briefy in Buchenwald, and ended up in England. This episode demonstrates how easily the otherwise diplomatic Hilgard could be provoked into an anti-Semitic outburst. 
It is clear, however, that this in no way solved his problems with the publicly chartered companies and the Nazi critics who could not be put on ice. While Hilgard was a convinced believer in working with the Nazis to temper them, it must be said that one of his tactics at this time was most peculiar indeed 每 namely, his support for the appointment of Andreas Bra. to replace General Di-rector Oertel (who wanted to leave his post for health reasons,33) as head of the Private Insurance Economic Group at the beginning of 1937. Hilgard had frst encountered Bra. at the Bayerische Versicherungsbank, where he had been em-ployed. Subsequently, Bra. was appointed general director of one of the DAF＊s insurance companies, Deutsche Lebensversicherung AG. Bra. was, as he never tired of repeating, an Old Fighter (indeed, Party member no. 10657) who had 
34
battled for the movement ※at the most forward line§ since 1923. Bra. contin-ued to struggle for less dramatic causes after 1933, and his fevered commitment brought to the most mundane of issues that proper measure of drama and ideo-logical ballyhoo needed to perpetuate his National Socialist credentials. 
Bra. had achieved a measure of notoriety in insurance circles because of two campaigns he had launched in 1935每1936. The frst of these was for the elim-ination of the Association of German Life Insurance Companies, which (he argued) had become superfuous with the establishment of the branch group within the Reich Group and the installation of the ※leadership principle.§ In creating the Reich Group and the economic groups, Schmitt＊s strategy had been to retain the old associations for the various branches of the insurance business alongside them, of which one of the most important was the Life Insurance As-sociation. Bra. wished to undermine this strategy, which lay at the heart of the old order of business self-administration. Indeed, Bra. wanted to get rid of all the old associations, including the Association of Private Insurers, on the grounds that it was a National Socialist principle to promote simplifcation and 
32 
Ibid. 33 On Oertel＊s motive for resigning, see the manuscript of Director Karl Haus of the Knische 
Hagel-Versicherungs-Gesellschaft, ※Die Deutsche Versicherungswirtschaft und der National-
sozialismus,§ (1946), p. 10, AXA, Bestand Knische-Hagel-Versicherungs-AG. 34 Bra. an Feder, 13. Jan. 1934, requesting a position on the insurance committee of the newly 
founded Akademie f Deutsches Recht, BAB, R 3101/16959, Bl. 7每8. Hilgard, in his postwar 
interrogation, claims to have frst met Bra. in 1935 and that Bra. was appointed to the DAF po-
sition in 1936. Bra., however, already held the latter position in 1934, so Hilgard must have met 
him at the Bayerische Versicherungsbank earlier. See his interrogation of July 14, 1947,NA, RG 
260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2/57/6每8. 
avoid double organization. In a series of letters to Schloe.mann, Oertel, and other leaders of the Association in the spring and summer of 1935,Bra. pro-moted his cause but with little success. While other industry leaders conceded that there was some duplication and that the establishment of a single organi-zation might be a future goal, they argued that the two types of organizations were necessary because the legislation creating the Reich Group and economic groups for the various branches had specifcally barred them from engaging in market regulating functions, so that price issues continued to be the province of the old associations. Furthermore, the new branch groups depended on the old associations for funding. Coordination, Bra.＊s interlocutors insisted, was guaranteed through the personal identity of the leaders of the associations and the Reich Group and its branch organizations. It is hard not to conclude that underlying these arguments was a strong desire on the part of the industry lead-ership to maintain its tried and true organizations precisely against the sort of synchronization that Bra. held forth as an ideal. They were certainly not as enthused about the leadership principle in business life as Bra., whose commit-ment to the idea was as total as could be. Schloe.mann, for example, bluntly warned against ※a strict carrying through of the leadership principle,§ since many association members would simply resign (as was their right) if the chair-man forced decisions upon them. This would be unfortunate, in Schloe.mann＊s view, since the Association worked in common to promote the insurance idea to the public.35 
The second area where Bra. distinguished himself, in this case with consid-erably more success, was with respect to automobile insurance. This was one of the industry＊s great headaches in the early 1930s because of pressure from the Party to reduce rates and the large number of accidents that helped make automobile insurance a losing business. The insurers had formed a rate cartel, and in mid-1936 they tried to solve their problems by increasing rates and devis-ing a complicated scheme of deductibles for automobile and liability insurance. At this point the DAF insurers 每 under the leadership of Bra. 每 refused to go along, charged that some automobile dealers were getting as much as a 30% commission on the insurance, and called upon the insurance companies to re-duce their costs and, if necessary, subsidize automobile insurance from profts made in other branches. In order to deal with the crisis, Hilgard set up a spe-cial commission to fnd a solution, where Bra. roundly declared that the DAF companies 
will not go along if the solution is only arrived at on the basis of the view of the insur-ers. He does not see himself as a representative of his companies but as the bearer of the will of the Movement. As such, he cannot recognize that the only possible alternative for 
35 See especially Bra. to Schloe.mann, June 26, 1935, and Schloe.mann to Bra., Aug. 22, 1935, 
BAB, R 3101/9270, Bl. 105每12. See also Bra. to RWM, Dec. 11, 1935, ibid., Bl. 103每4, and his 
correspondence with other industry leaders, Bl. 113每26. 
reconstructing the automobile insurance business is by means of premium increases that beneft the insurers or reduction of benefts at the expense of the general public. Rather, as is according to the will of the Frer, sacrifces must be made if necessary....36 
Bra. denied that any rate increase was necessary, but he did indicate that the Party was not opposed to a deductible and that this would reduce costs. Hil-gard seized upon this concession, expressing his agreement with Bra. on the need to keep the general public in mind and pointing out that ※we are after all not some pile of interested persons but a committee conscious of its responsibil-ity.§ Hilgard then developed this perspective further by pointing out they could not operate on the basis of voluntarism and that their decisions needed external reinforcement: 
There must therefore be the necessary authority behind our decisions, and it is therefore important to assure the agreement of the Party and government. He [Hilgard] has found in dealing with Party agencies that they in part really have much understanding for the diffcult situation of the insurers. Nevertheless, one can hardly speak of a united Party will in this connection. One has to work in an enlightening way within the party, espe-cially along the lines of making clear that insurance premiums are no dominating portion of the upkeep costs of a car.37 
The episode is important, not only as a revealing general illustration of the politics of the insurance business at this time, but also because it helps explain Hilgard＊s decision to support the appointment of Bra. as head of the Private Insurance Economic Group in early 1937. Bra. had attained a good deal of pop-ularity because of his role in the automobile insurance question, and he was blessed by good luck since the costs of the insurers began to drop after the sec-ond half of 1936 owing to a decrease in new drivers, better traffc education, and stricter traffc regulations. Ultimately, the prices and regulations governing auto-mobile insurance were settled after lengthy negotiations by a decree of the Price Commissar of February 14, 1938, and Bra. could take some credit for having led the way and for eliminating abuses such as the automobile dealer provisions. Back in 1936, however, Hilgard seems to have come away with the impression that one could do business with Bra., that his Party connections were indeed useful, and that he might be used for precisely those purposes of ※enlighten-ment§ within the Party about which he had spoken. Furthermore, Hilgard was aware through his contacts in the RWM that Party circles were anxious to have Bra. appointed, and Hilgard managed to convince himself that Bra. would be 
36 Bericht er die Sitzung der Kommission f die Kraftfahrzeug-Versicherung am 1. Sept. 1936, 
GDV, RS/34,p. 5. There is a good discussion of the automobile insurance problem in Arps, Durch 
unruhige Zeiten, Bd. 2, pp. 138每45. 
37 Sitzung, 1. Sept. 1936,GDV, RS/34, pp. 6每7. Hilgard went on to suggest that one also had to work on public opinion in general and divert some of the attention to the profts of the automo-bile makers so that all the burdens would not be passed on to the insurers! 
useful in his struggles with the publicly chartered companies and his battles with Schwede-Coburg and Hans Goebbels.38 
It was neither the frst nor the last instance in which Hilgard was to outsmart himself, as Bra. was to prove a Trojan Horse. One of the frst things he did was to relegate Privy Councilor Lippert, the tried and true business manager of the Reich Association and the Association of Private Insurers, to the ever-decreasing activities of the Reich Association. Indirectly, Bra. was thus achieving his goal of getting rid of the latter organization, while the major work was now turned over to his private secretary Krauss. The 54-year-old Lippert found the situation impossible and resigned in September 1937. Hilgard, who had worked closely with Lippert, found this extremely unpleasant.39 
Nevertheless, Bra. did initially seem helpful with respect to the issue of price controls under the Four-Year Plan. The position taken by private insurers after the price-stop decree of November 26, 1936, was that insurance premiums dif-fered from normal prices in that they depended on the level and extent of claims being made and were often individualized because of different risks. The ef-fort to set fxed premiums or to reduce them would have the effect of harming the ※community of risk§ served by insurance companies; it would also, argued the insurers, endanger the coverage requirements set by the RAA. Thus, Hil-gard and his colleagues sought to protect the insurance industry from the Price Commissar by appealing to the RWM and the RAA for exemption from ceil-ings on insurance premiums.40 These agencies, which were responsible for the supervision of insurance, did indeed argue this cause on behalf of the insurance companies, stressing in particular that the liquidity of the insurance companies was very important for the fnancing of the Four-Year Plan. Nevertheless, Price Commissar Wagner＊s offce insisted that its powers extended to insurance pre-miums, although it agreed to work with the RAA and RWM in dealing with the industry. Bra., while compelled to recognize the authority of the commissar, nevertheless shared the view of Hilgard and the insurers that insurance premi-ums could not simply be treated as prices.41 In May, the confict was joined at the highest level of government, with Economics Minister Schacht himself intervening to argue that he had ultimate responsibility for the welfare of the insurance industry; Wagner stood his ground with the claim that premium in-creases on a broad front would inevitably damage price stability. After months of tedious negotiation, an agreement was fnally reached on February 1, 1938, setting down complicated guidelines for what did and did not constitute a ※price increase§ in the insurance feld. Final decision-making power was left in the hands of the Reich Commissar, and the agreement provided for use of the RAA 
38 See Hilgard interrogation of July 14, 1947,NA, RG 260, FINAD, OMGUS, 2 /57/6每8. 39 See Hilgard to RWM, Jan. 12, 1942,SM, 1458/1/109, Bl. 231每2. 40 See Reichsverband der Privatversicherung an das RAA, 7. Dez. 1936,SM, 1458/1/2062, Bl. 5每8. 41 See the correspondence for early 1937 in ibid., and especially Bra.＊s speech of Feb. 11, 1937, 
※Versicherungswirtschaft im Sinne der Gemeinschaft,§ ibid., Bl. 402每19. 
as an intermediary and accepted the principle that changing levels of risk justi-fed changes of premium.42 
Far more worrisome than this bureaucratic wrangling were the challenges that came from outside the bureaucracy, which Hilgard and Schmitt had sought to prevent by donations to the SS and the appointment of the Old Fighter Bra.. On April 5, 1937, the RAA complained to the Economics Minister about at-tacks on the private insurance industry, and specifcally on Neue Frankfurter, by Das Schwarze Korps. Between February and April 1936, the journal ran hos-tile articles, one of them making charges about the Neue Frankfurter＊s handling of claims 每 charges that the RAA had already investigated and that had turned out to be totally false. The customer in question had praised Neue Frankfurter for its handling of his claim; Hilgard had sought a retraction from the Schwarze Korps, but the journal had refused. A new series of attacks had been launched in February 1937: one was accurate but most were false and all were designed to put the private insurers in bad repute. The RWM was concerned enough to mediate a meeting between Kurt Schmitt and the 27-year-old fanatic who edited the journal, Gunter d＊Alquen, at which the latter promised to give his insurance company victims a chance to respond to false charges.43 
It was not long, however, before d＊Alquen was up to his old tricks, as demon-strated by an article of October 14, 1937, entitled ※Unholy Allianz,§ in which a speech of General Director He. was cited where He. noted that the volume of premiums still had not recovered to its 1930 levels because of the decrease in claims. He. pointed out that, while this was welcome, one also had to recog-nize that a certain volume of claims was necessary in order to bring costs into a reasonable relationship to premiums and that therefore one also needed claims. The obvious point was that the existence of a certain level of damages and claims was the legitimation for insurance and premiums. The Schwarze Korps urged its readers to go out and do penance (for failing to produce enough accidents and damage) by dropping lighted matches in their barns and throwing banana peels onto the street, since there had been too few accidents. If one wished to under-stand why 每 as had been the case with automobile insurance 每 insurers needed to raise rates and introduce deductibles, then they need only turn to the general di-rector of Allianz. Insurance was not there for the insured; rather, the insured was there for the insurance companies and damages were needed so that the concern might survive instead of fnding other ways to reduce its costs. For d＊Alquen, the view that ※business is not there for the people, but rather the people for 
42 See the Aktennote Posse, 24.Mai 1937, the inter-agency exchanges that follow, and the agreement 
between Posse and Flottmann of the Four-Year Plan authority of Feb. 1, 1938,inSM, 1458/1/100. 43 See Widmann (RAA) an RWM, 5. April 1937 (with extensive supporting material) and Vermerk 
Fritzsche on the meeting between Schmitt and d＊Alquen, April 14, 1937,SM, 1458/1/99, Bl. 43每 
66. On d＊Alquen, see Werner Augustinovic & Martin Moll, ※Gunter d＊Alquen 每 Protagonist des SS-Staates,§ in Ronald Smelser & Enrico Syring (eds.), Die SS: Elite unter dem Totenkopf. 30 Lebensl.ufe (Paderborn, 2000), pp. 100每18. 
business,§ was pervasive in the private economy, and he was appreciative that He. was so open about such views.44 
Bra., by contrast, was not given to being sardonic and was flled with earnest-ness when it came to both bringing the private insurance industry into the Na-tional Socialist fold and resolving the confict between the private and the pub-licly chartered companies. The greatest incentive to do so was the cost prob-lem plaguing the entire industry and the issue of ※Ausspannung§ 每 that is, il-licit efforts by insurance agents to win both agents and customers from one insurance company to another. The diffculty with this issue was defning ex-actly when fair competition became unfair and protecting the right of persons to switch companies and policies. Bra., however, believed that all problems could be solved with the proper National Socialist attitude. Toward this end, he joined forces with Hans Goebbels at the end of 1936 and concocted what be-came known as the ※Goebbels每Bra. German Insurance Comradeship.§ In an agreement signed on December 16, when Bra. was still working for the DAF, the two men agreed to engage in ※healthy and fair competition.§ The agree-ment also provided for joint participation in large insurance risks. The G-B Insurance Comradeship agreement, as it became known, was then expanded on January 12 for the purpose of joining together the private and publicly chartered companies in an effort to collaborate in carrying out the Four-Year Plan by ending their old quarrels and collaborating in the avoidance of unfair competition, the charging of ※just premiums,§ and obligating their representa-tives and agents to act accordingly. It also provided for an arbitration court to settle disputes. The idea met with enthusiasm in the RWM, and Hilgard ap-parently also viewed it as promising, provided certain issues could be settled. One of them was the question of non-Aryan insurance agents, where Goebbels and Bra. were prepared to concede the continuation of existing contracts pro-vided that no more Jews were hired and that Jewish agents were increasingly limited to the servicing of Jewish customers. The other was the arbitration court, where Hilgard considered it essential that persons not be allowed to be arbitrators in their own cause and that the RWM have a voice in the deci-sion making. Within this context, Hilgard appeared strongly supportive of the endeavor.45 
Nevertheless, the G-B Comradeship soured fairly rapidly, despite Bra.＊s ap-pointment as head of the Private Insurance Economic Group. Thus, at a meeting of the advisory council on May 20, he complained bitterly that only 45 companies had signed up, 20 of them private, but that not one of the large private concerns had joined. His predecessor General Director Oertel of Colonia tried to explain 
44 ※Unheilige Allianz,§ Das Schwarze Korps, 14. Okt. 1937, and He.＊s speech before the 2. Betriebs-
leitertagung der Allianz, Abteilung f Maschinen-Versicherung, 8. Dez. 1937, BAK, B 280/12237, 
Bl. 289每92. 45 See the agreements of Dec. 16, 1936, and Jan. 12, 1937, as well as Hilgard to RWM, Feb. 4, 1937, 
and other relevant documentation in BAB, R 3101/17050, Bl. 210每37. 
this by the fact that the terms of the agreement had not been fully hammered out in the RWM, but the reality was that no one could quite fgure out what kinds of issues were to be adjudicated by the arbitration body projected in the agreement. The Ministry had lost its enthusiasm and now favored some kind of agreement between the private and publicly chartered companies, while Hilgard noted that more sign-ups were unlikely in view of the agreement＊s defciencies. Discussions continued until November 1937, but the entire project came to naught because no one could defne what actually constituted ※Ausspannung.§ When Bra. sug-gested that the matter could be decided by practice and experience, Hilgard insisted that this simply would not do if one were going to have an agreement of the kind envisioned by Goebbels and Bra..46 
Underlying all of these discussions was a great deal more suspicion and sense of impending crisis than comradeship. The Four-Year Plan had created an en-vironment of mobilization in which radical measures attained a higher degree of plausibility and thus legitimacy. This manifested itself at the end of 1937 in the Reich Group for the publicly chartered companies, whose head (Paul Riebesell) was ruthlessly driven from offce by Schwede-Coburg for protecting a young Jewish insurance mathematician. He was given a vote of no confdence after an attack on his person by the Schwarze Korps and went on to become head of the newly founded Isar Company.47 The growing radicalization came to the fore in the private insurance industry organization in late February 1938. The advisory council of the Private Insurance Economic Group met on Febru-ary 24 in Munich, one day prior to its plenary meeting on the following day, where Bra. was scheduled to deliver a major speech. Bra. was celebrating his frst year in offce and received a unanimous vote of confdence from his col-leagues on the advisory council. Both he and Hilgard then proceeded to inform the council that they were very concerned about reports and rumors of an im-pending nationalization of the insurance industry. Indeed, there were reports that the matter had been decided already, although he did not think things had gone that far. He also did not think that Ging would act without consul-tation. Bra. claimed that the initiative was coming from State Secretary Jo-hannes Krohn of the Labor Ministry and that circles in the SS leadership were also behind it. Another concern was that Economics Minister Funk had close relations to the SS leadership. Bra. felt one had to take the matter very seri-ously, and he was planning to create a ※political committee§ of ten Party com-rades who had been in the movement before 1933 to serve as a counterweight to the developing tendencies among leaders of the publicly chartered companies. He needed 
46 Sitzung des Beirats der Wirtschaftsgruppe am 20.Mai 1937,GDV, RS/25, pp. 3每5; Vermerk, 
14.Mai 1937, and Besprechung er Ausspannung, 30.Nov. 1937,BAB, R 3101/17050, Bl. 253, 
272每3. 
47 Karl Hauss, ※Die Deutsche Versicherungswirtschaft und der Nationalsozialismus,§ pp. 12每13, AXA, Bestand Knische Hagel Versicherungs-AG. 
a political apparatus with which he [Bra.] can operate. It does not matter whether the individual member is a big cannon in the feld, whether he has already appeared before the public. The most decisive thing is that old Party comrades are at hand to challenge the view of the people in the publicly chartered companies that they are authorized rep-resentatives from a Party standpoint.48 
Thus, Bra.feltthattheLabor Ministry, theSS, andthepubliclycharteredcompa-nies were all working against the private insurers, although he thought Schwede-Coburg was less of a problem here than the people surrounding him. Bra. made a point of emphasizing his loyalty to the private insurance business: ※As an old National Socialist he [Bra.] stands fundamentally and completely in support of private insurance. He rejects every type of collectivization because it contradicts the program and the National Socialist view.§ Nevertheless, if contrary views were making themselves felt then it was important to deal with their causes, and he hoped to use his speech on the following day to defne the tasks of the pri-vate insurance business in the National Socialist state and to restore confdence in the industry. It was essential that their commitment to National Socialism be made as clear as possible. 
Hilgard underscored Bra.＊s point that they were facing ※questions of vital sig-nifcance§ and that Bra. was pointing to the correct way of dealing with them. According to reports Hilgard had received, however, the support for nationaliza-tion came lessfromtheagenciesmentioned byBra.thanfrom whathetermedthe ※Reich Youth Leadership of the SS.§ No such organization actually existed, and he undoubtedly meant the young fanatics associated with the Schwarze Korps. He could report that Schmitt had discussed the question with Ging and had found that Ging did not support nationalization, but Hilgard warned that the strong forces supporting nationalization were constantly trying to win over the highest authorities. In fghting them, two points had to be kept in mind. First, all claims to the contrary, the popularity of the private insurance business between 1933 and 1936 exceeded that of the publicly chartered companies 每 as demon-strated by the increase in customers, which ranged only from 6.3%to 13.8% for the latter but from 12.4%to 38.2% for the former. That so many people insured themselves with the private companies needed much more emphasis, in Hilgard＊s view. Second, there was the problem of foreign exchange in the inter-national business of private insurance companies; its balance had been negative to the tune of 15.4 million RM between January and November. The primary reason was the amount of business they were doing with English and Swiss rein-surers. The fgures could, of course, change if fres and other disasters increased 
48 There are two versions of the minutes of this meeting: one edited, the other unedited. The lat-ter is used here since, despite grammatical problems, it contains a great deal more information and better conveys what really happened. For the quotations and discussion of this meeting, see Niederschrift er die Sitzung des Beirats der Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung am 24.Feb. 1938,GDV,RS/26, pp. 4每30, quote on p. 5. 
or decreased, but the dangerous thing would be for Ging to discover that pri-vate insurers were costing him 15.4 million in foreign exchange at a time when his hunger for foreign exchange was boundless. Hilgard feared that their fate would be sealed if this came to Ging＊s attention. It was necessary, therefore, to reduce dependence on foreign reinsurers at least to some extent. 
In a remarkable response, Bra. thanked Hilgard for bringing these matters to the fore but then went on to discuss Ging and how to deal with him in a man-ner that speaks volumes about political leadership principles in the Third Reich: 
It should not be thought that perhaps things are seen too darkly. Whoever knows Ging, knows that for him there is only one perspective: Germany! If Ging determines that something is working to the detriment of Germany, there is no pardon. When Ging is convinced that the steering wheel is turned the other way, then he will also give consid-eration to our perspectives. If two proposals would be presented, both of which are not adverse to Germany, then it could be that it will be decided in favor of one person. Ging leaves it to the forces themselves to fght it out, just as the Frer lets the currents strug-gle with one another about great questions. If we fulfll the external preconditions, then he [Bra.] is optimistic enough to say that we will succeed with Ging with the means at our disposal and the intentions that he has. The gentlemen present will understand why he is committed to authoritarian leadership. There should be no other opinion than that of the leader of the Reich Group or, in the case of the private insurance, his own. Also in the future this should be the alpha and omega of each individual leader of an enterprise. He asks all the gentlemen present to make this standpoint and perspective be the gospel; then we will form a pool, a closed formation that holds constantly to its goal. Until a de-cision is made, we will fght against nationalization. Why should not one attain victory here as in other cases in which a battle is fought? Those are the perspectives which he will in part present tomorrow so that the ground is prepared so that the insurance industry is in line with the authoritarian system.49 
Bra. certainly was not a great analytical mind, but he had an intuitive under-standing of the role of Darwinian confict between competing forces in the func-tioning of the Nazi dicatatorship and what the function of ※working toward the Frer,§ to use the language of another Nazi offcial, really meant to a practic-ing National Socialist of this type.50 
As became clear from the ensuing discussion, the dangers were indeed taken quite seriously by those present. The Labor Ministry, once so supportive of the insurance industry against the DAF, apparently had plans to expand the social insurance system. It sought to take advantage of the failure of private insurance companies to do enough in providing insurance for craftsmen and offering pen-sions. Thus, there was a strong sense that the private insurance industry was threatened from powerful forces in the government and the SS, and Hilgard and his colleagues apparently hoped that Bra., with his Party credentials, would 
49 Ibid., quotes on pp. 6, 13每14. 50 See Ian Kershaw, Hitler. 1889每1936. Hubris (New York & London, 1998), pp. 527每9, who uses 
the term to explain the dynamics of National Socialist behavior. 
contribute to warding off the dangers and reassuring the public about the indus-try in his forthcoming speech. 
If this was the intention, then Bra.＊s speech on February 25, ※The Commu-nity of Labor in the Insurance Industry,§51 was a catastrophic failure that caused outrage within the industry while providing welcome fodder for Das Schwarze Korps. Bra. spent an hour and a half telling his audience that the private insur-ance industry must mend its ways and overcome the ※sins§ of the capitalist age, which had given it such a bad reputation. He sharply attacked the investment policy of the industry, arguing that it needed to be more focused and centrally directed and that one would have to do more than have a few great concerns in-vest in the public good. He called for less competition and more collaboration, and he sharply attacked the stealing away of customers. Insofar as the cost ques-tion was concerned, he urged controlling commissions and purging ※undesirable elements§ from the external service and also called for more pooling of risks, thus creating the impression that the entire industry was very wasteful and in-effcient. At the same time, he urged far greater attention to public needs, such as pensions, even if they were deemed unproftable. He also sharply criticized the companies for charging different premiums for different persons and claimed that there was such a thing as a ※just premium.§ As usual, he praised himself for his role in the automobile insurance debate and praised the Price Commis-sar for settling the matter. Above all, he placed extraordinary emphasis on the primacy of political considerations and expected that the concerns and frms in the industry would place more National Socialists in responsible positions. 
Needless to say, the speech did nothing to improve the image of the indus-try. The Schwarze Korps, in an article headlined ※Pretty Words Do Not Help§ and ※Belated Conscience Probing,§ expressed satisfaction at the acceptance of its criticisms from within the industry but argued that the real question was the right of private insurance to exist.52 The reaction to Bra.＊s speech within the in-dustry was a high degree of outrage, expressed above all by Johannes Tiedke in a lengthy letter to Hilgard of April 9, 1938. As Tiedke (who, along with other col-leagues, had taken careful notes) pointed out, the printed speech in Neumanns Zeitschrift left out portions of the speech and thus made it sound less insulting than it actually was. In his remarks about the stealing away of customers, for example, Bra. had said: ※I repeatedly receive reports that not only insignifcant companies but also those with name and reputation sally forth into competition like thieves.§53 Tiedke answered Bra.＊s charges point by point and insisted that, whatever Bra. claimed his intentions to be, his speech promoted the cause of na-tionalization and had done great damage to the industry. He also charged Bra. 
51 Generaldirektor Bra., ※Gemeinschaftsarbeit in der Versicherungswirtschaft. Vortrag auf der 
Jahreshauptversammlung der Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung am 25.Feb. 1938,§ Neu-
manns Zeitschrift f Versicherungswesen, Beilage zu Nr. 10 vom 2. M.rz 1938. There is (perhaps 
happily for the Anglo-American political culture) no real way to translate the full meaning of 
Gemeinschaft 每 let alone Gemeinschaftsarbeit 每 into English. 52 Das Schwarze Korps, March 10, 1938. 53 Tiedke an Hilgard, 9. April 1938, NL Tiedke. 
with gross incompetence in handling the affairs of the group, with neglecting pressing issues, and with failing to pay attention to the suggestions and work of his colleagues. 
The entire affair was to be very much a test of Hilgard＊s diplomatic skills. He most certainly was not going to permit a battle royal between Bra. and Tiedke. The latter was too given to expressing his outrage at the outrageous, an honor-able but not very useful or safe way to deal with such problems in the existing political context. At the same time, there was no way to hide the fact that Bra. had put on an absurd performance and had very much disappointed and irritated his colleagues. Bra.＊s capacity to deal with the criticism was weak-ened by two other developments. First, Bra. had been one of those summoned to prepare and carry out the ※elections§ in Austria following the March 1938 annexation and was thus preoccupied in the months following his speech. Sec-ond, the DAF had decided at the end of 1937 to dissolve Deutsche Lebensver-sicherung (which Bra. had headed) by consolidating with its organizations in Hamburg. Bra. had thus effectively lost his position as an insurance executive, and his critics claimed that he possibly had lost favor with the DAF as well. Cer-tainly the bad economic situation of the company did not speak well for his management.54 
Thus, when Bra.＊s speech fnally was discussed at the advisory council meet-ing of June 17, 1938, 55 Hilgard seized the initiative and set the tone. He agreed to the appointment of two new members to the council, the insurance man Staats-rat Christian Bartholatus from Hamburg and Standartenfrer Haertel from Himmler＊s staff, so as to answer criticisms that there were not enough Nazis on the Council. This was not the committee of ten Old Fighters that Bra. had contemplated, but it certainly gave the Party a great deal more presence. Hil-gard began by pointing out that they all had a duty to express their opinions on matters pertaining to the economic group and that they all were persons who had long served the industry. He recognized that Bra.＊s speech had been the source of some ※tensions.§ This was not, in Hilgard＊s opinion, because Bra. had made programmatic suggestions, which was his right and duty, ※especially in view of the fact that Herr Bra. was summoned in order to implement the de-mands of the Party in private insurance.§56 The problem, as Hilgard presented it, was Bra.＊s tone, especially the suggestion that everything was ill with the in-dustry until he took offce. It was one thing to say that reforms were needed, yet 
54 Bra. an Ministerialdirektor Kurt Lange, 11. April 1939,SM, 1458/1/109, Bl. 179每80. See the 
excellent unpublished Magisterarbeit by Ingo Ble, ※Die Volksfsorge Lebensversicherungs-
AG im ＆Dritten Reich＊ § (Universit.t Hamburg, 1996), pp. 71每2. See also his ※Die Volksf-
sorge Lebensversicherungs AG 每 ein Unternehmen der Deutschen Arbeitsfront (DAF) im ＆Dritten 
Reich＊,§ Zeitschrift f Unternehmensgeschichte 45 (2000), pp. 49每78, esp. p. 60. 55 Sitzung des Beirats der Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung am 17. Juni 1938. There are two 
versions of the minutes: an edited one in GDV, RS/15, and an unedited one in GDV, RS/26. 56 Interestingly, this was inserted in the offcial minutes that went out to members in GDV, RS/15, 
p. 2, and was probably intended to remind those who received it that Bra. had been put into his offce as a representative of the Party. 
another to suggest that private insurance was not the blooming industry it was but rather in terrible shape. Turning the table a bit on Bra., Hilgard urged a more comradely spirit and that he consult more with his colleagues before act-ing so as to create a true community of labor. Borrowing from Tiedke＊s letter, Hilgard made reference to comments by Schmitt (at the Munich meeting) to the effect that the leadership principle in business meant that the leader should have as his goal inducing the vast majority to support him. The limits of criticism had thus been defned. The problem with Bra.＊s speech was declared to be a matter of form rather than content. This point was emphasized by Bartholatus, who stressed that Bra. was above all concerned to serve the National Socialist cause. Another member suggested that Bra. had made the mistake of painting too dark a picture. Bra. himself seemed much chastened and certainly was aware that his performance in Munich had been a fop. While he absolutely refused to engage the criticisms of Tiedke, which he had read, he did seem anxious to rec-oncile himself with his colleagues.57 He expressed gratitude to Hilgard, whom he described as a ※master of the art of negotiation,§ and tediously explained his performance by the fact that he was an Old Fighter, accustomed to political bat-tles and a rough tone, and that he had used the same style and techniques that had been used to win the people over to the Party. The Munich speech, Bra. claimed, was intended to be honest and to place the problems in the context of the National Socialist world view. He had worked half the night after the previ-ous advisory council meeting to write a speech appropriate to the occasion and had not intended to wound individuals. His goal, he insisted, was to support and not to harm the private insurance industry. 
On the same day that Bra. was praising Hilgard and speaking these recon-ciling words, he sent Ministerial Director Kurt Lange of the RWM a detailed memorandum whose aims included eliminating Hilgard from Reich Group lead-ership, restructuring the insurance industry＊s organizations, and compelling the private insurance industry (insofar as it would be allowed to survive) to mend its ways. This memo was no solo fight on Bra.＊s part, which made the matter far more serious and dangerous. Lange was an Old Fighter from Hamburg who had been appointed to deal with fnancial aspects of the Four-Year Plan within the RWM money and credit division; he was thus an important member of the Ging apparatus. It was Lange who had solicited Bra.＊s recommendations con-cerning reorganization of the insurance industry.58 
Bra. operated from the premise that the insurance industry and its organiza-tions in all their forms were in need of a ※comprehensive reform§ so as to make them ※instruments of National Socialist economic policy in every respect.§ This included the Reich Supervisory Offce, which (in his view) needed to be po-litically reformed and much more anchored in the Party, perhaps through the appointment of Schwede-Coburg as its head, and needed to have comprehensive 
57 See the internal note to Gabriel, June 24, 1938,GDV,RS/26. 58 On Lange, see Boelcke, Deutsche Wirtschaft, p. 183. For the origins of the Bra. report, see Bra.＊s 
covering letter of June 9, 1938,inSM, 1458/1/92, Bl. 3. The report is on Bl. 4每13. 

Advertising calendar of Allianz: ※Famous Germans. An almanac for the year 1939§. 
powers over the entire industry in all its forms. The RAA was too overburdened by auditing activities; Bra. urged that the auditing duties be left to accountants with specifc instructions and that the RAA personnel thereby be liberated for the policy-making and supervisory job it needed to do with respect to substantive issues 每 for example, premiums, external service, commissions, dividend policy, simplifying of insurance conditions, and reducing costs. 
Insofar as the Reich Group was concerned, the goal had to be to turn it into ※the instrument of self-administration for the policy of the State.§ Bra. thought the separation between an economic group for private insurance and an economic group for the publicly chartered companies ※tragic§ because it en-couraged a ※business-hungry attitude§ instead of collaboration for the common good. He therefore proposed a Reich Group that would encompass both types of insurance company and a division into seven economic groups for the differ-ent types of insurance (e.g., life, fre, automobile, accident and liability, health, transport and reinsurance, and agriculture). As in the Reich Group, so in each of these economic groups: the private and the publicly chartered companies would work together. It was essential in Bra.＊s view that these groups be led not by the ※old experts§ but instead by ※political personalities§ who would approach the reorganization of the industry from a political (rather than business or techni-cal) perspective. Indeed, the entire beneft of bringing the two types of insurance companies together would come from the fact that the more politically oriented publicly chartered companies would no longer be criticizing the private compa-nies from the outside; instead they would be working within the same structure and could thereby directly infuence the private companies to pursue a National Socialist economic policy. 
Bra. claimed that he did not wish to make any personnel recommendations (aside from suggesting Schwede-Coburg for the RAA) because he stood in the middle of personnel disputes himself, but he could hardly be accused of subtlety in suggesting from whence the leadership of the Reich Group should not come. The challenge to the position of Allianz and Hilgard was scarcely disguised: 
I believe ... that everything should be done to avoid what would amount to a continua-tion of the earlier traditions of the old associations of the German insurance industry. At that time 每 to some extent such considerations continue still today 每 the leading positions of the organization were flled in such a way that at the head and in the other positions and offces there were persons who represented a certain economic power complex. As a result, the biggest concern always received the top offce and certain other concerns oc-cupied the next positions. The Third Reich has already broken with this tradition .... Very many hopes on the part of willing and faithful persons in the insurance industry will be lost if once again there will be the impression that in a reorganizing the attitudes and wishes of this or that great concern will be taken into account.59 
Bra. had passed these proposals on to Schwede-Coburg and Hans Goebbels, who were invited by RWM Ministerial Director Lange to join in a discussion with other RWM and Party offcials on June 28. Among the latter was Georg Amend, who handled insurance for the NSDAP and worked closely with Party treasurer Franz Xaver Schwarz. Schwede-Coburg questioned whether insurance should be a proft-making business at all and complained that the competition had gotten 
59 Ibid., Bl. 11. 
out of control at a time when manpower was needed for more important things. Hans Goebbels insisted that the large risks handled by the private insurers could just as easily be undertaken by publicly chartered companies. Most importantly, however, a new actor had come on the scene in the person of Amend, who had written a memorandum advocating the consolidation of the entire industry into a single publicly chartered company.60 
Amend＊s proposal, which was one of a number solicited by Lange after the meeting, was extremely radical in nature. It insisted that insurance was not an appropriate feld for private enterprise since, by its very nature, it embraced a risk community. Competition simply raised the costs, and he charged that the private industry had done nothing to prevent damages and accidents. He made much of the scandals involving private insurance, especially at Favag and Phix. Thus, he urged immediate measures to determine the number and ownership of insurance company shares, a ban on their sale, limitations on executive salaries, and limitation of existing insurance policies to three years. Fundamentally, he was urging nationalization of the industry.61 
There can be no question that Party radicals were most serious about this plan. On July 12, 1938, Schwarz wrote directly to Ging and claimed that 
the true reason for these abuses lies almost exclusively in the self proft seeking of the pri-vate insurance companies .... A cleansing of the personal insurance system in Germany and its alignment to National Socialism is not and will never be possible through partial solutions of individual problems but only through an uncompromising radical solution of the basic problem which, in the frst instance, my dear Party Comrade Ging, you will have to undertake.62 
Franz Xaver Schwarz claimed to be speaking for the Party and was very insistent that the necessary reforms could never be carried out by the ※liberalists§ heading the private companies. 
Ging, however, apparently wanted to know what Lange had to say, and Lange reported at the end of September that all the representatives of the pri-vate insurance business with whom he had spoken opposed the consolidation of the insurance industry into one privately chartered company. While they had not been given access to the Amend memorandum, they had all insisted that the proposal would ※necessarily lead to an ossifcation of the insurance business and an exclusion of German insurance from world trade. The private insurers consider free competition among a plurality of enterprises necessary for their mutual fructifcation, for the deepening and promotion of the insurance idea, and lastly, for the opening of new kinds of insurance and new paths toward in-surance protection.§63 
60 See the record of the meeting in ibid., Bl. 16. 61 The Denkschrift zur Reform der deutschen Individualversicherung was forwarded by Schwarz to 
Lange, 27. Juni 1938, ibid., Bl. 17每33. 62 Schwarz an Ging, 12. Juli 1938, ibid., Bl. 128每9, quote on Bl. 128. 63 Entwurf eines Briefes von Lange an Ging, 30. Sept. 1938, ibid., Bl. 130. 
A good illustration of these arguments was provided by General Director Wal-ter Forstreuter of the Gerling concern, who had also been invited to the meeting of June 28. He sought to remind the government of the great achievement of the private insurers in rescuing the entire insurance business after the infation, stressed their creativeness in the felds of machine insurance and other areas, and noted that it was the private insurance business 每 not the publicly chartered com-panies 每 that had banded together in the service of the flm industry and fight insurance and that had demonstrated its capacities in the recent Hindenburg disaster. The international role of the German insurance industry was predomi-nantly the work of the private insurers as well. Forstreuter also rejected the idea that private insurers were doing nothing to prevent accidents, arguing that they were at the forefront of research in certain areas and also that they paid high taxes and thus contributed importantly to the government＊s safety programs.64 
In the end, Lange came down on the side of the ※liberalists.§ On the one hand, thanks to the situation in Austria and other pressing political and eco-nomic problems, he was simply too busy to deal with the problem in all its complexities. On the other hand, he was most inclined to see the continued exis-tence of a variety of types of insurance companies (and of individual companies as well) to be benefcial. He therefore decided to limit reform to improving the supervisory situation and creating a Reich Group organized according to insur-ance branches. This position was strongly confrmed by Economics Minister Funk in a letter to Ging of November 22, 1938. 65 What this RWM decision refected was a more general tendency on the part of Four-Year Plan authori-ties to employ existing structures and the private economy for their purposes rather than ride the radical wave in the Party. Nevertheless, as shown in the next chapter in connection with the November 1938 Pogrom, Party radicals were able to create circumstances that forced Ging to deal more rapidly and radically with certain problems than he might otherwise have. Thus, although the gov-ernment was not prepared to give way to Schwede-Coburg and Amend, it was now inclined at least to follow Bra.＊s program to reorganize the RAA and the Reich Group and, if Bra. were to have his way in these matters, to Nazify these organizations. 
Bra., however, had a unique talent for shooting himself in the foot. On No-vember 9, 1938, the insurance agency of Jauch, Hner & Co. complained to Ministerial Director Lange that Bra. had denounced them to the Chamber of Industry and Commerce for being ※true examples of what we understand to be Jewish businessmakers,§ suggested that they might have some Jewish an-cestry, and claimed that they were suspect for their international dealings and business with the Soviet Union. The company certainly did do a great deal of 
64 Forstreuter an Lange, 3. Aug. 1938, ※Einige Betrachtungen zur Frage einer Neugestaltung des 
deutschen Versicherungswesens,§ ibid., Bl. 114每25. 65 Entwurf Lange, 30. Sept. 1938, ibid., Bl. 130; Funk an Ging, 22.Nov. 1938,BAB,R 3101/9275, 
Bl. 129每33. 
international business, but it had brought a lot of foreign exchange into the country. Three of the owners were Party members, and one was a Captain of the Reserve in the Wehrmacht. Apparently Bra. had a business grudge against the frm, but whatever his motives, the unfounded charges ruined his position even with the Party people in the economic group. Initially, on November 15, Bra. was asked simply to step down from his offce while matters were settled. His secretary Kraus seems also to have been involved in the affair and ended up being fred. In the coming months Bra. continuously protested his innocence, writing to all and sundry that he was a victim of the capitalists and of his ef-forts to create a truly National Socialist insurance system. In the process he also informed the Gestapo that there were reports that Hilgard and General Direc-tor He. were homosexuals, which led to a series of interrogations before the charge was dismissed. Bra., in an effort to excuse himself, later told Hilgard that Schwede-Coburg had put him up to the denunciation. Before leaving offce, Bra. persistently violated his agreements with his colleagues and tried to resume his role, which led to demands for his dismissal from members of the advisory council. His actual term ran out at the end of January 1939, and Economics Minister Funk thanked him for his services and relieved him of his duties on March 3, 1939. 66 
The entire affair, which the RWM tried to keep out of the papers by imposing silence on Bra. and the others involved, was of course extraordinarily embarrass-ing to the Reich Group 每 whatever the personal pleasure some private insurance executives must have felt about Bra.＊s plight. Given the impending reorgani-zation and the personnel problems, Hilgard had placed his own offce at the disposition of the Ministry and apparently was quite serious about resigning if that was requested. There was a strong feeling that someone new with genuine authority had to take over the Reich Group, and General Director Forstreuter (as well as important persons in the RWM) thought that Kurt Schmitt would be the right man in the right place under the existing conditions. When Schmitt was asked, however, he showed no enthusiasm, suggesting that it might be best if someone totally outside the insurance feld 每 like the Baden Minister-President, Walter Kler, with whom he had spoken and whom he regarded as a moder-ate 每 would take the job. The problem was that Kler would have to take a position with some insurance company and probably did not want the job. As the RWM offcial with whom he spoke reported: 
He, Schmitt, can at the utmost declare himself ready to take over the offce if it is really shown that the leadership question cannot be solved in a better way, and if he by tak-ing the position could prevent an otherwise unavoidable severe damage to the insurance 
66 For the Jauch, Hner & Co. complaint of Nov. 9, 1938, see SM, 1458/1/109, Bl. 2每7; for the sub-sequent correspondence, see the same volume, Bl. 29ff. For the dismissal by Funk, see Bl. 168. See also the materials in BAB, R 3101/9275, Bl. 62每129. On the homosexuality charges, see Hilgard interrogation of July 14, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /57/6每8. 
business and fnally if the taking over and carrying out of the offce would be made possi-ble, by which he understands that he would not be dragged into doing the ※dirty work.§67 
That is, Schmitt wanted the old arrangement whereby someone else was deal-ing with the nasty business and persons in the regime, which had of course been the specialty of Hilgard and in which Hilgard was up to his ears at this time owing to the November 1938 Pogrom and the insurance problems it presented (see Chapter 5). 
Concurrently with those problems, Hilgard was facing an attack on the private insurance business and the uncertainty about his own job in the Reich Group. Hilgard had never seen the memorandum of Amend recommending the cre-ation of a single insurance organization, and he was not a participant in the meeting of June 28 to discuss the idea. He was not even privy to the reform pro-posals of the RWM, which he did not learn about until November. It was only on December 12 that he and Schmitt were fnally in a position to discuss the proposals at a meeting called by Ging, a record of which Hilgard made and sent to Schmitt on December 19 because of its potential future importance.68 Also attending (among others) were Economics Minister Funk, Lange and other high offcials of the RWM and the Four-Year Plan offce, Schwede-Coburg and Goebbels, Rudolf Lencer, and Bra.. Ging informed those present that the issue of nationalization of the insurance business was of such importance that he did not feel he could decide it himself and had taken the matter directly to Hitler on December 4. Hitler came to the conclusion that nationalization was not some-thing that could be taken up in the foreseeable future and was no longer to be discussed. Ging made clear that this did not mean that it could not be taken up again someday, just not within the coming decade. Hence, insofar as there were going to be reforms, they would have to be of another nature. Funk then came forth with his proposals for the reorganization of the Reich Group and also argued for the shutting down of unproftable small insurance companies. 
Schwede-Coburg was obviously disappointed, and he made no secret of his bitter rage. He claimed to be there not as a representative of the publicly char-tered companies but rather as a plenipotentiary of the Frer, to whom alone he felt responsible, and that it was his task to bring the ideas of National Social-ism to realization. The publicly chartered companies were much closer to these ideas than the private ones, who wanted to leave things just as they were. He sarcastically remarked that the opposition of the private insurers to nationaliza-tion would cease if every general director were guaranteed a lifetime income of 
67 Vermerk Krause, 17.Nov. 1938,BAB,R 3101/9275, Bl. 61. On the support for Schmitt and Hil-
gard＊s willingness to resign, see Vermerk Schmeer, 12.Nov. 1938, ibid., 56每8, and Forstreuter 
an Lange, 18.Nov. 1938,SM, 1458/1/109, Bl. 56每7. On Schmitt＊s view of Kler as one of the 
moderate Gauleiter, see Friedrich Freiherr Hiller von Gaertringen (ed.), Die Hassell-Tagebher 
1938每1944. Ulrich von Hassell. Aufzeichnungen vom andern Deutschland (Berlin, 1988), p. 74. 68 Hilgard to Schmitt, Dec. 19, 1938, and Aktennote of Dec. 15, 1938, which forms the basis of this 
discussion, FHA, S 17.5/7. 
200,000 RM a year. Schmitt and Hilgard responded to this insulting accusation of venality with outrage, and Ging 每 who obviously did not like Schwede-Coburg＊s tone 每 made it clear that such arguments would go nowhere and that it was time to stop such attacks and establish peace. In the ensuing debate about cost questions and the like, Hilgard and Schmitt strongly defended the private insurance business against charges that its costs were higher than those of the publicly chartered companies; they also emphasized the importance of the in-dustry in German foreign trade. Schmitt made a particularly strong case against Bra.＊s attack on the proft-making and dividend policy of the industry. In the end, there could be no question that Ging had come down on the side of the private insurers: 
The General Field Marshal made it clear repeatedly in a very drastic way that a person who bought a share wanted to get something for it. In general it was not a special prob-lem of the insurance business. The question of the joint stock company and its dividend policy was a general economic question and could only be regulated for the entire econ-omy in the same way. 
Even Lencer proved cooperative by arguing that if an insurance company fulflled its obligations to the insured and its employees, then one could not reproach it for giving higher dividends to its shareholders. 
Thus, events transpired as Bra. had outlined in the Reich Association meeting on February 24, 1938. Hitler and Ging had let the combatants wage their war and 每 all considerations not being as equal as he had pretended 每 drawn the bal-ance in favor of the existing structure of the industry and against nationalization. While this did not introduce either an era of good feelings or quite the obedi-ence to Hitler＊s order demanded by National Socialist ideology, it did provide an important prop for the private insurers (especially Allianz) in the coming years. Nonetheless, a price had to be paid: every successful battle against Party ideo-logues required personnel concessions and opened new opportunities for their infltration of the industry and its organizations. On December 15, 1938, Martin Bormann (chief of staff to Party secretary Rudolf He.) called upon Funk to ap-point Amend head of the RAA; on January 7, he told Funk that Schmitt was fully in agreement with this choice. He then urged that Amend be given an advisory council headed by Schwede-Coburg and composed of Schmitt, Hans Goebbels, Bra., and Hilgard 每 along with B.rmann (who worked with Bormann) to repre-sent the Party, Lencer to represent the DAF, and one of Schwarz＊s co-workers to represent the insured. Bormann thoroughly approved the unifcation of private and publicly chartered companies in the Reich Group and the reorganization of economic groups according to branches. Here, too, he had personnel wishes, urging that General Director Rudolf Kratochwill of Deutscher Ring be placed in charge of the life and health insurance group. Bormann thought it critical that the Reich Group be headed by someone from a medium-sized insurance company and proposed Director Max Odenbreit of the Agrippina in Cologne, although he also supported the appointment of Hans Schmidt-Polex of Allianz to head the group for liability insurance and Alois Alzheimer of Munich Re to head the group for reinsurance and credit insurance. Bormann remarked that these ap-pointments were being proposed in full agreement with Schwede-Coburg and Goebbels, and Schmitt (who had also been consulted) agreed.69 
The obvious goal was to put as many committed National Socialists into the commanding heights as possible, and many of Bormann＊s proposals were imple-mented. The personnel question did produce further discussion, however, since Funk initially wanted Kratochwill to head the entire Reich Group, a proposi-tion certainly very agreeable to Bormann. When it came to the top leadership of the Reich Group, however, Schmitt was not quite as agreeable as Bormann had claimed and sought to persuade Schwede-Coburg that Hilgard was still the best person for the job. Schmitt therefore decided to turn to the one person who could decide the issue: Ging. In early February, Schmitt wrote personally to Ging as a follow-up to correspondence Hilgard had been having with Ging and in a manner that suggests Schmitt＊s long-term cultivation of the Field Marshal was not without advantage. He began by pointing out that ※the decision of the Frer and yourself in the question of insurance created a welcome clarity, and the way must now be free so that with the help of an economic leadership guided by National Socialist principles the highest conceivable position in the world can be attained in this feld.§ He had conveyed this view to Schwede-Coburg, but 
from a purely practical view the old game continues insofar as in the nominations for the most important positions one is trying very strongly and with understandable suc-cess to push the private insurers into the background. The centerpiece of this battle is the elimination of Hilgard, who without doubt must be the natural leader of the insur-ance business, if the private每public confict is not quietly to remain the dominating idea beneath everything. 
Schmitt insisted that ※friendly collaboration§ was impossible if the struggle was going to continue in this manner. As a former minister, Schmitt claimed that he was trying to take a neutral position and then asked Ging to arrange a meet-ing with Schwede-Coburg (in the presence of Ging) in mid-February to settle the matter.70 
No record has been found of such a meeting. Ging did decide that Hilgard would keep his post, and Schwede-Coburg was compelled to accept the decision. The reason is discoverable from the marginal comment in red by Ging on a copy of the aforementioned letter from Schmitt to Ging. The latter＊s offce sent the document to Lange on February 20 and asked in a covering letter that Ging＊s marginal comment be brought to the attention of Funk. Lange＊s own marginal notations show that on February 21 he spoke to Schwede-Coburg, who 
69 Bormann an Funk, 7. Jan. 1939,BAB, R 3101/9275, Bl. 158每9; for the subsequent exchange on 
personnel questions, see ibid., Bl. 160每81. 70 An undated copy of the letter from Schmitt to Ging was sent to Lange from Ging＊s offce on 
Feb. 20, 1939, ibid., Bl. 183每4. 
agreed to the retention of Hilgard, and that on February 22 he reported to Funk. The decisive handwritten notation by Ging read: ※If the private [insurers] are 80%, then Hilgard must remain.§71 In sum, Ging＊s decision in favor of Hil-gard was largely pragmatic and involved an acceptance of the private insurers＊ argument that they dominated the business and so should provide the organi-zation leadership. As was so often the case, Ging came down on the side of private enterprise when it was the practical thing to do. 
After the war, Hilgard was to attribute his retention to more personal factors, and these may have well played some role. Schmitt＊s letter to Ging began by making explicit reference to recent correspondence between Hilgard and Ging: ※My friend Hilgard informed meyesterday about an exchange of letters with you. I feel a need to say a few words about it.§72 The subject of this correspondence may have been a matter that Hilgard brought up in his postwar interrogation and that he considered decisive for his retention as head of the Reich Group. Ging had asked Hilgard to assist in the insurance case of Ging＊s wife＊s close friend, the actress Agnes Straub. She was involved in an automobile accident and was insured with the Gerling concern, but she told Frau Ging that she feared diff-culties if she fled a claim. Ging personally wrote to Hilgard to ask for help; Hilgard contacted General Director Forstreuter, who assured Hilgard that Frau Straub would have no diffculties with her claim. Hilgard then wrote Ging that he had the pleasure of telling him the problem had been solved. Subsequently, when Hilgard visited the RWM in connection with his reappointment as head of the Reich Group, Lange purportedly showed him the letter Hilgard had writ-ten concerning Straub, at the bottom of which Ging had allegedly written in red: ※Hilgard stays.§73 Eight years had passed between the events described and the interrogation, and it is possible that Hilgard was confating events and es-tablishing a cause-and-effect relationship where none actually existed. Hilgard＊s interpretation of his retention ft in nicely with his own emphasis on the trials, tribulations, and vulnerability of the private insurance industry and on the un-predictable behavior with which he constantly had to contend. The confation could have been conscious or unconscious, and it is not impossible that Ging may also have been infuenced by Hilgard＊s services even if the decisive reason was the power of large private insurers in the industry. 
One thing for certain is that pandering to Ging＊s material needs and wishes was common practice by those who courted his favor. This was not the frst time Hilgard had played Ging＊s insurance man, although Ging seems to have shown a preference for Allianz as an insurer quite independently of Hilgard. Thus, he had taken out a 30-year policy for 50,000 RM in 1932 with a premium 
71 Ibid. I am grateful to Inge Ble for providing me with a copy of the document in which the 
Ging marginal comment is decipherable and thus making it possible to refute the Hilgard in-
terpretation discussed shortly. 
72 
Ibid. 73 See Hilgard interrogation of July 14, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /57/6每8. 
of 1,620 RM a year, for which he had paid a total of 13,200 RM by 1945.In June 1938, the Luftwaffe gave Ging a present of a 50,000-RM dowry insur-ance for his daughter Edda, payable on her marriage or in 1963 at the latest.74 In his unpublished memoirs, Hilgard claims that Ging had summoned Hilgard to his offce in 1935 and stated that he wished to take out a life policy but that Allianz＊s rates were too high. Hilgard explained them to Ging and apparently appeased him, although there is no record that he took out a policy for himself at this time. In 1936, an annuity insurance was taken out for his sister-in-law, Else Sonnemann, but this was not necessarily the problem Ging had in mind in his discussion with Hilgard.75 In 1937, Ging once again called Hilgard in, this time concerning a policy on his recently awarded Field Marshal＊s baton (which was studded with jewels and diamonds); he probably took out a policy with Al-lianz for this as well. Still, it would be excessive to argue that Ging＊s decision to keep Hilgard was simply a product of the latter＊s assistance with insurance mat-ters, or because Allianz was a regular participant in the gift giving at Ging＊s lavish birthday parties, where he would purchase costly works of art and charge them to the account of guest corporations.76 Ging needed competent peo-ple to do his bidding 每 not types like Bra., who could describe but not master the politics of someone like Ging. Hilgard was a known quantity who had proven himself amidst all the irritating squabbling connected with the insurance business. Why not keep him? In any case, Hilgard stayed at his post and thus presided over the reorganization of the Reich Group during the coming months. 
Ging was not the only major fgure in the regime to insure with Allianz, which was after all viewed by a substantial number of Germans as the biggest and best insurance company in Germany. Deputy Frer Rudolf He. had a va-riety of accident and liability policies with Allianz (on which he paid premiums in 1939 totaling 4,699 RM) as well as what must have been a substantial life in-surance policy (on which he paid a yearly premium of 2,076 RM).77 Adolf Hitler was also insured by Allianz for his palatial home in Obersalzberg, the Berghof, between 1936 (when construction was completed) and 1943 (when the insur-ance was cancelled for reasons that are not entirely clear). The policies had been mediated through a real estate specialist in Munich by the name of Gotthard F.rbers, who offcially received a commission of 272.50 RM from Bayerische Versicherungsbank for his services. The commission, however, was actually de-livered to Martin Bormann. The fve policies covered liability, household con-tents, glass, water, and storm damage, the last-named four policies each in the 
74 AZLB, A 142 696. 
75 
Ibid. 76 Ibid. and Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7, pp. 99每100. Hilgard tells the amusing story of how the 
Reichs-Kredit-Gesellschaft director (and leader of the Reich Group for Banking) Otto Christian 
Fischer attended one of the parties and noticed a Cranach as one of the gifts. When he inquired 
who had bought it for Ging, he was informed that it was his bank! 77 Aktennotiz, Haftpficht-& Unfall-Abteilung, 29. Juni 1939, FHA, S 17.10/21. 
amount of 500,000 RM. The premiums added up to 1,090 RM a year. After some irritation on the part of Hitler＊s adjutant SS Gruppenfrer Julius Schaub over the way they were being billed (through normal procedures), billing was handled personally by one of Bayerische Versicherungsbank＊s Munich directors. Obviously, ※Our Frer and Reich Chancellor§ was not an everyday customer.78 
On balance, Allianz had done extraordinarily well in maintaining its position as Germany＊s pre-eminent concern, and its leaders continued to dominate the industry despite the travails of the years before the war. To be sure, Hilgard and his colleagues felt embattled 每 and would, indeed, continue to feel embattled 每 in their efforts to defend the private insurance industry from its enemies. However, it would be a mistake to think that they had merely survived. Germany was on the march, and so was Allianz. As the concern approached its fftieth anniver-sary in 1940, it was expanding as Germany itself expanded into Austria, into the former Czechoslovakia, and soon into most of the lands dominated by the Third Reich. By the time Germany went to war in September 1939, Allianz and its leaders were well practiced in the grotesque politics of the regime and the ethi-cal compromises required; they had become 每 sometimes willingly, sometimes reluctantly 每 mired in its evil purposes. Allianz was in no way unique in these respects, and it ultimately shared the collective responsibility of the German business community. However, certain areas 每 where the insurance industry was particularly involved in the seizure of Jewish assets 每 are extremely complicated and controversial. We deal with them in the next two chapters before moving on to the examination of Allianz at war. 
78 For this correspondence on Hitler＊s policies between 1936 and 1939, see ibid. 
5 

The ※Night of Broken Glass§ and the Insurance Industry 
the pogrom as an insurance problem and the conference of november 12, 1938 
On June 17, 1938, Andreas Bra. informed a meeting of the advisory council of the Private Insurance Economic Group that the Jewish question was ※picking up strongly again,§ as his colleagues may have noticed. He had recently been at a small gathering with Hitler, and there was a good deal of anger that so many Viennese Jews were coming to Berlin and that it would not be surprising if some-thing were done about it. Bra. indicated that the Hitler Youth were likely to take action and that, in any case, the insurance companies should be prepared. He personally would not insure any more Jews. However, as pointed out by Gen-eral Director Anton Dietrich Kessel (one of the Berlin glass insurance company executives), there were policies still in force that one could not simply elimi-nate overnight. He had already received reports of Jewish store windows being defaced during the day and then broken at night. The damage had been consid-erable. He asked for help, since the damage was not being done to the Jews in the end, a point echoed by General Director Johannes Tiedke of Alte Leipziger, who observed that ※the Jew can only be harmed if he himself is the owner and is not insured.§ Non-Jewish Germans would have to pay in the end 每 and, worse yet, most of the glass came from abroad. Bra.＊s only response was that they would just have to take the losses. When Kessel urged that they publish newspa-per articles pointing out these facts, Bra. replied that ※if the present action has a political origin, then the press will not take such an article at the present time.§ Kessel then suggested that they simply turn down such claims, but this was more a counsel of despair than a real answer.1 
This was revealed three days later, on June 20, when the Association of Ger-man Glass Insurance Companies sent a circular to its members dealing with a series of recent reports concerning the shattering of Jewish shop windows in Berlin. Initially, such incidents had been confned to the area around Alexander-platz, but similar occurrences were now taking place in other parts of the city and 
1 See the edited version of this meeting of the Sitzung des Beirats der Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatver-
sicherung am 17. Juni 1938,GDV,RS/15, andthe uneditedversionin GDV, RS/26. The quotation 
is from the latter, pp. 56每7. 
190 
in the provinces. It was standard practice for glass insurers to replace the bro-ken glass of their customers rather than make cash payment, but the Association feared that the immediate installation of new windows would be futile under ex-isting conditions. Because the volume of reports was increasing and ※the danger of repetition was great,§ the association recommended that ※the regulation be delayed and the insured be urged to use emergency glass or wood boarding for the time being until a measure of calm has taken hold.§2 It also asked its mem-bers to provide, on a regular basis, full details of all such incidents and the costs involved. 
There was good cause for concern. The events reported by the glass insur-ers were the products of a ※Judenaktion§ that had begun on May 1每2 and did not end until June 21. It had largely been confned to Berlin and was primarily the work of SA men, sometimes in and sometimes out of uniform. In the ini-tial phase, it consisted of the defacement of Jewish shops and businesses with painted identifcations, signs, and warnings with the obvious purpose of driv-ing away customers. The frst reports of the actual breaking of windows came on May 27, and this was followed at the end of the month with raids on the Kurfstendamm 每 in which the police, Gestapo, foreign exchange authorities, and SD (security service of the SS) all participated 每 whose purpose was to pick up Jews suspected of violating regulations and foreign Jews subject to depor-tation. A second and far more serious wave of anti-Jewish activity began on June 17, attributed by the police to the Berlin Gau leadership and the direct inspiration of Joseph Goebbels. The propaganda minister had given an infam-matory speech before the Berlin Order Police in which he emphasized that the Jewish question was to be handled with a minimum of laws and decrees and with ※a maximum degree of personal readiness to act.§ In somewhat contra-dictory fashion, Goebbels then chose as his model the former Weimar Berlin Police Vice-President Bernhard Wei., whom Goebbels defamed with the frst name of ※Isidor,§ who could be presumed to have contemplated what chican-eries he might commit against the Nazis while going to work. Thus, ※it is for this reason today nothing more than right and proper when police offcials con-sider on their way to work how they can best employ chicaneries against the Jews that day.§3 
Apparently, the police did not have to strain their minds very much, and about 2,000 Jews were arrested between June 17 and 21, some of them for such offenses as jaywalking. These arrests were accompanied by renewed breaking of Jewish shop windows, along with the plundering of shops, while the police failed to provide adequate protection. The entire ※action§ was brought to an abrupt halt at 5 p.m. on June 22 by the personal intervention of Hitler himself from Berchtes-gaden. Matters were apparently getting out of control, and this order followed 
2 Rundschreiben Deutscher Glasversicherungs-Verband, 20. Juni 1938,GDV,RS/45. 3 Bericht des Sicherheitsdienstes an das Sicherheits-Hauptamt, 24. Juni 1938,SM, 500/1/645, Bl. 
16f., 21f. 
meetings the previous day among the Berlin Police President Count Helldorf, Deputy Gauleiter Glitzer, SA Obergruppenfrer von Jagow, and other dis-trict leaders and party offcials, as well as complaints by Reich Economics Min-ister Funk to Ging, who apparently intervened with Goebbels. While Funk, Ging, and Goebbels expressed their gratitude to the police and the SA leaders for the action, ※which had gone fabulously and had been a complete success,§ they also announced confdentially that the government intended to buy up all the Jewish businesses. Clearly, the government had an interest in taking them over in good shape.4 
The actions against the Jews in Berlin and elsewhere had attracted consider-able negative attention abroad, which was reinforced by the observations of the many tourists who came to Germany at the beginning of the tourist season. The arrest of some foreign Jews had also led to offcial protests from their govern-ments. The anti-Jewish actions caused some domestic political embarrassments as well, since they seemed to run counter to the recently issued Third Decree of the Reich Citizenship Law. This law provided that, at some time to be deter-mined, the Reich Economics Minister, in consultation with the interior minister and the deputy Frer, would take responsibility for the ※designation§ of Jew-ish businesses. The methods used to ※designate§ Jewish businesses by the SA obviously were different than those that would be employed by the ministries. Also, SA vandalism inevitably complicated ongoing Aryanization negotiations. Finally, the public was reported to have mixed feelings: 
The mood of the population with respect to these actions is divided. While the larger por-tion of the old Party comrades and the general population have greeted these measures, there have also been a great many negative judgments. It has often been pointed out in this connection that the burdens incurred through the shattering of display windows are carried by the German insurers, but not by the Jewish owners themselves.5 
Actually, one could argue that these costs should have been carried by the State. In December 1933, the Reich Economic Court had ruled that such damages tak-ing place during the anti-Jewish boycott of April 1, 1933, constituted a domestic disturbance and fell under the compensation provisions of the Tumult Damage Law.6 But 1938 was not 1933, and the willingness of either Jews or insurers to take the Third Reich to court because of offcially sanctioned vandalism by the SA was much weakened. Indeed, the insurers＊ meeting of June 17 demonstrated that they could not even mention the damage being done to themselves in the 
4 Ibid., Bl. 17. 5 Bericht betr. Judenaktion in Berlin vom 17. Juni bis 21. Juni 1938, ibid., Bl. 32每7. More gen-
erally, see Friedlander, Nazi Germany and the Jews, pp. 261每3. See also Christian Dirks, ※Die 
＆Juni-Aktion＊ 1938 in Berlin,§ in Beate Meyer & Hermann Simon, Juden in Berlin 1938每1945. 
Begleitband zu der gleichnamigen Ausstellung in der Stiftung ＆Neue Synagoge Berlin 每 Centrum 
Judaicum＊. Mai bis August 2000 (Berlin, 2000), pp. 33每41. 6 Longerich, Politik der Vernichtung, pp. 36, 595. 
newspapers. Worse still, as events later in the year would show, what had still been considered a civil disturbance in 1933 was by 1938 being characterized as the exercise of righteous civic virtue. Saul Friedlander has properly described the ※action§ in Berlin 每 although by no means restricted to that city 每 in the spring of 1938 as a ※small-scale rehearsal§7 for what was to come in the fall after the Sudetenland crisis was over. Similarly, the events of the spring signaled the far more complicated insurance issues that were to be raised by the Great Pogrom of November 9每10, 1938, and also demonstrated that these issues had already attained a measure of consciousness among those who would be called upon to deal with the questions of insurance following the ※Night of Broken Glass§ (※Reichskristallnacht§). 
There is by now a substantial literature on the origins and course of the No-vember Pogrom, so that the general aspects need not be recounted here. The Pogrom was launched in the wake of the shooting on November 7 of the Coun-cilor of Legation at the German Embassy in Paris, Ernst vom Rath, by the dis-traught Herschel Grynszpan, whose family had been among the 16,000 Polish Jews expelled to Poland under the most miserable circumstances in late October. Vom Rath died on the late afternoon of November 9, and Hitler received the news while participating in the ※Old Fighters§ dinner in Munich following a memorial celebration of the November 9, 1923, putsch. Hitler had been in an intransigent mood on the ※Jewish question§ for some time, Goebbels was anxious to restore his status (tarnished of late by his propaganda failures and extramarital affairs), and the idea of a pogrom and of a more radical policy toward the Jews had been in the air for months in Party and SD circles. In any case, Hitler decided to take Goebbels off the leash and informed the assembled Party leaders that ※sponta-neous§ actions in response to the vom Rath assassination were not to encounter interference. Thus was unleashed the ※Night of Broken Glass,§ a Party and SA orgy of vandalism, burning, looting, and sadistic mistreatment of Jews through-out the Reich that led to the destruction of several hundred synagogues and 7,500 businesses, the murder of at least 91 Jews, and a wave of arrests in which 30,000 Jews were dragged away for usually brief but always terrifying incarcerations in concentration camps, thereby producing further deaths and suicides. Although Goebbels personally ordered an end to the ※demonstrations§ on the front page of the Vkischer Beobachter on November 10, vandalism and violent actions continued in some places as late as November 13. 8 
Goebbels coordinated his actions, including termination of the Pogrom, very closely with Hitler, and cheerfully noted in his diary that he found Hitler ※totally radical and aggressive.§ Much damage had been done, but Hitler was uncon-cerned since, as Goebbels noted in reporting their conversation in Munich of 
7 Friedlander, Nazi Germany and the Jews, p. 263. 
8 Ibid., pp. 257每79, and Wolfgang Benz, ※Der Rkfall in die Barbarei. Bericht er den Pogrom,§ 
in Walter H. Pehle (ed.), Der Judenpogrom 1938. Von der ＆Reichskristallnacht＊ zum Vkermord 
(Frankfurt a.M., 1988), pp. 13每51. 

The Uhlfelder department store in Munich, Rosental 12, destroyed in the so-called Reichs-kristallnacht, November 10, 1938. 
November 10: ※The Frer wants to take very sharp measures against the Jews. They must themselves put their businesses in order again. The insurance compa-nies will not pay them a thing. Then the Frer wants a gradual expropriation of Jewish businesses and to give the owners paper payment for them that we can void any time.§9 This diary entry is of immense importance for two reasons. First, in the general sense, it demonstrates that some of the most signifcant immi-nent actions refected the express wishes and intentions of Hitler. Second, with specifc reference to insurance, it shows that Hitler was well aware that insur-ance claims might be made in connection with the Pogrom but had pre-empted any serious discussion of payment by ordering that the Jews were not to receive insurance compensation. 
Needless to say, the leadership of the insurance business was also well aware that the fre, glass, and especially burglary and theft branches had a problem on their hands. In contrast to the situation in June, however, it was obvious from the outset that the character and extent of the damage gave the actions of November a very different quality from those of June and that the government was likely to take an active interest in the insurance aspects of the Pogrom. Thus, on No-vember 11, the leadership of the Reich Group sent a most revealing confdential letter to the organization of private insurers pointing out that the damage 每 the 
9 Die Tagebher von Joseph Goebbels, hrsg. von Elke Frlich, Teil 1: Aufzeichnungen 1923每1941, Bd. 6: August 1938每Juni 1939, bearb. von Jana Richter (Munich, 1998), p. 182. 
extent of which still could not be determined 每 had been very great and that one could also not determine ※whether the damages are subject to compensa-tion under the terms of the policies.§ This being the case, ※it seems absolutely necessary that the insurance companies proceed in the handling of this matter according to totally uniform principles which have to be adopted in agreement with the relevant authorities and Party agencies.§ Hilgard, in his capacity as head of the Reich Group for Insurance, therefore asked that they take measures as quickly as possible to ensure that no company do anything to prejudice this unifed stance. On the one hand, it was necessary to acknowledge all incoming reports of damages. On the other, it was important that ※no payments for dam-ages occur before further instructions are received concerning the handling of these reports.§ Finally, Hilgard asked that he be supplied with ongoing infor-mation about the extent of the damages, which he needed for his reports to the Reich Economics Minister.10 
This letter clearly demonstrates that Hilgard was very much aware of two factors potentially complicating the handling of claims of Pogrom victims; these factors are of great importance in evaluating his somewhat puzzling performance (to be discussed shortly) at the meeting of November 12, 1938, under Ging＊s chairmanship in the Reich Air Ministry called to deal with the problems raised by the Pogrom. The frst was the general issue of liability 每 specifcally, whether the Pogrom could be viewed as a public disturbance and thus not be subject to compensation under the insurance conditions of most policies. The circular proves that Andr谷 Botur (who has produced the most important study of the in-surance issue and the Pogrom) is absolutely correct in surmising that Hilgard, as an experienced insurance man, was well aware of this legal issue, since the circular specifcally raises the question of liability.11 
Indeed, it is inconceivable that Hilgard could not have been conscious that even the terminology with which liability could be called into question was a touchy issue. On April 20, 1938, the Reich Supervisory Board for Insurance had sent the insurance group a letter pointing out ※that in the National Socialist State the marketing of riot insurance and the mention of riot, domestic or civil unrest, dis-turbance of the peace, mob action, plundering, strikes, lockouts, and sabotage in the general insurance conditions of the other insurance branches is insupport-able.§12 At its meeting on June 17, the group advisory council was quite ready to abandon riot insurance, which scarcely existed anymore anyway, but was re-luctant to abandon the reference to riots and public disturbance in the general 
10 Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung der Reichsgruppe Versicherungen an die Fachgruppen, 11. 
Nov. 1938,GDV,RS/46. 11 Botur apparently did not have access to this important circular, which very much strengthens his 
general argument but which also shows that Hilgard＊s policy of nonpayment antedated rather 
than followed the meeting of November 12 discussed in what follows. Botur, Privatversicherung, 
pp. 179每80, 186. 12 RAA an die Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung, 20. April 1938, MR, G 1/1. 

Circular of the Economic Group for Private Insurance of November 11, 1938. 
conditions because of its foreign business. It was impossible to have two sets of conditions in German insurance policies. Furthermore, in the event of war, it was conceivable that domestic Communists could attempt public disturbances or that diffculties might arise in areas evacuated in a strategic retreat. Thus, the insurers argued that it was ※in the interest of the National Socialist State§ to maintain the clause. Apparently, the insurers and the RAA easily agreed on this compromise 每 the latter having already indicated that it understood the need to take foreign business into account 每 but the matter nevertheless continued to hang in the air in late October because the Propaganda Ministry persisted in demanding that the terminology be removed from the general insurance condi-tions. It would not be easy to openly claim that the events of November 9每10 were a civic disturbance when Goebbels, the very man who had incited them, in-sisted that civic disturbances no longer existed in National Socialist Germany.13 
The second factor complicating Hilgard＊s efforts to fnd a policy for deal-ing with insurance claims arising from the Pogrom was that government offcials were in a position to exercise dictatorial authority with respect to the payment or nonpayment of insurance claims. This was not only because it was a government-inspired Pogrom that had created the complicated situation in the frst place and that one of the unique characteristics of totalitarian states is that they are in a position to arbitrarily ※solve§ the problems they arbitrarily create; it was also be-cause section 81a of the Reich Insurance Decree gave the government the power to set aside existing clauses in the general insurance conditions if it deemed such action ※in the public interest.§14 The insurance industry was in no position to make autonomous decisions on its liability with the confdence that it could fght for its position in court. It would inevitably have to come to terms with the authorities and party agencies. Finally, it is useful to bear in mind that the sense of insecurity in the Reich Group must have been very high at this time be-cause, as discussed previously, it was undergoing reorganization and it was by no means certain that Hilgard would retain his leadership position. 
Leader he was, however, and it was only a matter of a couple of days before he was summoned to represent the entire industry with respect to the insurance aspects of the Pogrom. On the morning of November 12, Hilgard received a summons from Ging＊s ※Chancellory§ to go immediately to a meeting at the Reich Air Ministry. In the antechamber to the meeting room, as Hilgard re-ported in his private memoirs, he encountered a number of Ging＊s adjutants, some of whom immediately approached him with the information that the meet-ing he was about to enter was a very stormy one, ※that Goebbels＊s position was shaky and that I could contribute to fnishing him off entirely.§15 Hilgard was 
13 Sitzung des Beirats der Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung, 24.Feb. 1938,GDV, RS/26; Nie-
derschrift er die 10. Beiratssitzung der Fachgruppe 1 Feuerversicherung, 28. Juni 1938,SM, 
1458/1/178, Bl. 105f.; Niederschrift er die Sitzung des Beirats der Fachgruppe Glasversicherung, 
9. Dez. 1938,SM, 1458/1/255, Bl. 71. 14 See the discussion in Botur, Privatversicherung, pp. 71每3. 15 Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7,p. 107. The account by Hilgard given here deviates somewhat 
from that written at the time of Hilgard＊s denazifcation, when he was writing more from mem-
ory. His ※Aktennote betr. Die Aktion gegen die Synagogen und jischen Gesch.fte vom 8./9. 
November 1938,§ written for the Nuremberg trials, misdates the meeting to November 11 and 
sets the participation at 40每50 persons. According to his memoirs, it was more in the neighbor-
hood of 100. See FHA, NL 2 /5. 
understandably surprised by such expectations and, upon entering the room, was confronted by a large assemblage of nearly a hundred Reich ministerial and police leaders assembled about a horseshoe-shaped table with Ging at its head. Ging instructed that Hilgard be provided with a seat next to him, and Hil-gard thus found himself squeezed between Ging and Goebbels, who sat at his left. At the same time, he sat directly across from Reinhard Heydrich, chief of the Reich Security Offce and SS Reichsfrer Himmler＊s right-hand man, and across from Kurt Daluege, chief of the Order Police. This was no dinner party, and there is every reason to believe that Hilgard found the situation intimidating. 
One of the great diffculties in interpreting the 160-minute meeting is that the log is incomplete. The portions taken by one of the two stenographers have not been found. For this reason, we do not have a record of Hilgard＊s involvement in one of the three parts of the recorded meeting at which he was present. The other presently available sources on the meeting do not add signifcantly to our knowledge of the insurance discussion. Nevertheless, the total body of available source material is extensive enough to piece together the role of Hilgard in this important event.16 
Insurance was only one part of the broad agenda of the meeting that Hilgard now joined and that Ging had earlier announced to be of ※decisive nature§ in taking a unifed approach to the Jewish question. He had received a letter from Martin Bormann (chief of staff of the deputy Frer＊s offce) calling for such centralization, and Hitler himself had repeated this demand over the phone with him the day before. Ging viewed the question primarily as a ※large-scale economic problem,§ and this was to be the point of departure for their deci-sions. The demonstrations of the previous days had made it clear that 每 despite earlier discussions and decisions 每 they could not go on dragging their feet on Aryanizing the economy but rather had to act decisively. At the same time, and with scarcely concealed hostility toward Goebbels and his irrepressible ego-mania, Ging made it clear that he was ※fed up with demonstrations§ because ※they do not hurt the Jews, but in the last analysis myself since I am the fnal au-thority for organizing the economy.§ He argued that not only did destruction of a Jewish store not hurt the Jew (since insurance covered the damages), it also 
16 Stenographische Niederschrift von einem Teil der Besprechung er die Judenfrage unter Vorsitz 
von Feldmarschall Ging im RLA [Reichsluftamt] am 12.Nov. 1933, 11 Uhr, in Der Proze. gegen 
die Hauptkriegsverbrecher vor dem Internationalen Milit.rtribunal. Nnberg 14. November每 
1. Oktober 1946, Bd. 28, Nnberg 1948, Dokument 1816-PS, pp. 499每540 (hereinafter cited as Dokument 1816-PS). One of the two stenographers retained the copy of his portion of the min-utes in violation of the regulations, which is why it found its way into the International Military Tribunal. The other two presently available primary sources on the meeting are those of Bern-hard Lener of the Jewish desk in the Interior Ministry and the Undersecretary in the Foreign Offce, Ernst Woermann. For the former＊s account, see ※Das Reichsministerium des Innern und die Judengesetzgebung,§ Vierteljahrshefte f Zeitgeschichte 9 (1961), pp. 263每311. Woermann＊s account can be found in Akten zur Deutschen Ausw.rtigen Politik 1918每1945, Serie D (1937每 1941), Bd. V: Polen, Sosteuropa, Lateinamerika, Klein-und Mittelstaaten. Juni 1937每M.rz 1939 (Baden-Baden, 1953), Dokument 649, pp. 761每2. 
destroyed goods meant for consumption by the people. Any future demonstra-tions, he urged, should be directed in such a way ※that one does not cut into one＊s own fesh.§ Ging repeated again that it was insurance companies who would bear the costs of property destruction, while the shortage of desperately needed clothing and other goods would only increase. In another thrust at Goebbels, Ging stated that he would be appreciative if it were made clear to the people through propaganda that the insurance companies, not the Jews, were the vic-tims of destructive demonstrations. This said, Ging made it no less clear that, ※I do not have any desire ... to let the insurance companies pay for these dam-ages. I will therefore issue a decree on the basis of my plenary power 每 and ask naturally for the collaboration of the relevant ministries 每 that matters be put on the right track and the insurance companies not have to bear the damages.§17 
This was, of course, in full conformity with Hitler＊s decision that the Jews receive no insurance payments, of which Ging undoubtedly was aware either through Goebbels or through his own telephone conversation with Hitler of the previous day. Nevertheless, Ging＊s insatiable thirst for foreign exchange and any assets he could lay his hands on made it impossible for him simply to discharge the insurance companies of any responsibilities they might have had. Thus, hebelievedtherewasasecondissuetobeconsideredontheinsurancefront: 
these insurance companies could be reinsured abroad. In the case such reinsurance comes into question, then I would not want to renounce it because it will bring in foreign ex-change. This must be examined. For this reason I have asked Herr Hilgard of the insur-ance business to be brought here, who is in the best position to give us information as to the extent to which the insurance companies are covered for such damages for I would not want in any case to renounce it. 
The question of how the German insurance companies could be spared pay-ment of Pogrom damages while foreign reinsurance companies continued to pay their share was a mystery concerning which Ging was apparently oblivious. While Hilgard had been on his way to the meeting, those already assembled had engaged in a brutal, ill-tempered, and often simply disgusting discussion of the next steps in the despoliation of the Jews through Aryanization: the replace-ment of burnt-down synagogues (after the Jews had torn down what remained of them) with parking lots, the segregation of Jews on trains, and their exclusion from cinemas, swimming pools, beaches, public parks, the ※German forest,§ and German schools. Whereas Ging was most interested in details of the Aryaniza-tion question, Goebbels paid enthusiastic attention to the ※cultural§ questions. Ging was anxious to concentrate on the matters most on his mind and made a point of mentioning a plan, long under discussion, to impose a special tax on the Jews. The idea for such an ※atonement§ tax had frst arisen in connection with the assassination of Wilhelm Gustloff (leader of the NSDAP organization in Switzerland) on February 5, 1936. The regime had deliberately restrained ※pub-lic wrath§ in the Gustloff case because of the Olympics. Now that it had been 
17 Dokument 1816-PS, pp. 499每500. 
unleashed and larger bills were due for both damages and military expenditures, Ging wanted a contribution from the Jews in the form of a high one-time levy rather than a tax surcharge, hungrily remarking that ※thereby I am better served.§18 
Turning to Hilgard on his left, Ging now raised the question of how he might be ※served§ by such insurance proceeds as might be owing to the Jews. Pointing out to Hilgard that the recent events arising from the ※justifable rage of the people toward the Jews§ had led to a great deal of damage to property and persons, Ging went on to state that ※I assume that a portion of the Jews 每 probably the majority 每 are also insured against tumult damages, etc.§ In the minutes of the meeting, Hilgard is reported as saying ※yes§ to this remark 每 ※Hilgard: Yes§ 每 although, given what was to follow, this was probably more a ※listening noise§ than an actual confrmation of Ging＊s assumption.19 Ging then went on to assure Hilgard that Jewish insurance entitlements arising from the ※justifed defense§ of the people against the Jews would present no problem: ※Here the matter would be relatively simple in that I would issue a decree that these damages that arise from this outburst are not to be covered by insurance.§ However, the question that was of ※burning interest§ to Ging (and which was why he had summoned Hilgard) was whether there was any foreign reinsurance for tumult damage insurance. He wanted to discuss ※to what extent this rein-surance, which might possibly yet bring foreign exchange, does not come to the Jews but to the German national economy.§20 
Ging was now ready to let Hilgard have his say, frst as to the matter of whether the Jews were insured against the damages. There can be no doubt about the fact that Ging＊s line of questioning put Hilgard in a very diffcult po-sition because it was quite the product of utter ignorance. All he could do was attempt to enlighten Ging as to what really was at issue: 
The matter is such that we are dealing with three types of insurance, and to be sure not with insurance against disturbances and tumult damage insurance, but with regular fre insurance, with regular glass insurance, and with regular simple theft insurance. The in-sured, that is, those who have a claim on the basis of these policies, are in part Jews, in part Aryans. With respect to the fre insurance, which is the largest amount here, those involved are probably by and large Jews. In the case of the warehouses, those damaged are identical with the Jews, with the owners, as is naturally certainly the case with the synagogues, aside from the damage to neighbors that came about through the spread of the fres. According to my information, which came in last night, such damage was rel-atively small. The matter is completely different with respect to glass insurance, which plays a very large role. Here the largest proportion of those damaged by far are Aryan. 
18 Ibid., p. 511. On the Gustloff affair, see Friedlander, Nazi Germany and the Jews, pp. 181f., 236. 
19 Dokument 1816-PS, p. 511. In contrast to Botur, Privatversicherung, p. 177, I am disinclined to 
interpret Hilgard＊s ※Ja§ as an actual affrmation that most of the Jews were insured against un-
rest, especially since he was soon to dismiss the signifcance of such insurance. 20 Dokument 1816-PS, p. 512. 
This is namely the house ownership, which is primarily in Aryan hands, while the Jew is in the rule only the renter of the shop 每 a situation which you can establish all along the line, e.g., on the Kurfstendamm.21 
For Ging, all this bad news simply confrmed what he had been saying all along about the economic harmfulness of such demonstrations, and he was not in the least pacifed when Goebbels chimed in with ※there the Jew must pay the damage.§ Indeed, Ging few into a rage: ※It doesn＊t make any sense. We do not have any raw materials. It is all foreign glass; that costs foreign exchange! One could crawl up the walls!§ At this point, Hilgard certainly understood very well what Ging＊s aides had meant with respect to ※fnishing off§ Goebbels. He proceeded to expatiate on the glass problem, pointing out that the shop window glass came from Belgium, not Bohemia, and estimating ※that we must expend ap-proximately 6 million under the insurance conditions as replacement mainly to Aryans who have suffered damages.§ While emphasizing that this could only be an estimate because of time constraints, and modifying his remarks to point out that Jewish merchants did suffer glass damage insofar as they were the owners of the buildings (as was the case with Jewish department stores), he went on to calculate that some 3 million marks＊ worth of glass was available in Germany, which meant that another 3 million marks＊ worth of glass would have to be im-ported. This amounted to half a year of Belgium＊s production, so that it probably would take another half year for the required glass to be produced. This trig-gered yet another altercation between Ging and Goebbels over the need to inform the people about Pogrom costs, which the latter did not feel possible at the moment. 
Of course, the Pogrom had been an exercise not only in destructive vandal-ism but also in thievery, and this was the next subject to which Ging turned in what so far had been a very frustrating discussion with Hilgard. Ging wanted to know if theft insurance covered goods that were taken out of shops and then burned, to which Hilgard replied negatively. Was it then a case of civic distur-bance (Aufruhr)? Here, Hilgard was uncertain, since it was an open question as to whether use of goods after an entrance (or containers) had been forcibly destroyed constituted thievery or simply an extension of the civic disturbance. Ging, apparently still under the illusion that there was insurance against civic disturbances and against damages arising from tumult, frst declared the event to be one of civil disturbance, whereupon Hilgard informed him that such in-surance scarcely existed anymore. Hilgard took as his example their biggest thievery case, the jewelry store Markgraf on Unter den Linden, which had re-ported 1.7 million RM in damages and held a so-called combined policy that seemed to insure it against every possible damage. After Ging had gone into another rage 每 calling on Heydrich and Daluege to round up those responsi-ble and use the Party to go after anyone who seemed to have been involved in 
Ibid. 
looting 每 Hilgard went on to say that the damages in question probably did not fall under the policy. Nevertheless, he made this statement with reservation, and asked Ging if he could not make a small request in the name of the in-surance industry with respect to their liability, namely, ※that we not be blocked in the fulfllment of our contractual obligations.§ This was necessary, Hilgard declared, because of their international business, which was very important and brought in foreign exchange. It was necessary to maintain confdence in the Ger-man insurance business, and failure to meet their contractual obligations would constitute a ※black spot on the coat of honor of the German insurance industry.§ 
Ging＊s initial reaction to this suggestion that the insurance companies meet such liabilities was to reiterate that he would issue a decree that would provide relief, but when Hilgard indicated a desire to discuss this, Heydrich chimed in with the idea that the insurance companies should pay out their obligations and that the money would then be confscated. In this way the companies could for-mally save face. Hilgard＊s response to this and Ging＊s interruption (along with Hilgard＊s interjection in the midst of Ging＊s remarks) are most revealing: 
Hilgard: That which Obergruppenfrer Heydrich just said is what I actually also consider the right way, frst to use the apparatus of the insurance industry to determine, to regulate, and also to pay out, but then to give the insurance industry the possibility, in some kind of fund 每 
Ging: One moment! You have to pay out in any case because Germans are dam-aged. But you receive a legal ban against making the payments directly to the Jews. You must also pay the damages that you would have had to pay to the Jews, but not to the Jews but to the Finance Minister. (Hilgard: Aha!) What he does with it is his business.§22 
The only sensible way to interpret Hilgard＊s ※Aha!§ is that Ging had hoisted Hilgard on his own petard. The latter apparently hoped that the insurance com-panies could make what was tantamount to fctional payments where they had liability and then get their money back from the State. While there is no direct evidence that Hilgard anticipated that this money would come from the Jews, his agreement with the scenario sketched out by Heydrich and the subsequent remarks made by State Councilor Schmeer (of the Economics Ministry), who was very much involved in the reconstruction of the Reich Group at this time and also was aware of the plan to levy a billion-mark fne on the Jews, could be interpreted as indicative of Hilgard＊s thinking: ※Field Marshal, I was going to make the proposal that one settles on a specifc percent of the reported assets 每 a billion mark is to be collected 每 in my view 15% and then raises this percent somewhat so that all the Jews pay the same amount and then give the insur-ance companies the money back from this amount.§23 Ging, however, had obviously changed his mind with respect to the liability of the insurance compa-nies. At the beginning of the meeting he indicated a desire to relieve them of all 
22 Ibid., p. 516. 23 
Ibid. 
obligation, but Hilgard＊s request that the companies be allowed to fulfll their obligations caused Ging to change his mind and to interrupt Hilgard before the latter had a chance to clarify his point: ※No. I am not thinking at all of giv-ing the money back to the insurance companies. The insurance companies are liable. No, the money belongs to the State. That is absolutely clear. That would be a gift to the insurance companies. They have made a generous request. They will fulfll it. You can count on it!§ 
The question of interpretation is important because, after the war, Hilgard claimed his ※Aha!§ as a ※plus point§ in his denazifcation, and he also gave himself credit for saying, presumably in connection with his request that the in-surance companies be permitted to fulfll their obligations, that the insurance companies would even pay the Jews if they determined they were liable. He sug-gested that this required no small amount of courage in the threatening presence of Goebbels and Heydrich. The former was purported by Hilgard to have turned red and to have interrupted him ※with the classic words: ＆Gentlemen, did you hear that? I think the monkey is picking lice off me. This man wants to pay the Jews.＊ §24 Quite aside from the fact that the words attributed by Hilgard to him-self and to Goebbels are not found in the extant portions of the minutes, it is diffcult to see how or why Hilgard would have made a special point of saying that the insurance companies would pay the Jews when it had been quite obvious (from the remarks made by Ging almost immediately after Hilgard entered the room) that the Jews were not going to collect insurance under any circum-stances. Goebbels certainly may have been overwrought, given the way Ging was trying to use Hilgard to make his position diffcult, and he could conceivably have misinterpreted Hilgard＊s remarks or intentions, but it is hard to imagine the stenographer omitting such a sharp remark from so important a personage yet still recording Hilgard＊s ※Aha!§ Furthermore, however threatening a personage, Heydrich was positively helpful to Hilgard in suggesting precisely what the lat-ter wanted 每 namely, a fctional payment by the insurance companies (to help them save face) that would then be compensated. It was the rapacious Ging who elicited Hilgard＊s ※Aha!§ by rejecting such a solution and declaring that he was going to confscate the insurance, so that the companies would receive no compensation at all. Whatever the defciencies of the minutes, about which Hil-gard complained bitterly when they were fnally published in 1948, there seems to be no evidence or reason for Hilgard＊s making a special point about paying insurance to the Jews themselves; most important, the interpretation given here is perfectly consistent with Hilgard＊s behavior during the negotiations over the coming weeks while the insurance issues of the Pogrom were being settled. 
In any case, matters were then made worse for Hilgard 每 following Ging＊s announcement that he intended to confscate insurance payments to Jews with-out compensation to the insurance companies 每 by Hans Kehrl, a high offcial 
24 Hilgard, ※Leben,§ p. 109, FHA, NL 2 /7. 
in the Reich Economics Ministry whose presence at the meeting Hilgard could not even remember at his interrogation in Nuremberg.25 Kehrl chimed in that the vast majority of the glass insurance companies were too small to bear the costs and that they had to fnd out if there was reinsurance. Hilgard responded by pointing out that reinsurance played a very small role here and was primarily of some importance with respect to fre insurance for large department stores. Reinsurance did not exist in the glass branch for the simple reason that the glass insurance business was normally extremely proftable. But it was now suddenly confronted with double the normal damage for a year, so that all calculations had to be thrown out. Whereas glass insurers normally collected 14 million marks in annual premiums and paid out damages to the tune of 4每5 million, their prof-itability now was truly endangered. Ging was unmoved, however, pointing out that there still would be a 4-million-mark proft; he remained unmoved even though Hilgard insisted that by adding up all the damage one arrived at a loss of 25 million and that this was a ※great catastrophe§ for the insurance business. 
Ging, however, was in a ruthless mood. He only wished 200 Jews had been killed in place of the goods that had been destroyed, and he had no patience either with Kehrl, a convinced Nazi whose apparent concern about the fate of small glass insurance companies ran athwart of Ging＊s quest for economic ra-tionalization, or Funk, who tried to argue that the insurance companies would not have to pay if the Jews footed the bill. Ging was out to collect from every-one, and the matter was ※as clear as day§ for him: 
At this moment 每 except for Herr Hilgard, who is here 每 no insurance company thinks anything other than that it must pay for the damages. They also want to do so, and I have complete understanding for that. They must do so so that they cannot be reproached for not having been strong enough to bear the damages. Glass insurance 每 this has also been emphasized 每 was until now the best business. It also has suffcient extra profts, if it did good business, and it has not distributed them as dividends, then it has reserves in order to be able to cover the larger damages. Such a company must be able to cover damages of 10, 12, 15 million, three times that of a normal year＊s premiums. If it cannot do that, then one must consider whether one should allow such small mutual insurance companies to stay alive. It would simply be insanity to have insurance companies that are not in a po-sition to cover such damages. Such an insurance company would absolutely be a fraud against the people. I now take the following view. The damages are to be determined. The insurance companies have to accept their full legal liability for them and to pay.26 
At this point, there was a change of stenographers and the discussion that en-sued is lost. It would appear to have been concerned with details of the various damages to be covered as well as of a decree, subsequently issued, requiring Jews to repair the damages caused by the Pogrom. This, in any case, was the note on which the minutes resumed, since Ging declared that, if the jewels stolen from 
25 Ibid., pp. 116每18. 26 Dokument 1816-PS, pp. 518每19. 
Markgraf were to be found, they were to be turned over to the State along with any other stolen property from Jews that was recovered. A more serious prob-lem was presented by goods on commission from England or the United States, which may have been insured by British or American companies. For Ging, however, this constituted no problem since the Jews, not Aryans, would report the loss and then be compelled to compensate the non-Jews. Thus, not all the damages would be paid by the German insurers and, as Ging cynically re-marked, Hilgard had something ※to smile about.§ Hilgard was not amused and, manifestly unable to control his irritation at the big bill looming before his in-dustry, bluntly stated that not having to pay some damages could not be called a proft. Ging, however, was indifferent to Hilgard＊s discomfture (since he seemed to have him where he wanted him) and thought moreover that Hilgard should be grateful for the good deal he was providing: 
Excuse me! If you are legally liable to pay 5 million, and suddenly an angel in my some-what corpulent form comes and tells you: you can keep 1 million, then damn it, is that not a proft? I am to take a direct cut with you, or whatever one calls it. 每 I only have to look at you; your whole body exudes satisfaction. You are getting a big rake-off. 
Hilgard, who had expected that his industry could pass off the bulk of the Pogrom costs, could not share this view. As was his custom by now, he couched his argument in the language of the regime to make a last desperate point, even at the risk of irritating Ging: 
It is a self-evident matter for me that the honorable German merchant ought not to bear the burden. I have also spoken to the frms, and I have argued that the damages ought not to remain hanging on the Aryans, and it remains hopelessly on the backs of the Aryans because the insurance community 每 not the insurance companies! 每 are thereby affected in that they must pay higher premiums and receive lower dividends. As a result, they are the ones who are damaged in the end. That is so and remains so. No one will deny that to me. 
By this time, Hilgard was as irritating to Ging as Goebbels, and Ging dis-missed him with the message he had been trying to convey to the Propaganda Minister: ※Then please be good enough to take care that not so many window panes are broken. You belong to the people also. Send your agents out. They should explain things immediately!§27 
hilgard, the reich group, and the aftermath of the air ministry conference 
Beginning on November 12每 that is, within hours of the meeting in the Air Min-istry 每 there began a new food of anti-Jewish legislation that distinguished itself 
27 Ibid., p. 520. 
from past measures by vastly accelerating their despoliation, exclusion from Ger-man economic life, and social and personal isolation. Most important from the perspective of the insurance issue were the three decrees issued on November 12 itself. The frst of these, the ※Decree for the Restoration of the Appearance of the Streets around Jewish Enterprises,§ placed the burden of cleaning up and repair-ing damage from the Pogrom on the Jews and mandated confscation by the State of any insurance to which Jews of German citizenship could make claim. The second decree imposed an atonement tax of 1 billion marks on Jews of German citizenship. Of great signifcance in connection with this decree was the imple-mentation decree of November 21. It ordered that all Jews with assets of 5,000 RM or more be obligated to pay 20% of their assets in four payments between December 15, 1938, and August 15, 1939. Especially signifcant for the insur-ance question was section 7 of the implementation decree, which provided that insurance payments in connection with the Pogrom to Jews with German citi-zenship and stateless Jews were to be made directly to the State revenue offces and to be credited against their levy on assets. Insofar as such payments ex-ceeded the latter, however, they were to be confscated by the Reich anyway. Finally, there was the ※Decree for the Exclusion of Jews from German Economic Life,§ which barred Jews from owning or running any enterprises after January 1, 1939. 
As we shall show, the last-mentioned decree promoted a massive repurchase of Jewish life insurance assets and ultimately raised the question of whether Jews were insurable at all. For purposes of clarity, however, it is most effcient to con-centrate frst on the thorny problem of insurance obligations in connection with the Pogrom itself. As should be obvious, the meeting in the Air Ministry had left Hilgard with an extremely unpleasant and unanticipated problem on his hands: Ging and the government now appeared to be expecting substantial payment of the damages from the insurance companies as well as from the Jews. When Hilgard returned to his offce, he immediately arranged for a meeting with his colleagues in the Reich Group. But even before it was held, he received a call from the offcial in the Reich Finance Ministry (probably Ministerial Director Johannes Schwandt) whom Ging had put in charge of the matter, telling him that Ging ※expects a payment of 20 million marks, with which he will then be satisfed.§ Hilgard and his colleagues had no intention of paying any such sum if they could help it, but they were fully aware that they would have little chance of winning a legal battle ※since our real opponent in court would not be the dam-aged Jews but rather the almighty Ging, who had pronounced the seizure of all Jewish claims by means of a decree.§28 It is unlikely that Hilgard ever be-lieved the insurance industry could take the government of the Third Reich to court over this issue or that the government would engage in a formal legal suit. 
28 Hilgard, ※Leben,§ p. 110,FHA,NL 2 /7. 

Eduard Hilgard (1884每1982), member of the board of Allianz 1923每1944 and head of the Reich Group for Insurance 1934每1945, about 1934. 
Avoiding suits at home and abroad was an important determinant of both in-dustry and bureaucratic behavior in the coming negotiations.29 
If Hilgard were going to prevent Ging from having his way, he would have to mobilize his contacts in the ministries 每 especially in the Reich Economics Min-istry, which was charged with implementing the decree on repairing damages arising from the Pogrom. Hilgard would also have to keep his ※troops§ in line. Thus, on November 18, the various insurance organizations were informed about his collaboration with the RWM, and their members were instructed to provide detailed information on the damages and on who had suffered them 每 German 
29 See Hilgard＊s interrogation of July 14, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /57/6每8. 
Jews, non-German Jews, Aryans, foreigners. The injunction against paying any damages was reiterated and the Reich Group announced its intention of working closely with the various business managers of the insurance branch organizations in assuring a uniform approach to the problem.30 During the next few days, how-ever, confusion arose due to the RWM＊s implementation decree of November 21. Three days later, the Reich Group informed its members that nothing was to be paid despite the issuance of the implementation decree and, on November 29, pointed out that the implementation decree said nothing about ※whether§ the insurance companies were obligated to pay the damages but only stated that, ※in so far§ as Jews were successful in claiming such obligations, the sums were to be paid to the Finance Ministry. In the meantime, the economics minister had reserved his decision about the actual obligations in question and would probably make a determination only after the extent of the damages had been established.31 
Hilgard now viewed it as his chief task to persuade the RWM that insurance companies were neither legally liable nor fnancially capable of covering the dam-ages and, further, that holding them liable made no sense in terms of the goals and purposes of the decrees of November 12. He stated the views of himself and his colleagues in a memorandum to Ministerial Director Lange of the RWM on December 6, 1938. 32 In his covering letter, Hilgard called for a uniform settle-ment of the issues and urged that the RWM hold a discussion with the relevant insurance industry leaders as well as Justice Ministry offcials. He left open the question as to whether the Finance Ministry needed to be asked to join as well, which was quite understandable given the interest of the Finance Ministry in sup-porting Ging＊s idea of making the insurance companies liable and collecting their money. 
The memorandum itself was signed by Director Hans Goudefroy of Allianz, who served as the legal expert for the Reich Group, and by Hilgard himself. They began by narrowly defning the relevant damages under the two decrees relevant to the issue 每 the decree for the restoration of the appearance of the streets and the atonement tax implementation decree of November 21. They took the position that the only relevant damages were those that directly affected the appearance of the streets and involved businesses and homes. Thus, damages to the interior of businesses and houses (as well as damages to synagogues, Jewish schools, and other institutions) did not fall under the decrees. They applied a similarly nar-row construction to section 7 of the implementation decree, reiterating that it 
30 Rundschreiben Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung, 18.Nov. 1938,GDV, RS/15. The call for 
speedy transmittal of such information was reiterated in a Rundschreiben of 21.Nov. 1938, ibid. 31 Rundschreiben Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung, 24.Nov. 1938 and 29.Nov. 1938,GDV, 
RS/20. 32 Hilgard to Lange, Dec. 6, 1938, and his memorandum of Dec. 5, 1938, ※Bestehen Versicherungs-
ansprhe deutscher oder staatenloser Juden auf Grund der Vorg.nge vom 8.每10. November 
1938?§ in SM, 1458/1/98, Bl. 147每53. 
did not establish liability but only stated that, if liability existed, then insurance payment was to go to the revenue offce and be counted in the atonement tax payment. They then turned to the central question: Did liability exist? Unsur-prisingly, the answer was negative and was based on the Reich Court decision of June 8, 1923, in the Porto Allegre case, in which an angry mob responded to the German sinking of a Brazilian ship in April 1917 by storming and destroying var-ious German businesses. Those claiming damages from the insurance companies tried to argue that they were entitled to compensation because the disturbances were not directed against the Brazilian government or offcials and thus did not qualify as civil disturbances. The court, however, ruled that a civil disturbance existed when ※portions of the populace, which do not have to be considered nu-merically insignifcant, are set in motion in a way that disturbs the public peace and order and exercise violence, be it against persons, be it against things.§ In the view of the authors, this ft the situation of November 8每10 perfectly, as was amply demonstrated (in their view) by Goebbels＊s call for a cessation to the demonstrations of November 10 in which he urged an end to the ※demonstra-tions and reprisals§ taken against Jewry and Jewish property ※in justifable and understandable anger§ over the murder of vom Rath. From this, Goudefroy and Hilgard triumphantly concluded that ※therefore the damages of November 8每10 were the result of civic or internal disturbances and are consequently not liable to compensation.§ 
However, the two insurance executives left no stone unturned and went on to argue that, even if the conditions defning a civic disturbance were not fully sat-isfed by the events in question, nevertheless the sense of the general insurance conditions (in excluding compensation for civil disturbances, acts of war, earth-quakes, and the like) was to protect the insurers from liability for ※elementary events,§ and this was the sort of event Goebbels described when he wrote 每 in an article of November 12 on ※The Grspan Case§33 每 that the events in question were ※an eruptive outburst of the anger of the population.§ Thus, if the Pogrom was not a civil disturbance then it was something like an earthquake. 
Goudefroy and Hilgard showed themselves to be quite masterful in carrying the logic of the Pogrom, and the decrees arising from it, to their brutal con-clusions. Thus, Aryan owners of destroyed Jewish properties could not suffer damages or lay claim to insurance payment because Jews were responsible for making the repairs. They were most emphatic, however, about the lack of Jew-ish entitlement to compensation: 
Through the decrees of November 12, 1938, the entire Jewry, therefore also the German and the stateless Jewry has been pronounced guilty of the Paris murder and thereby of a provocation against the German people. When the provocateur brings about the event provoked, then he must accept being treated like the perpetrator himself. It will not do to 
33 Vkischer Beobachter, 12.Nov. 1933. 
treat the politically condemned Jews as being legally guiltless with respect to insurance. As a consequence, it is justifable to raise the objection that the German and stateless Jews were responsible for being intentionally, or at the very least being grossly negligent in bringing about the insurance case. Thereby, however, all insurance claims are rendered inapplicable. 
It was not enough to argue that the collective guilt of the Jews for the murder of vom Rath deprived them of all rights to insurance, however. Goudefroy and Hilgard found it necessary to go further by insisting that paying the Jews insur-ance would be ※a violation of good morals§ since it would involve payment of those who had been found guilty of a crime: ※The act of reprisal against the Jews has the character of a punishment approved by the State. It would contradict the general sense of justice in the highest degree if the German insurance com-panies would have to remove this atonement placed upon the Jews.§ Yet, this is precisely what would happen. For example, if one compared two Jews, each with 100,000 RM in assets and damages of 20,000 RM but with only the second having insurance, then the former would pay 20,000 RM in damages out of his own pocket plus 16,000 RM in atonement tax on his remaining assets, whereas the latter would pay 20,000 RM in atonement tax but nothing for damages if compensated by insurance. Thus, the 16,000 RM difference would be covered by the insurance companies. And this already unsatisfactory result would be made even more ※unbearable§ if the money in question came from a mutual insurance enterprise that would then have to raise the money from its members, ※for in this case the Aryan members of the enterprise must pay the punishment imposed on the Jews.§ 
This memorandum is a monument to the sophistry and perversion of business and personal ethics that were coming to characterize businessmen like Hilgard and Goudefroy in the pursuit of their interests under the conditions created by National Socialism. That said, it is important to recognize that the issue was not one of paying damages to Jews, since direct insurance payments for Pogrom damages to Jews were manifestly out of the question. Nevertheless, as the ex-ample employed at the end of the memorandum demonstrates, the authors were prepared to argue that the liability of the insurers was especially undesirable because it might have the effect of relieving the Jews somewhat of the burdens imposed on them by the decrees. If the chief goal was the avoidance of insurance payment to the government, Goudefroy and Hilgard nevertheless did not shy away from reinforcing their position by arguing that insurance company liability would detract from the punishment being visited upon the Jews. Promoting the effcacy of anti-Semitic measures was thus an integral part of their argumenta-tion against insurance company liability; as we shall see, this was not their last use of such arguments. 
The primary goal, of course, was to block insurance company liability, and Hilgard provided the RWM with detailed information as to what the costs would be. If liability were to be assumed, then the amount of money the government would collect from private insurers alone would amount to 25.75 million RM: 
21.18 million in fre insurance, 4.42 million in glass insurance, and 150,000 in transport insurance. Payments to foreign Jews, which it was assumed would have to be made for political reasons, amounted to 1.84 million RM, while payment to Aryans would amount to 1.37 million RM, bringing the total to 28.96 million RM for the private companies alone. The publicly chartered companies would owe another 8.4 million RM to Jews, but the total amount of known (but not yet reported) damages to Jews would add 6.5 million RM to the total and, when one added damages to Aryans and non-German Jews, the total for the publicly char-tered companies would amount to 15.2 million RM. Hilgard was careful to note that all the information still was not in and that many Jews were not available to assist in the determination of damages 每 although no mention was made of the fact that their ※unavailability§ was probably due to their having been carted away to concentration camps. There were other problems as well. Foreign rein-surance companies were refusing payment for the damages. Hilgard did not say why, but they obviously had no diffculty calling a civil disturbance by its name, and that the fre department and police did nothing to mitigate the damages was well known. Also, there was the problem of compensating those who had suffered accidents or shock and illness due to the events. Accident and health in-surance had not been regulated under the decree of November 12. Whatever the case, time was of the essence in dealing with these questions because non-Jews were beginning to bring lawsuits against the companies, demanding payment for damages. Finally, to bring home the implications of liability, Hilgard provided a detailed list from German and foreign companies demonstrating that often re-ported damages signifcantly and even vastly exceeded the premiums they had collected. This was especially the case with smaller companies, for whom the obligation to pay would have proven ※catastrophic.§34 
Nearly every major ministry was by this time engaged in trying to control the damage and complications created by the Pogrom. On December 8, a meeting was held in the Interior Ministry at which representatives of the ministries of jus-tice, economics, fnance, and propaganda appeared 每 along with offcials from the Foreign Offce and SS 每 to determine the extent to which the Reich might be liable for Pogrom damages. The RWM was able to present Hilgard＊s estimates of the damage, thus providing an overview of the enormity of the problem. By this time it was very clear that, for political reasons, certain groups (Jewish and non-Jewish foreigners and non-Jewish German citizens) would have to be com-pensated for the damages and that public funds would have to be used for at least the immediate handling of some cases. Furthermore, some property belonging to Aryans had been damaged because perpetrators erroneously believed it did belong to Jews, had belonged to Jews, or belonged to persons of ※mixed blood§ 
34 Hilgard an Minsterialdirigent Gottschick, 6. Dez. 1938; Aktennote f Hilgard, 7. Dez. 1938,SM, 1458/1/98, Bl. 154每8, 159每61. 
or who were politically suspect for other reasons. There was an entire category of persons who were indirectly damaged because they had just invested all their assets in purchasing Jewish property or had sold goods to Jews who were now completely bankrupt and in no position to pay for the goods. The big question was how to settle claims quickly, avoiding court trials and publicity. Here the government already had a mechanism at its disposal in the form of a law de-creed on December 13, 1934, on the ※Settlement of Claims in Civil Law,§ which permitted the Minister of the Interior to terminate claims made to the courts in connection with compensation for damages arising from ※the National Socialist uprising and renewal of the State§ and to adjudicate such cases himself in accor-dance with the ※healthy feeling of the people.§35 Needless to say, it was a law aimed primarily at preventing Jews from taking the National Socialistregime and its minions to court for acts of vandalism and injustice. Its potential usefulness with respect to stifing court proceedings in cases brought by Jews and non-Jews alike in connection with the Pogrom is easily apparent. Thus, at the December 8 meeting, a decision was made to centralize such decisions in the Justice Ministry so as to ensure uniformity of practice and maintain budgetary control. In the National Socialist state, however, ※uniformity of decision making§ was really a formula for discriminatory practice (so that only Aryan hardship cases would receive compensation) and it would be possible to distinguish between foreign Jews who had been foreign citizens for a long time and those who had recently emigrated. The Gauleiter would be asked for advice, as provided under the 1934 law, and non-Jews interrelated with Jews would be denied compensation. In-deed, as made clear by the 14th Decree for the Implementation of the Law on the Settlement of Claims in Civil Law of March 18, 1939, which was specifcally issued to deal with compensation for damages arising from the events of No-vember 8 and the following days, such compensation would be given only on the basis of need and after political criteria were met. These emergency mea-sures, however, still left open the question of insurance company liability 每 that is, whether payments by the Reich were purely subsidiary or whether they were to be the primary source of compensation. The insurance companies were able to report their position to those assembled on December 8, but the actual re-sponsibility for dealing with the issue lay with the Reich Economics Ministry.36 
35 RGBl 1934, I, pp. 1235每6, and Joseph Walk (ed.), Das Sonderrecht f die Juden im NS-Staat. Eine Sammlung der gesetzlichen Ma.nahmen und Richtlinien-Inhalt und Bedeutung (Heidelberg, 1996, 2d ed.), Nr. I 487,p. 99. 
36 Vermerk er das Ergebnis der Besprechung im RMJ am 8. Dezember 1938 zur Frage der Gew.hrung von Schadenersatz f Verluste, die im Zuge der Aktion gegen die Juden am 8., 
9. und 10. November 1938 entstanden sind, BAB, R 3001/10788, Bl. 356每60. For the 14. Verord-nung zur Durchfrung und Erg.nzung des Gesetzes er den Ausgleich bgerlich-rechtlicher Ansprhe vom 18. M.rz 1939, see RGBl 1939,I, p. 614, and ※Wiedergutmachung von Sch.den aus den Aktionen vom 8. November 1938 und den folgenden Tagen,§ Reichsminister des Innern an die Landesregierungen, 28. M.rz 1939,BAB,R 18/3746b. 
Ministerial Councilor Daniel of the RWM, while basically friendly to the po-sition of the insurance companies, was above all anxious to keep the discussion of the issue confned to a small circle and was likewise anxious to avoid any pub-lic discussion of whether the damages were the result of tumult and thus free of insurance obligation. He worried that it might indeed prove diffcult to avoid court cases. Small and medium-sized frms, whose existence was threatened by the potentially high costs, would certainly do everything in their power to save themselves if held liable, and it would be impossible to prevent foreign insurers and reinsurers from questioning any government decision refusing to recognize the Pogrom as a tumult.37 
Daniel sought to clarify the matter at a December 16 meeting with insurers and other governmental offcials under the chairmanship of Ministerial Direc-tor Gottschick of the RWM.38 By this time, the reported damages (which later turned out to be exaggerated) had risen to 60 million RM: 45 million RM for fre damage, 8每10 million RM for glass, and the rest for burglary. The attendees expected that court cases would be brought by foreign insurers claiming nonlia-bility because of tumult, and Hilgard came well prepared to argue the case for nonliability for German insurers, as well. In the case of burglary insurance, there was no liability because the goods had been stolen after the windows had been broken, rather than by those who had done the initial damage. As for the fre and glass damage, it was the result of civic unrest. Also, the Jews had already re-placed almost all the glass that had been broken, as required by decree, so that the obligation of insurers to replace the glass no longer existed. More generally (and quite plausibly), Hilgard argued that he had never told Ging at the meet-ing of November 12 that the insurance companies would pay in every case, but only ※that the companies would remain faithful to their contracts and would pay in those cases in which they were legally bound to compensate.§39 Ging＊s in-terruption and the subsequent discussion had created the false impression that Hilgard had accepted full liability. Once again, he and his colleagues reiterated that the costs were unaffordable. The small mutual glass insurers would have to ask their members for additional payments that would exceed by many times their normal premiums, and even the larger fre insurance companies would be hard pressed. As in the memorandum of December 6, so now: industry represen-tatives argued that payment should not be made for reasons of economic policy 每 namely, that ※the Aryan insured would not understand the Aryan community of the insured being the bearer of the burden in the last analysis.§40 They warned 
37 Vermerk Ministerialrat Daniel, 9. Dez. 1938,SM, 1458/1/98, Bl. 164每5. 38 The meeting was originally scheduled for the 14th. There are two reports on the meeting, the frst 
by Ministerialrat Hans Thees of the Justice Ministry, the second by Regierungsrat Segelcke of the 
RWM. The former is to be found in BAB, R 3001/10788, Bl. 353每4, the latter in SM, 1458/1/98, 
Bl. 169每72. 39 Ibid., Bl. 169. 40 Ibid., Bl. 170. 
that foreign reinsurers would refuse to pay, so that the German insurance com-panies would have to sue them in foreign courts. When asked if the insurance companies also refused to pay for damages to Aryans and foreigners, Hilgard remained consistent. From the standpoint of the law and liability, there was no difference between the Jews and the foreigners. Returning to the proposal (frst made by Heydrich and then by Schmeer at the November 12 meeting) at which he had so eagerly grasped, Hilgard suggested that, if the authorities thought it important to regulate the damages done to Aryans and foreigners, then one had to invent a scenario that would camoufage any impropriety yet also be eco-nomically palatable to the insurers: ※The insurers regulate all the demonstration damages including the Jewish damages without prejudice to their favorable legal situation. But the Reich obligates itself internally to replace 100% of the expen-ditures of the companies. Approximately 30 to 50 million RM will be necessary that the Reich could pay out of the [Jewish] contribution.§41 
The position of the insurance companies was now quite clear. In the discus-sion among the ministerial offcials following the departure of Hilgard and his colleagues, one of the RWM offcials argued that it was ※unbearable§ to place the damage costs on the insurance companies and that, as intended by the im-plementation decree of November 21, the costs were to be covered by the Jewish indemnity. The problem, as all admitted, was that the decrees issued in the wake of the Pogrom were contradictory and confusing. It was unclear whether or not the Decree for the Restoration of the Appearance of the Streets was intended to mandate payment by the insurers and thereby exclude application of the civil unrest clause in policies; although the Justice Ministry (RJM) felt that the civil unrest clause was applicable, it was very unhappy with the decree＊s formulation. Potentially, this left the determination to the courts, which was precisely what all were trying to avoid. The RJM was especially distressed by the implementa-tion decree of November 21 (issued by the Finance Ministry) because they had not been consulted 每 despite claims to the contrary written into the preamble of the decree, under which the insurance payments could be counted in partial pay-ment of the atonement tax. In the view of councilor Hans Thees of the RJM, ※the goal must be to free the insurance companies and extract the contribution without exception from the Jews.§42 
When it came to the modus operandi, however, the RJM wished to issue a decree making the insurance companies liable (thus obviating the need for dis-cussions in the courts) but then actually to spare insurance companies the need to pay by taking the money from the Jewish contribution. The only thing the in-surance companies would have to pay under such an arrangement was the money 
41 
Ibid. 42 Vermerk Thees, BAB, R 3101/10788, Bl. 373, and complaints of the RJM about nonparticipa-
tion in the implementation decree of Nov. 25, 1938,BAB,R 3101/10787, Bl. 118. See also Botur, 
Privatversicherung, pp. 185每6. 
owed to Aryan Germans and to foreigners, a sum the offcials thought manage-able for the insurance frms. This in no way satisfed either the Finance Ministry or the Four-Year Plan representatives at the meeting. The former questioned whether the insurance companies (aside perhaps from some of the smaller glass companies) really were so bad off, feeling that additional evidence was necessary; the latter went further and argued that the assumption of insurance company liability inherent in the various decrees could not be set aside. Section 7 of the implementation decree was interpreted as creating a measure of equity among the Jews so ※that the small Jewish businessman, whose windows have been shat-tered, should not come away worse off than the rich Jew, whose villa remained untouched. For this reason one decided that the payments from the insurance claim should be counted toward the contribution.§43 Neither the RWM nor the RJM could accept this position, which in their view created legal insecurity. The by now infamous section 7 made sense only if insurance companies were liable 每 but this was not the case, as the companies were in a position to demonstrate. Another way had to be found, and since there was no agreement, the RWM took it upon itself to draft a new decree that would be submitted to the other min-istries in an effort to solve the problem. 
It had been a nasty meeting. Nine years later, Thees (in a letter to Hilgard) remembered back on their confict with Schwandt and the Party: 
... in that we refused not to recognize the riots of November 1938 as riots. In the end we pushed through with this position, which is that held today, because we saw the entire action as a big Schweinerei. I still think back on the frst meeting in the Reich Economics Ministry in which among the large circle present you and I were the only ones who had the courage to declare that this event was nothing other than a tumult, although this was sharply contested from the side of the Party with the argument that there could be no tumult in the Third Reich by defnition. I also remarked that one would have to issue a decree which would establish the liability of the insurers, but which would have to begin in such a way that under ∫1 of this decree a tumult is not a tumult.44 
Hilgard, indeed, remembered Thees as ※an ally, as undaunted as he was clever.§ Writing in 1947, Hilgard quite unabashedly recaptured both his arguments and his sentiments of 1938. The Finance Ministry ※dealt with me then as if it were acting on behalf of the Jews.§ Hilgard, however, argued that the insurers had no responsibility in a civic commotion and that, since the Reich claimed it was punishing the Jews, ※it was quite impossible and in contradiction of all sense of justice, to palm this punishment off on the insurance institutions.§ Thus, ※what I aimed at during all of these negotiations was to prevent that the Reich de-rived from these anti-Jewish demonstrations a beneft of several millions, to the detriment of theinsured.§45 Bythe ※insured,§ of course, hemeant the ※Aryan§ in-sured who paid premiums to the companies he represented. Apparently Hilgard 
43 Vermerk Segelcke, SM, 1458/1/98, Bl. 171. 44 Thees an Hilgard, 1. Dez. 1947, FHA, NL 2 /5. 
had no problem with asking that the Jewish atonement tax be used to compen-sate the insurance companies for what was tantamount to fctional insurance payments to cover a liability the insurance companies themselves contested. It was, of course, a good thing to keep the Reich from getting still more money from the ※night of broken glass.§ Yet one is struck by the singularity of purpose exhibited by Thees and Hilgard, not only in 1938 but also in 1947, by the absence of any refection on the fate of the Jews at either time, and by their persistent willingness to instrumentalize the ※atonement§ imposed upon the Jews 每 which Hilgard did at least put in quotation marks 每 in order to argue against liability on grounds of ※justice§ toward the ※community of the insured.§ 
The insurance industry leaders were well aware, even in the benighted Ger-many of 1938, that they were complicit in a very shady endeavor, if not in the sense that they were directly cheating Jews of insurance entitlements then in the sense that they were aiding and abetting the cover-up of government activities generally viewed as criminal in the civilized countries with which Germany still consorted. This collaboration can be seen most clearly from an extraordinarily frank letter Hilgard sent to Reich Economics Minister Funk on December 17, 1938, as a follow-up to the meeting of the previous day, which was intended as a last-hour appeal to avoid insurance company liability.46 Hilgard spoke for both the private and public sector insurers in rejecting the idea that the insur-ance companies should pay for the punishment meted out to the Jews. He made a special point of representing the concerns of the small insurers, like Glasverein Eberswalde, which collected 30,000 RM in premiums a year and was now con-fronted with an equal amount of damages. The psychological effect of Aryan small businessmen having to pay these costs had to be taken into consideration. He appended a letter from the head of another small glass insurer in Ahaus, a ※simple man of the people,§ to demonstrate his point. In this letter, one Wilhelm Hansen lamented how unbearable it would be for the glass insurer he represented to pay 560 RM for the fve windows in the two Jewish businesses insured by his company. As he had argued to his colleagues, 
World Jewry is our enemy, with whom we are in a regular state of war. Naturally the Jews of Ahaus also belong to world Jewry. One has to do damage to one＊s enemy (opponent in war) wherever that might be. And most certainly after the Paris murder. In this case the damages done are to be viewed as a just punishment for this mean deed. This pun-ishment ought not to be compensated with the help of some paragraphs that have been dug up. Every employment of sentimentality and of that famous German objectivity is an evil. 
45 ※Aktennote betr.: Die Aktion gegen die Synagogen und jischen Gesch.fte vom 8./9. November 
1938§ and ※Memorandum. Subject: The action against the Synagogues and Jewish shops of No-
vember 8./9. 1938,§ in ibid. Undated but written in 1947 每 that is, before Hilgard had access to 
the minutes of November 12, 1938. 46 For the discussion and quotations that follow, see Hilgard an Funk, 17. Dez. 1938,SM, 1458/1/98, 
Bl. 177每82. 
Indeed, in Hansen＊s view, it would be a ※mockery of justice,§ and the people would not understand any law court or lawyer who would defend these Jews. 
As Hilgard thus instrumentalized the ※voice of the people§ for his cause, his own argumentation stuck to familiar arguments designed to strike home to min-istry interests as well. Once again Hilgard cited the Porto Allegre case, which demonstrated that disturbances did not have to be directed against the govern-ment to count as disturbances, but he warned especially against the idea (sug-gested in the previous day＊s discussion) that the government could simply pass a law setting aside the court＊s decision. It would call forth, Hilgard warned, ※a storm of outrage abroad.§ As evidence he cited an article in the British News Chronicle, which reported that many German insurance companies were facing bankruptcy because the damages to Jewish synagogues and businesses amounted to over 50 million pounds. Most German insurers, according to the article, car-ried reinsurance in England, but the English insurers were well aware that the Germans themselves had eliminated insurance for domestic disturbances from their policies, that the damage was done with the ※quiet approval§ of the govern-ment, and that ※the [British] insurers can demonstrate that the police and the fre department did not do their duty, so that the insurers did not receive the mea-sure of offcial protection that is the precondition for reinsurance.§ He pointed out that Swiss insurers were also involved, and that it was not in the interest of the State to have such questions brought to trial. Also, the reinsurers would ex-pect the German insurers to demand that the terms of their own policies with regard to civic unrest be effectuated. Thus, the entire industry and also the State would be embarrassed if liability were made an issue. 
While Hilgard emphasized the alleged plight of small insurers, he warned very emphatically in the name of the entire industry against letting the question hang on whether or not the existence of individual frms were endangered by liability, 
for it is self-evident that, if, for example, Allianz has to pay damages in the amount of perhaps 6 million as a result of the anti-Jewish demonstrations, it will not be toppled over. But one must be clear about the fact that every mark, that is to be paid for this by the German insurance frms, must somehow work out to the disadvantage of the other Aryan insured .... 
Hence there was but one solution 每 namely, the one he had advocated in the meeting on the previous day: that the amount of insurance involved be taken from the Jewish contribution. About 50 million marks in damages had been reported, and by assuming that the synagogues and other Jewish religious build-ings were ※not worthy of reconstruction,§ one was left with about 40 million in damages. This was a sacrifce worth making to avoid the ※very heavy psy-chological damages§ that he had discussed. Hilgard further proposed that the insurance companies undertake the regulation of the damages and then be paid back in full measure. He did not fail to mention that the use of the insurance apparatus in this way involved considerable administrative costs to the compa-nies in any case, and he pleaded with Funk ※not to deny the German insurance business these fully justifed demands and to do everything to keep catastrophic harm away from the German insurance industry.§ 
Kurt Schmitt had assigned Hilgard the task of doing the dirty work of the in-dustry, and Hilgard was serving very well. In this instance, however, Schmitt felt he had to intervene himself, as shown by a strictly confdential letter he sent to Justice Minister Franz Gtner on December 20. It was clearly intended to move the discussion of the November 9 damages up in the hierarchy of both the in-dustry and the government, a privilege Schmitt could allow himself as a former minister. Schmitt claimed that he had assumed that the decree transferring Jew-ish damage claims to the Reich had been issued so ※as to prevent any discussion of the actual and legal issues related to this question.§ Now apparently ※certain circles§ in the government were actually planning to call on the insurance com-panies to pay. Schmitt insisted that, ※under the existing laws,§ the companies had no liability because of the civil disturbance involved. Schmitt made it clear that he did not think it very wise to raise questions about this: 
Now the very determination as to whether there has been such a violation of the public order or not is unpleasant. But even if this were to be denied, the obligation to compen-sate would still not be a practical issue because of the possibilities for suits. I can certainly spare myself going into details about this and need only to point out that it would be un-bearable if, for example, foreign insurance companies or reinsurers made the question of perpetration or the behavior of the police and the fre department a subject of court proceedings. It is an especially unpleasant complication of the present case that in many instances foreign insurance companies are involved as direct insurers and reinsurers, and according to foreign press reports one can expect that they would refuse to pay voluntar-ily. In this situation, there is only one practical way of forcing the insurance companies to pay, namely the issuance of a special law. I consider this idea, after the Jews have in general already been obligated to bear the costs of the damages, to be so impossible that I do not have to say a word about it. I believe that a more unusual and unjust special tax and intervention in existing legal relationships could hardly be thinkable. 
Apparently, what was being done to the Jews was more ※thinkable,§ and the peculiar juxtaposition of the normal and the bizarre in the relationship between the insurance business and the government at this point was heightened by the Christmas and New Year wishes with which Schmitt ended his letter. In any case, Schmitt noted that he was anxious to bring this ※delicate complex of questions§ to Gtner＊s attention, planned to call him about them, and offered the services of Director Alois Alzheimer to the ministry for further counsel and discussion.47 
The insurance industry was now mobilizing itself, and while Gtner invited Alzheimer to take up discussions with Thees, Hilgard had a circular sent on De-cember 27 informing the industry of the line he was taking in dealing with the government, thereby making the position that he and Goudefroy had taken the offcial position of the industry. On January 4, 1939, Alzheimer met with Thees 
47 Schmitt an Gtner, 20. Dez. 1938,BAB,R 3001/10788, Bl. 361每2. 
and other offcials and reiterated the usual arguments but indicated also that the insurers would be prepared to accept liability de facto for Aryans and foreigners. The domestic reinsurers would also take on the obligation; although one could try to induce foreign reinsurers to take a similar stance, court cases had to be avoided. The bad news was that a number of insurance companies were already being taken to court, and when Thees asked that the RJM be regularly informed of all such cases, Alzheimer suggested that they contact Director Goudefroy of Allianz, who had apparently been given the job of serving as watchdog in this area.48 Finally, on January 10, Hilgard sent a new memorandum to the Reich Economics Minister setting forth his position in detail and making concrete pro-posals for a solution.49 
What is interesting about this latest memorandum was the extent to which it gave priority to anti-Semitic considerations in making the case against insurance company liability. Thus, because it would be counted toward the atonement tax, payment by the insurers would involve a shifting of the punishment to ※purely German insurance communities.§ It would ※weaken the proftability of German insurers in favor of the Jews and contradict the healthy feeling of justice among all national comrades to the highest degree.§ At the same time, the Reich would receive no additional money because the payment would be credited to the con-tribution. To be sure, the Jews were also not entitled to compensation because of the civil disturbance involved, and Hilgard quite openly stated that there could be no legitimate charge against the companies for making ※unjustifed savings§ by not paying the damages. Indeed, they were making a ※signifcant sacrifce, if they voluntarily compensate the Aryan insured and thereby would take away the Reich＊s obligation to compensate.§ Also, the foreign reinsurers would ※leave them in the lurch§ and would claim the right to go to court if they felt themselves victims of special legislation that undermined the basic standards written into in-surance contracts. The long-term effect would be to undermine the international relations of the industry and its value for the procurement of foreign exchange. Hilgard saw no contradiction between his proposals and the decrees sequestering such insurance claims as may have existed; picking up on an argument used by Schmitt, he viewed the sequestration of insurance claims as necessary ※in order to take away from the Jews the legitimacy to launch complaints and to bring the events of November 8每10 before the courts.§ It was also necessary to prevent ※sensational trials before foreign courts§ and to prevent foreign Jews from using the issue ※in a tendentious manner against the German Reich.§ He therefore pro-posed the following way of dealing with the problem: ※The leader of the Reich Group for Insurance announces in agreement with the relevant ministries that the insurance enterprises are not obligated to pay the direct or indirect damages to domestic or stateless Jews in connection with the events of November 8每10, 
48 Gtner an Schmitt, 21. Dez. 1938, ibid., Bl. 363, and Rundschreiben Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatver-
sicherung vom 27. Dez. 1938, ibid., Bl. 377, Vermerke Thees, 4. Jan. 1939, ibid., Bl. 381每4. 49 Hilgard an den Reichswirtschaftsminister, 10. Jan. 1939, ibid., Bl. 388每90. 
1938. However, the German insurance enterprises are obligated to compensate insured Jews of foreign citizenship and Aryans.§ 
In the meantime, the pressure for a solution was increasing. On the one hand, foreign insurers and reinsurers were making inquiries with their German col-leagues about the situation, and the bad press Germany was getting for the Pogrom in general also contained reports that German insurance companies were threatened with bankruptcy because of the Pogrom＊s costs. While dangers of insolvency were hotly denied, responses to more general inquiries were vague, usually stating that matters had not yet been decided and sometimes indicat-ing that civil commotion clauses made liability unlikely.50 On the other hand, the courts were already hearing some cases. A Berlin Jewish optician of Polish citizenship, for example, took a glass insurance company to court in early De-cember demanding 400 marks for the replacement of a window. While the court initially ruled in his favor, the glass company successfully appealed the case. The court ruling on the appeal found that it was legitimate for the company to follow the instructions of the Reich Group and not pay out any monies until the relevant authorities had ruled on the compensation question. Signifcantly, the court also held that this judgment was in no way affected by the fact that the Nordstern company had been paying damages to foreign Jews. The case was worrisome since it demonstrated that foreigners were not waiting upon decisions in Berlin to go to court. The instructions of the Reich Group to refrain from pay-ment were becoming problematic, and some frms were breaking ranks. Also, the American consulate was showing an irritating interest in the case, claiming the problem was of relevance to its citizens as well.51 
Asimilarcourtcomplaint was launched againsttheAllianz branchinCologne, where the representatives of another Polish Jew, this time one who had been ex-pelled to Poland two weeks before the Pogrom, demanded 467.30 RM for the replacement of windows. The Allianz branch refused to consider the applica-tion, claiming that the windows had been destroyed in a civil disturbance; the plaintiffs argued that the events of November 9每10 did not qualify as a civil dis-turbance. This, of course, was precisely the kind of argument and discussion that insurance industry and government leaders wished to avoid. Once informed of the case, the head offce of Allianz decided to pay the bill; in addition, Hilgard sent out a circular letter to members of the Reich Group on February 1, 1939, pointing out that ※a bearable result§ in the negotiations between the insurers and the government would only be possible if the claims of Aryans and for-eigners were resolved without any concern for the reservations stated in previous 
50 See, for example, the correspondence between Munich Re and its London correspondent, C. E. 
Golding, Nov. 24 and Nov. 30, 1938; between B. B. Fischer of the Royal Exchange Assurance 
and A. Martini of Dec. 1 and 14, 1938; and the correspondence with the Union des Propri谷taires 
Belges between March and May 1939 in MR, G 1/8. 51 For the correspondence on the American request and a copy of the judgment in the case in De-
cember 1938每January 1939, see BAB, R 3001/10788, Bl. 419每24. 
circulars about liability. Indeed, Hilgard urged that such payments be made ※im-mediately§ and that the companies ※proceed in a generous manner.§ He warned against refusing such payments on legal grounds without frst consulting with the Reich Group. At the same time, however, he enjoined the companies to as-sert their legal nonliability: 
In the case of all payments, the insured is to be told in a not-to-be-misunderstood man-ner that the companies are not legally obligated to pay and that, insofar as compensation is being made, these constitute voluntary payments. This reservation is indispensable so that the payments could not be viewed as prejudicial with respect to claims made by do-mestic Jews. Insofar as the claims made by domestic Jews are concerned, matters remain the same in this respect as already indicated by my previous circulars.52 
How much were the insurance companies paying, and how large were the potential claims of German and stateless Jews? At the turn of 1938每1939, the insurance companies had some sense of the actual and potential sums involved. Total damages in all insurance categories (except health and accident) were es-timated at the end of January 1939 to be 49.5 million RM, 46.1 million of which was suffered by Jews and the remaining 3.4 million suffered in almost equal mea-sure by German ※Aryans§ and Jewish and non-Jewish foreigners.53 Glass was by far the most important category, amounting to 2.1 million marks. The hardest-hit companies with respect to ※Aryans§ and foreigners were Allianz, Schlesische Feuerversicherungs-Gesellschaft, Albingia, and Neue Frankfurter. Given the in-ternationalcomplicationsinvolved, onemayreasonablyassumethattheamounts were paid out promptly, although it is worth noting that Hilgard (undoubtedly acting under directives connected with the impending war) issued secret instruc-tions on July 25, 1939, that no payments were to be made to ※foreigners of Polish citizenship.§54 
The balance of the potential claims could be made by German Jews. Accord-ing to the breakdown of damages provided by the insurance companies, they suffered 38.2 million RM in fre damage, 4.4 million RM in glass damage, and 
3.1 million RM in theft and break-in. The companies with the greatest liability 
52 Schreiben Hilgard an die Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung, 1.Feb. 1939, ibid., Bl. 479, and Oberlandsgerichtspr.sident Bergmann an RJM, 31. Jan. 1939 und Vermerk, 4.Feb. 1939,BAB, R 3001/10788, Bl. 415每16. See also Rundschreiben der Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung, 2. Feb. 1939,GDV,RS/19. 
53 Aufstellung, 26. Jan. 1939,SM, 1458/1/98, Bl. 236. This is a more accurate estimate of potential insurance company liability than that employed at the November 12 meeting in the Air Ministry of 225 million RM, taken over by Avraham Barkai in his important ※Schicksalsjahr 1938. Konti-nuit.t und Versch.rfung der wirtschaftlichen Ausplderung der Juden,§ in Walter H. Pehle (ed.), Der Judenpogrom 1938. Von der ＆Reichskristallnacht＊ zum Vkermord (Frankfurt a.M., 1988), pp. 94每117, here p. 115. Hermann Graml also speaks of 225 million in his Reichskristallnacht. Antisemitismus und Judenverfolgung im Dritten Reich (Munich, 1988), p. 178. 
54 For fgures on individual company obligations, see Fachgruppe 1 an das RWM, Ministerialrat Daniel, 21. Dez. 1938,SM, 1458/1/98, Bl. 217每21. For the ban on payment to Poles, see Rund-schreiben Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung, 25. Juli 1939,GDV,RS/16. 
in fre were Allianz, Neue Frankfurter, Aachen und Mchener, Nordstern, Al-bingia, and Victoria. Hilgard, however, reported quite different fgures to Min-isterial Councilor Daniel of the RWM on January 30, 1939. In his calculations, the fnal liabilities of the companies for fre damages to German Jewish property were halved, amounting to 19,622,329 RM, while break-in and theft damages were corrected to 3,566,763 RM. There was no calculation for glass damages. The purpose of Hilgard＊s report was to provide the RWM with the statistical material needed to inform Ging and the Finance Ministry (RFM) of the sums involved and to plead the case for the insurance companies not being held liable. Hilgard well understood that it was to his interest to keep the fnal fgures pre-sented to the government as low as possible, since the more Ging and the RFM thought they might lose, the more they would push for imposition of liability. At the same time, Hilgard and his allies in the RWM were very aware that his fgures on German Jewish claims were potentially much higher than those being reported. Thus, in the covering letter to the breakdown of insurance company liabilities 每 sent in late December to the RWM by Director Karl Autenrieth of Berlinische Feuer and the head of the fre insurance branch of the Reich Group 每 which formed the initial basis for Hilgard＊s global fgures, Autenrieth warned not only that the numbers were estimates that had to be made without the usual help of the authorities but also that 
if the companies are basically condemned to pay, then the sum of the damages would swell extraordinarily. Many Jews are not in a position to make claims [presumably be-cause they were still in concentration camps], while others are holding back with their claims because they do not believe themselves entitled to make them. But if the compa-nies are basically to step forward with regard to these claims, then substantial retroactive claims will be made, namely in the break-in and theft insurance, where the level of claims is least controllable.55 
The Autenrieth report, of course, made it more imperative for Hilgard to lower the potential liability of the insurance companies. The circumstances of Germany＊s Jews were of help to Hilgard, since he spoke only of claims made by the Jews up to the time of his letter rather than of potential claims. Further-more, the ministerial offcials had asked Hilgard to report only such claims as might be legally uncontestable. There were some Jews who did have insurance against public disturbance, the total sum involved coming to 38,000 RM, and they could possibly have made claims. Excluding them from the reported claims was tantamount to denying them payment, a rather ironic (indeed, hypocriti-cal) position in view of the fact that insurers considered the Pogrom a public disturbance. In any case, the fgures Hilgard now reported were millions short of the amount estimated for fre, theft, and break-in because they included only actual claims and those viewed as uncontestable in court. This did not end the 
55 Autenrieth an das RWM, Ministerialrat Daniel, 21. Dez. 1938,SM, 1458/1/98, Bl. 217每18.For Hilgard＊s use of these fgures, see Hilgard an Daniel, 30. Jan. 1939, ibid., Bl. 238每9. 
whittling down of the fnal sum, however, aside from the fact that glass damages were left out. Hilgard then proceeded to argue that 16,055,566 RM of the fre insurance and 79,000 RM of the break-in and theft insurance pertained to syna-gogues and other Jewish institutional buildings. If one subtracted these amounts, then the amount of insurance that could be claimed was 3,566,763 RM in fre insurance and 2,995,239 RM for break-in and theft, making a total of 6,522,002 RM. This was the amount, Hilgard argued, that the Reich would lose if it ac-cepted his proposal. Although his global fgures did not include the publicly chartered insurance companies, which had greater liability in their contracts and were most responsible for insuring synagogues and Jewish institutional build-ings, Hilgard urged that those companies be freed of any such liability as well, ※since here one is dealing with the destruction of public property not worthy of protection.§56 
One should pause to refect on these words, since they exhibit a rather novel approach to insurance. Insurance policies had been issued for these synagogues by publicly chartered and private insurance companies both, and no one had ever raised the question of whether they were ※worthy§ of protection. When Colonia and Iduna-Germania joined together and concluded on June 21, 1938, to insure the structure and contents of the synagogue in Saarbrken for 320,000 RM and then charged the synagogue congregation a premium for this insurance, no one raised a question concerning the ※worth§ assigned to the building and its contents. When the Jewish community reported 120,000 RM in damages as the result of the Pogrom, Colonia refused payment on the grounds that the dam-age was the result of a civil disturbance (citing the Porto Allegre decision) but also indicated that, while it believed its position correct, the decision could be challenged in court within six months. Indeed, Colonia had also insured at least nine other synagogues in various parts of the country (e.g., Bielefeld, Koblenz, Liegnitz, Leipzig) whose total claims added up to 524,000 RM, while claims for damage to contents within four synagogues amounted to 73,000 RM. Manifestly, it had agreed to attach a value to these buildings and their contents, just as it had agreed that the four Torah scrolls, the two mantles covering them, and the prayer books and prayer shawls belonging to the synagogue in Ochsenfurt 每 items that had been thrown into the street and burned 每 had a total value of 2,950 RM.57 In fact, the insurance companies had precise knowledge of what they had and had not insured. Thus, when the mayor of the City of Bl (which was the owner of the publicly chartered electrical company) wanted to know if Allianz covered 
56 
Ibid. 57 These various cases are based on the Akte ※Sch.den des Judenpogroms vom 9./10. November 
1938 (＆Reichskristallnacht＊), Teil B: Brandschadenberichte,§ AXA, Bestand Colonia Versicherung 
AG. See especially the undated report on various claims made in connection with the Pogrom, the 
copy of the insurance policy concluded with the Synagogengemeinde des Kreises Saarbrken of 
June 21, 1938, the correspondence connected with it, and especially the response to the claim of 
the Synagogengemeinde＊s claim of Jan. 11, 1939. I am grateful to the AXA Colonia Konzern AG 
and its archive for making this material available to me. 
the technical equipment in the town＊s destroyed synagogue, worth 204.16 RM, Allianz informed them that the fre insurance policy of the Jewish community covered only such equipment or objects that belonged directly to the synagogue itself. Therefore Allianz ※unfortunately§ could not pay these damages.58 What-ever one＊s moral qualms, one could defend the decision of an insurance company to refuse payment for the synagogues and their contents because the mode of their destruction was excluded under the insurance provisions. But there were no contractual or legal grounds for such refusal by claiming they did not have material value 每 which had been assigned to them and accepted by an insurance company in return for a scheduled premium. This, however, is precisely what Hilgard was doing in his totally opportunistic and morally reprehensible efforts to reduce the liability of the insurance industry. 
Hilgard＊s sleight-of-hand was thus neatly aided by his employment of anti-Semitic rhetoric. Furthermore, it is necessary to recognize that one important branch of insurance was simply left out of his calculations and arguments 每 namely, the glass insurance branch, where German Jews had suffered 4,430,000 RM in damages. The companies involved were already liable for 2.1 million RM in damages to Aryans and foreigners. Apparently, Hilgard and the RWM were by this time confdent of their case that liability for glass damages would ruin many of the small mutual companies and severely damage others. These costs would simply be left to the Jewish obligation to clean up and restore the appear-ance of the streets. Potential benefts from insurance company liability (in the form of a reduction of the atonement tax by the amount of insurance paid on a Jew＊s behalf to the revenue offce) would not be allowed with respect to glass damages.59 Indeed, the Economics Ministry was strongly supportive of Hil-gard＊s position, happy that the amount had been reduced to ※only§ 6.5 million RM, pleased that the companies were going to pay off Aryans and foreigners, satisfed that the glass companies were not included (since they were supposed to replace damages in kind anyway and were not included in the implementa-tion decree), and relieved to have the question of civic unrest relegated to the sidelines.60 
Despite the friendly posture of the RJM and the RWM, Hilgard was nervous. There were reports of further court cases, including one by a Jewish commu-nity in connection with its buildings, and he was understandably anxious about 
58 Bgermeister der Stadt Bl an Allianz, 9. Juni 1939; Antwort Allianz, 16. Juni 1939, Stadt-
geschichtliches Institut der Stadt Bl, BH-Akten (alt) 363. 59 An estimate of the glass insurance costs can be found attached to an Aktennote for Hilgard of Dec. 
7, 1938,SM, 1458/1/98, Bl. 214每15. The company worst hit was Knische Glas-Versicherungs-
AG, which reported 1.2 million RM in damages, while the list of small mutuals shows that in 
some cases the damages did indeed exceed their yearly premium. Round numbers on all the dam-
ages and a breakdown of the distribution of the glass damage can be found in a RWM list for a 
meeting on January 26, 1939, ibid., Bl. 235每6. 60 Schreiben Lange an RJM und RFM, 3.Feb. 1939,BAB,R 3001/10788, Bl. 425每6. 
the liability question even though he had managed to whittle down the potential liability to 6.5 million out of a total of 49.5 million RM in reported damages. Thus, on February 7, he called the RJM to fnd out if there was anything new; he was told that the RWM was composing a memorandum to be sent (in the name of the RWM, RJM, and RFM) to Ging, presumably along the lines desired by Hilgard.61 
Nevertheless, it would be months before the matter was settled, and there was a good deal of hard bargaining along the way. The projected memorandum for Ging was held up by the Finance Ministry, which apparently frst wanted the full 6.5 million. This was opposed by Hilgard and by the two other min-istries. Finally, in early May, Schwandt informed Daniel of the RWM that the matter had been discussed with Finance Minister Schwerin von Krosigk. The latter was ready to eschew payment for the fre damage, but he was holding back on the matter of break-in and theft insurance, claiming that the legal situation of the insurance companies was less strong in this area. By this time, however, Hilgard had been emboldened by the support of the RWM and RJM and was prepared to resist the RFM, pointing particularly to the possibilities opened up by the recently promulgated (on March 13, 1939) 14th Decree to the Law on the Settlement of Civil Law Claims, which was directly concerned with the Pogrom damages and enabled the Interior Ministry to close down court cases and settle claims according to its own guidelines. Under section 3 of this decree, German and stateless Jews were not entitled to receive any compensation through such mediation by the Interior Ministry, so that the Justice Ministry or the Interior Ministry could literally throw their cases out of court without a hearing. Hil-gard believed that the insurance companies would do well in remaining cases brought before the Interior Ministry, a not unreasonable conclusion since his colleague Goudefroy was constantly reporting all court cases connected with the Pogrom to the Justice Ministry in the hope that they would be suspended and handled under the March 13 decree. Daniel of the RWM was less sanguine, pointing out that the Finance Ministry proposal would cost the insurers some 2每3 million RM but would then end the matter, whereas mediation by the In-terior Ministry could prove much more expensive. Nevertheless, Hilgard was adamant, insisting that he had to take the matter before the advisory council of the private insurer group before he could make any concessions.62 
On May 15, Hilgard wearily informed his colleagues that he still did not have a fnal agreement; he described his tedious struggle with the Finance Ministry as well as the RWM inclination to go along with the suggested compromise of 
61 Vermerk, 7.Feb. 1939,BAB,R 3001/10788, Bl. 418. 62 Vermerk Daniel, 16.Mai 1939,SM, 1458/1/98, Bl. 273每4. Botur, Privatversicherung, pp. 197每202, 
did not have this information on the RFM demands at his disposal, which explains his puzzle-
ment over the sums at which Hilgard and the RFM fnally arrived. See, however, his excellent 
discussion of the 14th Decree, pp. 202每10. 
a reduced lump-sum payment. Hilgard reasserted the position that payment of Jewish insurance claims was tantamount to a ※special tax§ on the industry. There certainly was no legal obligation, so that ※the only thing that can still be involved is a moral and a technical insurance question.§ General Director Johannes Tiedke of Alte Leipziger was outspoken in his opposition to any com-promise with the government, warning that it was important to maintain their legal position and not let other considerations 每 as, for example, the ※moral§ and technical ones mentioned by Hilgard 每 get in the way: ※If one surrenders the legal standpoint and lets oneself be directed by other considerations, then one can count on similar diffculties arising in the future in similar cases.§ Tiedke, however, was always something of a maverick in his uncompromising opposition to National Socialist interference in business matters and efforts to tap insurance industry assets. Apparently, his subordinate directors held similar attitudes; one of whom, Waldemar Adler, had the temerity to discuss his views on the insur-ance aspects of the Pogrom in a chance meeting with Hans Goebbels on a train ride to Dseldorf. Goebbels totally rejected the legal position taken by Alte Leipziger and insisted that the matter had to be viewed from a ※party-political§ point of view.63 However, Tiedke＊s colleagues in the Reich Group were not made of such stuff and those present were prepared to be fexible and were doubtless well aware that the days of standing on legal principles 每 however they might be defned under these circumstances 每 were a thing of the past. In the end, they authorized Hilgard to struggle as long as possible against any payment but to compromise if necessary. They were certainly most anxious to bring the issue to an end and were quite prepared to discuss payment by means of an assessment on all the insurers, as they did in the case of the Adolf Hitler Donation, rather than only on the frms with liability. While expecting German reinsurers to have some participation, they ruled out any recourse to foreign reinsurers.64 
The wily and tenacious Hilgard now demonstrated once again his skills as a behind-the-scenes operator in the politics of the Third Reich. By the end of June, Alzheimer was reporting to the reinsurers that the latest payment fgure he was hearing was 1.5 million RM, and he knew whereof he spoke. At a meet-ing at the RWM on July 6, Hilgard refused Schwandt the 3 million the RFM was now demanding and argued that the statute of limitations on claims for break-in and theft had passed, so that the legal situation of the insurers was better than before. Schwandt threatened passage of a new law, and Regierungsrat Segelcke of the RWM pointed out that, while such a law was not likely at this point and 
63 Johannes Tiedke, ※Meine Stellung zum Nationalsozialismus erhaupt und die Grde daf, 
da. ich nicht in die Partei eingetreten bin,§ Leipzig, 5. Juli 1945, NL Tiedke. See also Volker 
Wei., ※Ist das, was wir machen, auch gerecht?§, pp. 57每67. 64 Niederschrift er die Sitzung des Beirats der Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung am 22. 
Mai 1939,SM, 1458/1/109, Bl. 193每6. On Tiedke, see Roland Kneebusch, ※Als Versicherungs-
GeneraldirektorimDrittenReich,§ (Leserbrief), Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 17.Nov. 1998. 
though the legal situation was favorable to the insurers, Hilgard should really voluntarily offer a ※certain compensatory payment§ which he ※would very much welcome in the interest of the reputation of the insurance industry.§ After fur-ther discussion, Hilgard offered ※at the most§ 1.5 million RM to the Finance Ministry, a sum that Schwandt declared ※only of interest to the RFM if at least one quarter of the damages reported by the Jews are thereby covered.§65 Hil-gard was asked to supply the necessary information as well as an accounting of the amounts paid out to foreigners and German Aryans. 
There does not appear to be a record of the exact fgures and information sup-plied by Hilgard, but the 1.5 million RM amount seems to have been the accepted point of departure. Synagogues, Jewish buildings, and glass damages had been eliminated from that calculation from the very outset. Indeed, the total amount of such claims as were covered seems to have been less than anticipated because, as Hilgard reported, of ※the correction of some damage reports.§ Whatever the case, Hilgard managed to pay even less than he had promised: in the fnal ac-counting with the government on October 14, 1939, he reported a total payment from the Reich Group to the treasury of 1,297,988 RM, with 1,074,828 of it coming from the private insurers of the ※Old Reich,§ 190,010 coming from the publicly chartered companies, and 17,988 from the Ostmark (Austria). Thus, it seems Hilgard managed to save yet another 200,000 RM. The 1.3 million RM paid to the treasury did not, of course, include the sums paid directly to Aryans and foreigners, although money undoubtedly was saved on the Poles.66 Thus, of the 46.1 million RM in losses by German Jews,67 the insurers ended up with responsibility for a mere 3% 每 thanks to the negotiating skills of Hilgard. 
This extra beneft to the insurers was the outcome of the charade concocted by insurers and ministerial offcials in order to deal with the insured Jews. The projected lump-sum payment to the Treasury was not without its complications, since it was intended to be in lieu of paying the insurance claims of German Jews and Germans in the categories of fre and theft. The Reich Group therefore in-structed its members on August 3 to make fctional payments to claim-seeking Jews in the amount of 50% of their claim for fre and theft. They were also to make believe that they were compensating for glass damage if the customer hap-pened to have a comprehensive policy for fre and/or theft insurance. No letter would be sent to Jews who had only glass insurance. The basis of the calcula-tion would not be explained to the customer, and all claims had to be presented by August 15. The model for such a letter to Jewish insurers was as follows. 
65 Niederschrift er die Sitzung des Beirats der Fachgruppe 7 (Rkversicherung) am 28. Juni 1939, 
SM, 1458/1/147, Bl. 71, and Vermerk, 6. Juli 1939,SM, 1458/1/98, Bl. 277. 66 Reichsgruppe Versicherungen an den Reichswirtschaftsminister, 14. Okt. 1939, ibid., Bl. 290, and 
Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung an alle Feuer-und Glas-Versicherungsgesellschaften, 13. 
Nov. 1939,GDV,RS/16. 67 See Chapter 5,p. 221. 
To the Jewish policyholder. 
Re: Fire insurance policy No. ... ... 
Break-in and Theft insurance policy No. ... ... 
Glass-Insurance policy No. ... ... 
(non-applicable categories to be crossed out) 
On the basis of the above insurance policy(ies) a sum in the amount of 
RM ........... is granted to you due to the events of November 1938 on the basis of an understanding with the Reich Finance Ministry and the Reich Economics Ministry, the Reich Justice Ministry and the Reich Interior Ministry without recognizing a legal obligation in view of the doubtfulness of the case. The payment of the sum is made on the basis of ∫2, para. 2 of the Decree on the Restoration of the Appearance of the Streets at Jewish businesses of 
12. November 1938, Reich Legislative Journal I, p. 1581, and the Implementation Decree for the Atonement Tax of the Jews of 21. November 1938, Reich Legislative Journal I, 
p. 1638, directly to the Reich. 
You are entitled to deduct the above mentioned sum from the last partial payment due on 15. August 1939 on the basis of the Decree on the Atonement Payment of Jews of Ger-man Citizenship of 12. November 1938, Reich Legislative Journal I, p. 1579. 
No further claims against us exist on the basis of the existing insurance policies as a 
68
result of the events of 8每10 November 1938. 
the ＆＆night of broken glass＊＊ and business ethics in the third reich 
It is worth taking the effort to appreciate how utterly grotesque this arrangement was and the extent to which it refected a state-sanctioned exercise in collective moral turpitude on the part of everyone engaged in this enterprise of trying to cope with the results of the Pogrom and cover up responsibility and liability for the damages. This 每 and not the legal issue of liability 每 is the important point from a historical perspective in any effort to assess the behavior of those involved. Indeed, it is ironic to note that, if the insurers had maintained their principles in the manner proposed by General Director Tiedke of Alte Leipziger, then no Jew would even have received reimbursement in the form of a rebate on their atonement tax. Those legal principles could only be asserted in another political environment, however. Thus perceived, it would be hard to fault the decision of the 2nd Civil Senate of the Federal Court of April 23, 1952, which rejected the claim of a Jewish 谷migr谷 for compensation from his insurance com-pany for jewelry stolen in the course of a break-in on the night of November 10每11, 1938. The court, using much the same arguments as were employed in 
68 Reichsgruppe Versicherungen an die Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung und die Wirtschafts-
gruppe .ffentlich-Rechtliche Versicherung, 3. Aug. 1939,SM, 1458/1/98, Bl. 283每5 and BAB, R 
3001/10789, Bl. 91每3. 
the Porto Allegre case and by the insurers in their private meetings with gov-ernment offcials in 1938每1939, declared the Pogrom a public disturbance. It declared the government, not the insurers, liable for making compensation. The 1952 court also rejected the claim of the plaintiff that ※the Pogroms of the year 1938 were not considered as disturbances under the offcial ＆legal conception＊ of that time.§ The court held that ※the legal conceptions in offcial circles at that time with regard to precisely these questions were so confused that contempo-rary views on the matter can no longer be taken into account.§69 Nevertheless, the court also noted that Ging (as well as Hilgard and the insurers) had spoken of public disturbance in meetings and court cases at the time. So far, so good 每 but this hardly exonerates Hilgard or his colleagues from quite consciously and deliberately covering up for deeds and arrangements which they obviously knew were indefensible, which they would have viewed as indefensible before 1933, and which they knew their colleagues in other countries considered indefensible. 
The negotiations between the insurers and the authorities over the Pogrom lasted more than a year, not because legal conceptions were ※confused§ but be-cause the legal conceptions under which Hilgard, his colleagues, and ministry offcials had operated simply were incompatible with a government-ordered Pogrom. The mounting radicalization of the regime was rendering standard norms of behavior increasingly incompatible with political requirements. The insurance leaders colluded with the authorities in trying to cover up the true nature of the disturbances and, in the process, persistently used anti-Semitic ar-guments that the insurers and the ※community of the insured§ should not pay the punishment visited on the Jews. Ultimately, however, Hilgard and his col-leagues found themselves trapped by the hasty conclusions Ging drew from Hilgard＊s remarks (at the November 12 meeting) about permitting insurers to pay where they did have liability and by the confusing conjunction created be-tween the insurance issue in the Decree on the Restoration of the Appearance of the Streets and the right of Jews to deduct insurance payments to the state from their atonement tax. Although not originally so intended, the efforts of Ging and especially the Finance Ministry to extract as much money as possible from the insurance companies 每 by making them liable for the damages 每 created a link between the amount paid by insurers and the amount that could be deducted by Jews from the atonement tax for insurance proceeds confscated by the revenue offces. Consequently,everyreductionintheamountpaidbytheinsuranceindus-try to the Finance Ministry was also a reduction in the amount Jews could deduct from their tax. In the last analysis, Hilgard＊s success in resisting the demands of the government came at the expense of the Jewish insured. Hilgard, of course, was not concerned about the Jews. He was concerned about reducing the ※spe-cial tax§ he felt the government was trying to impose on his industry, and doing so was something he recounted proudly to Allied interrogators after the war and 
69 Entscheidungen des Bundesgerichtshofes in Zivilsachen, Bd. VI (1952), pp. 28每35. 
in his unpublished memoirs.70 What he did not say to his interrogators was that he had not the slightest qualm about letting his industry proft from the regime＊s despoliation of the Jews and that, as we have seen, he was busy seeking out op-portunities for Allianz to conclude insurance contracts with newly Aryanized enterprises at about the very time he was negotiating this arrangement.71 
The goal with respect to the Pogrom, of course, was not to make a proft but rather to control or reduce losses by reducing payments to the government that had become oddly linked to a measure of reduction of Jewish tax liability. In practical terms there was something to Hilgard＊s claim that the Finance Min-istry was cynically playing the ※advocate§ of the Jews owing to the interaction of legal measures taken in connection with the Pogrom. Needless to say, the Fi-nance Ministry was no advocate of the Jews! Though it instructed revenue offces to deduct reported insurance company payments in connection with credits to be given for the atonement tax, the real payments were actually covered by the lump-sum payment to the Ministry. Jews who had emigrated were not to receive anything. Also, if the insurance payments were in excess of the required atone-ment tax payment, then the Jew could receive the surplus only if he or she had already made other payments meeting current obligations to the authorities in the form of money, securities, or property.72 As Thees succinctly put the matter, from the standpoint of the Reich the payment was nothing more than a ※politi-cal payment§ to cover its claims under the insurance confscation clause.73 
The fctional character of the entire arrangement was also manifested by the way in which the Reich Group extracted the lump sum from its members. The actual sum in question was paid by the Reich Group and was not paid by the in-dividual companies to the revenue offces of the insured. As demonstrated here, notifcations received by the latter were purely for accounting purposes regard-ing the atonement tax. The actual insurance company payments to the Reich Group were assessed on November 13, 1939. The assessment was divided into two parts. The frst was based on the total premium income of the companies in 1937, and each of the involved companies paid 2.29 RM for each 1,000 RM in premiums it had received for that year. The remainder was collected by a charge of 325.74 RM for each 1,000 RM worth of the total damages claimed by the 
70 See his interrogation of July 14, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /57/6每8, pp. 8每9; Hilgard, 
※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7,p. 110. There is not a shred of evidence to support the statement: ※After 
the war Mr. Hilgard told Allied interrogators that he had helped the companies settle Kristall-
nacht claims at 3 cents to the dollar.§ See Christopher S. Wren, ※Insurers Swindled Jews, Nazi 
Files Show,§ New York Times (May 16, 1998). Hilgard said no such thing and emphasized that 
he had reduced the payment to the Finance Ministry; he was and remained angry that the indus-
try had been forced to pay anything to the government at all. 71 See Chapter 3, pp. 148每9. 72 Der Reichsminister der Finanzen an die Oberfnanzpr.sidenten, 12. Aug. 1939,SM, 1458/1/98, 
Bl. 283. 73 Vermerk Thees, 4. Aug. 1939,BAB,R 3001/10789, Bl. 94. 
insurers. There was an additional interest charge of 4% for the period between August 14, 1939, when the Finance Ministry declared the money due, and No-vember 19, 1939, when the Reich Group actually paid. German reinsurers were to participate in covering the second half of the costs to the extent of their reinsur-ance through companies with which they were associated, but foreign reinsurers were not to be involved ※in view of the confdentiality of the matter.§74 
It was hardly imaginable that reinsurers in other countries would have been party to such an arrangement in any case 每 a long road had been travelled since the time when Ging believed he might pick up some foreign exchange from foreign reinsurers 每 and the reputation of the German insurance business would most certainly have suffered if the settlement had become public knowledge. In-deed, the insurers and government were only partially successful in their effort to keep cases connected with the Pogrom out of the courts. For one thing, many courts and plaintiffs were unaware of the 14th Implementation Decree to the Law on the Settlement of Civil Law Claims; thus Goudefroy was constantly reporting cases to the Interior Ministry so that they could be stopped in their tracks. Fur-thermore, there were Jews who did not realize that they were barred from taking claims refused by the government to court under section 3 of the implementation decree. Thus, on June 28, the Interior Ministry felt compelled to point out that the entire purpose of the measures was to deny Jews access to the courts and to prevent public discussion of the legal and other issues connected with the events in question. Also, there were complications with interpreting when the Pogrom stopped, so that losses incurred on the night of November 11每12 were consid-ered by one court to be products of violations of the discipline expected in a National Socialist state and hence actionable with respect to insurance. Finally, there were problems with Aryan mortgage holders and others who incurred in-direct damages because of the Pogrom. The insurers assumed that these would be somehow covered in the lump-sum payment, but the Finance Ministry refused to consider such inclusion. This led to a confict with the RJM and the Reich Interior Ministry as to whether Reich money could be used to provide relief in such cases.75 
Goudefroy＊s work at having the Ministry terminate court cases (for Allianz andcompaniesconnectedwithit)illustratesinsurancecompanycomplicityinthe legal chicanery of the Third Reich; it also demonstrates the absurd contradic-tions into which insurers were driven as a consequence of becoming implicated 
74 Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung an alle Feuer-und Glas-Versicherungsgesellschaften, 13. 
Nov. 1939, and Reichsgruppe Versicherungen an die Unternehmungen, die an der Umlage wegen 
der Sch.den aus den Vorg.ngen 1938 beteiligt sind, 12. Dez. 1939,GDV, RS/16. An interesting 
collection of correspondence with the Munich Re on such payment arrangements is to be found 
in MR, G 1/8. 75 See the excellent discussion in Botur, Privatversicherung, pp. 211每18. See also Rundschreiben des 
Reichsminister des Innern, 28. Juni 1939,BAB,R 18/3746b. 
in the government＊s treatment of the Pogrom. For example, on August 4, 1939, Goudefroy asked Thees to set aside the case of a Jewish woman from Holzmin-den who was suing Neue Frankfurter for 737.15 RM in payment for destruction of the glass window of her business on November 25, 1938 每 that is, well after the ※November action§ was declared over.76 A few days later, he sent another case to Thees asking for termination of the case brought against Allianz by an ※Aryan§ woman who had divorced her Jewish husband and resumed using her maiden name. Her ex-husband committed suicide in late December 1938, leav-ing all his property to her; she now asked for compensation from Allianz for a number of policies totalling 8,000 RM. Her lawyer had argued that the Pogrom was a ※measure of retaliation against Jewry§ and not a criminal act or domestic unrest.77 Goudefroy was successful in both cases. 
Then there was the interesting and indicative case in November 1939 of a Berlin Jewish storeowner with glass damage who could not understand why his rev-enue offce was telling him it could not give him a credit against his atonement tax because it had received no notice from Allianz about an insurance payment. When he contacted Allianz, he was informed that these matters had been rel-egated to the various ministries and that he had to turn to the revenue offce. Undaunted, the policyholder requested his revenue offce to ask Allianz to send the necessary information, whereupon Allianz informed the revenue offce that the matter was confdential. In the meantime, the policyholder decided to sue, not for his money but rather for information, and this presented an intriguing problem because the court was inclined to hear the case on the grounds that the 14th Decree might not enable termination of cases involving a demand for infor-mation. Goudefroy, as can be imagined, was very concerned. He pointed out in a letter to the Justice Ministry that the companies were obligated to maintain si-lence about the way in which the payments were calculated, and now they were faced with a potential court order to violate this condition 每 that is, to tell the policyholder that no glass insurance payments were being reported for Jews. Al-lianz＊s lawyers were arguing that the 14th Decree was valid in this case because it pertained indirectly to the events in question. It should come as no surprise that Thees lent a helping hand, and the case was stopped on the grounds of the 14th Decree.78 
An even more egregious case, which also involved a run-around between the revenue offce and Allianz, was that of a Jewish merchant in Wesel, who was heavily indebted to creditors and customers because of the damage done to his store and who also owed a substantial sum to the revenue offce for unpaid por-tions of his atonement tax. In correspondence that dragged on between January and August 1940, the legal adviser sought to gain some credit for glass breakage as well as to secure payment for fre and theft damages from Wttembergische 
76 Sally Kugelmann gegen die Neue Frankfurter, BAB, R 3001/10789, Bl. 106ff. 77 Johanna Oberl.nder gegen Allianz, ibid., Bl. 99每105. 78 Moses gegen Allianz, ibid., Bl. 162每8, 193. 
Feuerversicherung AG in Stuttgart. He received nothing, in the case of the bro-ken glass for the usual reasons and in the case of theft and fre because he had missed the deadline for making such claims under the 14th Decree. Of course, any such claims would have been rejected anyway because he was Jewish.79 
The reality was that leading offcers of Allianz (and undoubtedly their col-leagues in other companies) had descended into pure legal opportunism in deal-ing with the Pogrom, as was evident in the last case considered here, that of the Breslau frm of Wigo Wollwaren GmbH in Breslau. The frm had been 60%in the hands of an Aryan but 40% owned by a Jew, whose husband had been the ※soul of the business.§ For this reason, their establishment had been attacked and suffered severe window and interior damage during the Pogrom. However, this was one of those rare instances in which the party in question had insurance against tumult (Aufruhr), and the Aryan owner of the frm took the case to court at the beginning of 1940. Allianz refused to recognize the claim even though the plaintiff was nothing less than a ※pure Aryan§ and the insurance covered civil disturbance. Goudefroy argued that there had been no civil disturbance because the events in question were not punishable by law and did not constitute tumults or a breach of the peace. As they explained, ※the retaliatory actions of Novem-ber 1938 rather have the explicit character of an elementary event or, to use the words of Reich Minister Dr. Goebbels, the character of an eruptive outbreak of anger by the population.§80 Furthermore, insurance for civil disturbances and glass were not covered under terms of the agreement made between insurers and ministries the previous year 每 an agreement, one should be reminded, into which the companies entered without giving up their legal standpoint that the Pogrom was a civil disturbance! On this occasion, the position of Allianz did not con-vince even the Reich Economics Ministry offcials, who argued in a meeting with the RAA that Allianz was obligated to replace the glass and to pay on the civil disturbance insurance since an Aryan was involved. Goudefroy hotly contested this position, insisting that companies had to pay such claims only in the event that the criminal code had been violated. His position was strongly supported by Thees, who took the view ※that the Reich Supervisory Board for Private In-surance could not hold the companies to payments of civil disorder insurance if they do not want to recognize in their supervisory capacity that one was dealing with a punishable action.§81 This was the same Thees who seven years later was to claim in a letter to Hilgard that only he and Hilgard had shown the ※courage§ to say that a public disturbance was a public disturbance! 
The reality was that both were hopelessly entangled in the mesh created by a criminal regime that was nevertheless committed to certain legal niceties and appearances 每 primarily because its leaders found them opportune or did not 
79 Fall Hugo Brandenstein, BAK, B 280/12238, Bl. 88每113. 80 Allianz an Rechstsantwalt Hans-Wolfgang Schimmelpfennig, 20. Jan. 1940, ibid., Bl. 121每2, and 
Allianz an das RAA, 30. M.rz 1940, ibid., Bl. 117每18. 81 Sitzung, 24. M.rz 1940, ibid., Bl. 123每4. 
know how to escape them entirely without creating chaos. Businessmen and bureaucrats found it in their interest and advantage to exploit these windows of opportunity, but they also became increasingly aware that the windows could come banging down at any time. Such efforts did indeed require what, under the circumstances, might be called ※courage§; they certainly required constant cal-culation. It is obvious that Hilgard and Goudefroy wanted to avoid paying Jews, but they also wanted to avoid paying Nazis. The latter were obviously more dan-gerous than the former, and it is thus not surprising that their memories after the war concentrated on their struggle with Nazi leaders and radicals. 
Goudefroy conveniently forgot his role as a watchdog in the effort to shut Jew-ish claimants off from legal recourse, but it is not surprising that he remembered the struggle over the insurance issue in terms of the rather more threatening and anxiety-producing role he had to play in dealing with the Party. Goudefroy was no enthusiastic Party member, and in 1945 he recalled the issue of glass damages as the ※high point§ of his conficts with the Party: 
When after the murder of vom Rath, Jewish businesses were destroyed through a ※spon-taneous expression of the anger of the people,§ the Party wanted to secure substantial compensation from the glass insurance policies of the Jewish business people for their successors. In negotiations that I had to conduct with high Party agencies, I refused such demands with the argument that, according to the terms of insurance, no compensation could be given in cases of plundering or public disturbance. This argumentation led to a breakdown of negotiations with the Party functionaries and led again to undisguised threats against my person. Attention was diverted away from me only because the Reich Supervisory Board took up the matter and that this led to negotiations with the Reich Economics Ministry, the Reich Finance Ministry, and the Bureau of the Prussian Minis-ter President. But from this time on my phone conversations were controlled and I was observed and reported upon.82 
Thus it did take some kind of courage to refuse to provide the Nazi expropri-ators of Jewish businesses undeserved benefts from the original glass insurance of the expropriated, although certainly not the same kind of courage that it would have taken for Goudefroy and his colleagues to have refrained from using anti-Semitic arguments and to have stuck to their legal principles in trying to cope with the demands of Ging and the Finance Ministry. One can reasonably assume that this latter form of courage would have cost the insurance industry a great deal more money and might have led to serious consequences for those involved. Once again, one must remember how heavily engaged Hilgard and his allies were in fghting off the National Socialist opponents of the private in-surance industry at this time. One could expect no advantage from stubbornly 
82 Goudefroy, ※Lebenslauf,§ Staatsarchiv Hamburg, 221-11/F 17350. I have found no record of Goudefroy＊s negotiations with Party personages about such demands, but there is no reason to question his account since it is precisely what one would expect of those enriching themselves at the expense of the Jews. 
maintaining one＊s honor, although the essence of honor, of course, is that it is not maintained for advantage but for its own sake. In any case, the performance of Goudefroy, Hilgard, and Thees in the months following the November Pogrom demonstrated how successfully and easily the regime had undermined the most elementary principles of legal and business ethics and how readily the leadership of the insurance industry had succumbed to an often unprincipled opportunism. The adaptations made since 1933 had paved the way for their self-serving perfor-mance in 1938, as well as for what was to follow in the wake of that fateful year. 
6 

Allianz, the Insurance Business, and the Fate of Jewish Life Insurance Policies, 1933每1945 
indirect confiscation of jewish life insurance assets 
On November 17, 1938, the directors of Isar Life Insurance Company sent an ur-gent request to the RWM and the RAA for permission to refuse payment to Jews seeking to cash in their life insurance policies at their current repurchase value. As company directors Paul Riebesell (who, ironically enough, had been driven out of his position as head of the Reich Group for Publicly Chartered Insurance for helping a Jewish student) and Eckert reminded the government authorities, Isar had taken over the German portion of the Austrian Phix life insurance stock when that company collapsed in 1936 and 每 with the fnancial support of the Party, the government, and its corporate backers 每 had managed to guaran-tee the acquisition of this portfolio and to acquire a considerable amount of new business since then. As discussed in Chapter 4, Isar Life Insurance Company＊s portfolio was guaranteed by the entire German insurance industry, which of course included Allianz.1 Isar company directors warned that its successes were now threatened by Jewish cancellations because 20%每25% of Isar policyholders were non-Aryan. Although policy cancellations had increased signifcantly prior to November 9每10, the demands of the previous few days had been such, Riebe-sell and Eckert alleged, as to threaten the very existence of the company. For this reason, they asked for the speedy issuance of a regulation in the fnal version of the new ※Jewish law§ being drafted 每 presumably the already issued decree of November 12, 1938, excluding Jews from German economic life 每 that would permit insurance companies to refuse payment of the repurchase value of Jewish-owned policies and instead transform such policies into paid-up policies, free of premium obligations. Furthermore, with the approval of the RAA, ※special con-ditions§ were to be set for the calculation of the value of these paid-up policies.2 
This was an unabashed effort by the Isar Life Insurance Company to cheat its Jewish policyholders 每 and, indeed, to cheat them under conditions where 
1 See Chapter 4,p. 152. The Isar Lebensversicherungs-AG was acquired by the present-day Allianz 
in the mid-1990s as part of Vereinte Lebensversicherung AG. 2 See Isar Lebensversicherung an den Reichs-und Preu.ischen Wirtschaftsminister, 17.Nov. 1938, 
BAK, B 280/3867, Bl. 75; Walk, Sonderrecht, Nr. III 8 (p. 254). 
236 
they were desperate for cash because of the levies imposed on them and the costs of emigration. Not only did Isar propose to deprive such persons of the cash value of the policy to which they were entitled, the company also claimed an ar-bitrary right to transform it into a paid-up policy pegged at its present worth 每 and hinted at creating a special mode of calculation for such policies that would entail a further reduction of their value to the policyholders. Isar Life Insurance Company＊s request was rejected; the RWM took the position that there were no existing legal regulations limiting the repurchase of life insurance policies held by Jews.3 As a result, Isar Life Insurance Company had to pay out. Its repur-chase expenses in 1938 were 6.41 million RM as opposed to 2.43 RM in 1937, while the ※cancellation proft§ (to be explained shortly) rose only to 284,000 RM from 1937＊s value of 177,000. When queried by the RAA as to why profts were so low, Isar Life Insurance Company explained that 2 million RM＊s worth of the repurchases in 1938 went to policies paid for by means of a single lump premium, which had a particularly low cancellation proft. These policies had been pur-chased primarily by Jews. Moreover, there was the repurchase of a large portion of the policies held by the Jewish Family Protection Society, which also carried a much lower repurchase proft than large individual policies.4 Clearly, then, the government＊s insistence that Isar Life Insurance Company fulfll its obligations to its Jewish customers imposed a substantial 每 albeit temporary and ultimately sustainable 每 drain on the company＊s resources. The episode is instructive, how-ever, because it points to the complexities of one of the central issues of concern in this study: the fate of Jewish insurance assets under National Socialism. 
Isar Life Insurance Company＊s situation was typical in certain respects and not typical in others. Because the company had been created to take over the Phix assets in Germany, it had an inordinate number of Jewish policies, and no other company asking to be relieved of the obligation to pay its Jewish customers can be identifed by name.5 From this perspective, its exceptional request ※proved the rule§ that neither the leading insurance companies nor the RAA considered it legitimate to refuse payment of Jewish policies. Isar Life Insurance Company was typical, however, in experiencing a run on its Jewish-owned insurance stock in the wake of the Pogrom of November 1938. As the Isar story suggests, the Pogrom was a central event in sealing the fate of these and (it is important to note) other Jewish assets. The Pogrom was the bridge linking an earlier period of accelerating despoliation of the Jews and promotion of their emigration and a subsequent period of rigorous exclusion of Jews from German economic life, comprehensive extraction and confscation of Jewish assets by the National So-cialist regime, and a large-scale wave of emigration that was followed in 1941 by forced deportation to the East and extermination. The causeway leading to 
3 RWM an RAA, 14. Dez. 1938, ibid., Bl. 76, and RAA an RWM, 6. Dez. 1938,SM, 1458/1/98, Bl. 
27每9. 4 Isar Lebensversicherung an RAA, 1.Feb. 1940, SR, Leben 14, Isar. 5 BAB, R 3104/261, Bl. 71每3. 
this bridge was built on the Four-Year Plan and its voracious fnancial demands, which gave the expropriation of Jewish assets a signifcant place in Ging＊s ef-forts to manage the fnancial situation and helps to explain why the period from early 1937 to November 1938 marked a qualitative increase in the pressure on German Jewry. This pressure was greatly intensifed by the brutalities following the Anschlu. in March 1938 and the occupation of the Sudetenland in October. The causeway leading from the November Pogrom to what followed was shorter and more sharply descending, allowing for a fnal burst of emigration and atten-dant despoliation before murder replaced emigration as the pendant to thievery. As shall be shown in this chapter 每 which concentrates on the fate of the life in-surance assets of Jewish policyholders in Germany, Austria after the Anschlu., and the Sudentenland and Protectorate of Bohemia-Moravia 每 the confscation of Jewish insurance assets mirrors these trajectories. 
Nevertheless, the manner in which these insurance assets were confscated has been the source of much confusion, and there have been charges that Allianz and other German insurance companies were engaged in holding on to Jewish poli-cies, refusing to pay their customers, and profting as a consequence.6 Analogies have been made, for example, between unpaid life insurance policies and num-bered Swiss accounts. The analogy is false. All life insurance policies have names as well as numbers. By law, every policy had to be covered by assets equivalent to its current worth. As will be demonstrated in Chapter 9, there was no incentive for German insurance companies to hide or refuse to pay out on insurance poli-cies of Jewish or non-Jewish policyholders. Be that as it may, the real tragedy of the life insurance assets of German Jews 每 namely, that a large proportion of them were forced to give up their coverage and cash in their policies in order to pay extortionist taxes and costs connected with emigration and persecution by the National Socialist regime 每 can only be obfuscated by a narrow concentra-tion on the possible existence of unpaid policies. 
To understand what really happened, it is essential to place the postwar sit-uation in the context of the way in which Jewish insurance policyholders were compelled to deal with their insurance assets between 1933 and 1945 and the roles played by the insurance companies and the National Socialist authorities with respect to Jewish life insurance assets. The policies under consideration here are primarily the so-called large life insurance policies (Gro.leben). Such policies could run from 2,000 to 100,000 RM, although most of the policies ex-amined by this author had a face value of between 10,000 RM and 30,000 RM. Larger policies were quite rare. Normally, these were policies taken out in the mid-1920s that were to come to term after 20 years. They were a form of capital investment, and the owner was entitled to dividends as well as normal accrual 
6 For a useful account of the cases 每 albeit one that persistently accepts the arguments of the plain-tiffs and their lawyers 每 see Michael J. Bazyler, ※Nuremberg in America: Litigating the Holocaust in United States Courts,§ University of Richmond Law Review 34 (2000), pp. 1每283, esp. pp. 93每148. 
value. These policies differed from small life insurance policies (Kleinleben) of less than 2,000 RM, which were based on fxed monthly premiums, or group policies in which there was no direct relationship between the insured individual and the contracted insurance company. 
In dealing with the fate of these larger life insurance policies, it is essential to recognize that the concrete material interests of the companies and the Na-tional Socialist authorities with respect to Jewish insurance policies ran counter to one another owing to the very nature of the insurance business. An insurance company has an obvious interest in holding on to its customers for as long as pos-sible, having them continue to pay premiums, and having the policies it has issued come to their full term. Under normal circumstances, this interest runs parallel to those of the policyholder, who is making a long-term capital investment from which he or she would wish a full return. If an Allianz Leben policyholder held on to the policy then, beginning in the fourth year, he or she could anticipate interest in the form of a dividend based on the proft made on the company＊s cap-ital investment. Such dividends could be expected to increase in the course of the policy＊s lifetime and were credited against premiums. This meant that the policy-holder could anticipate a time when he or she would have to pay no premiums at all 每 and might even have a leftover accumulation if the dividends exceeded the premiums. Allianz also offered supplementary dividends resulting from profts made because of lower death rates and administrative costs. Lastly, it offered a guaranteed closure dividend payable for the last fve years of the policy, starting at three years before maturity. These were the expectations when the policies were taken out and issued. In the pre-1933 period, the chief threat to such expectations came from the economic diffculties experienced because of the Great Depres-sion. The insurance companies had an obvious interest in trying to persuade their customers to hold on to their policies. Customers could borrow against the repurchase value of their policies, and customers were urged not to repurchase their policies but instead to turn them into paid-up policies. Provision was made for reconversion of paid-up policies back into policies requiring premiums. That is, the companies worked hard at keeping cancellation business to a minimum. 
The immediate consequence of a policyholder cancelling a policy was that he or she lost life insurance protection but also no longer had to pay premiums. The long-term implication was that the policyholder and the insurer had to forego the aforementioned expectations in connection with dividends and profts. At the same time, the policyholder received the repurchase value of the policy, and this raises the question of how that repurchase value was calculated and what kind of loss and gain, if any, the policyholder and the company made. The answer is that the repurchase value was calculated in such a way as to cover acquisition and administrative costs already incurred by the insurer, and a cancellation charge (which constituted such proft) was allowable from the cancellation. The repur-chase value was based on calculations that were in no way arbitrary but rather were based on the business plans all private life insurance companies had to sub-mit to the RAA for examination and approval. The premiums were designed to cover acquisition and administrative costs, that is, insurance agent fees and com-missions, medical examinations, and administrative costs. By a method known as Zillmerung 每 named after the insurance mathematician August Zillmer (1831每 1893), who frst devised the mode of calculation involved 每 the repurchase value was calculated in such a way as to ensure that certain acquisition costs were fully covered at the very beginning of the policy＊s life while other costs were equally distributed over the years.7 The costs were immediately added to the reserves that the company was required to have for the policy. In the case of Allianz, using a standard premium and the 1927 business plan (which remained valid through the 1930s and 1940s), this meant that the policy had no value during the frst two years 每 that is, until the acquisition costs were paid off. If the poli-cyholder cancelled in the frst two years then he or she received nothing, and the company had a cancellation loss rather than a cancellation proft. Beginning in the third year, the policy had a repurchase value from the primary reserve that was subject to a 4.0% Zillmerung and, in each subsequent year, to 3.5%ofthe face value of the policy. In the event of a repurchase, the policyholder received the worth of the policy as determined in the manner just described. This, how-ever, included a cancellation deduction that amounted to 10% of the reserve in the third year, sinking down to a minimum of 2% of the reserve beginning in the eighteenth year of the policy. It was this deduction from the reserve that con-stituted the cancellation charge. It should be noted that the percentage of the reserve subject to the deduction declined as the reserve itself grew, so that the ab-solute amount of the reserve taken as a cancellation proft by no means declined but rather increased. 
Insurance policies that were allowed to come to term, however, produced con-siderably higher profts than those cancelled prematurely. The repurchase value of a policy was thus always somewhat lower than the actual reserve set aside for the policy. Furthermore, the cancellation charge was required to meet that part of the costs which had been equally distributed over the whole life of the pol-icy. Otherwise these costs would have remained uncovered owing to the early cancellation. Finally, additional administrative costs arose from the great num-ber of cancellations. The actual proft made by the company, insofar as there was one, was thus considerably lower than the cancellation deduction. Table C, based on the cancellation fgures for Allianz Leben between 1935 and 1941, shows the relationship between repurchases made during these years and cancellation deductions. 
This way of calculating the costs of cancellation business antedated the Na-tional Socialists and continued after they came to power. No one anticipated what would happen to Jewish insurance assets, and the level of cancellation would have been viewed as an increasing problem if it had continued, which it did not. The table shows that there was a cancellation charge of about 1.5 mil-lion RM in 1938 and 1.6 million RM in 1939. The actual proft, as explained 
7 See Arps, Auf Sicheren Pfeilen, pp. 383每4, 662每3, and Durch unruhige Zeiten, Bd. 1, pp. 306每14. 
Table C. Repurchases and Cancellation Deduction of Allianz Leben, 1935每1941 (million RM) 
1935  1936  1937  1938  1939  1940  1941  
Repurchases Cancellation deduction  14,382 757  15,209 800  13,800 726  28,922 1,522  30,301 1,595  6,717 354  5,042 265  

Note: Since exact fgures for cancellation deductions are no longer available, these fgures are based on the general assumption that 5% of the available capital coverage is accumu-lated for cancellation reduction; this is an upper boundary estimate. 
earlier, was much lower than these amounts and clearly could not weigh heavily in the balance. This does not mean that no attention was paid to the cancella-tion proft.8 Manifestly, more money would have been made in the longer run if the cancellations had not taken place. 
As will be shown, insurance companies worked hard to keep cancellation busi-ness to a minimum, whether or not the customers were Jewish. The longer the National Socialists were in power, however, the more they wanted to gain con-trol of Jewish assets and to do so as quickly as possible. Theoretically, there were two ways in which the confscation of Jewish insurance assets might have been of no cost or even of slight proft to the insurance companies. The frst method would have been to postpone confscation until the insured had paid off most of the acquisition costs equally distributed over the life of the policy. Then the cancellation charge would meet both the cancellation costs and those acquisition costs not paid off at this point. It is obvious that the regime wanted the money quickly and was not going to pace its confscations to suit insurance company calculations. The second method would have been for the government actually to assume the title to policies and wait until they came to term. I have found no evidence in the period prior to 1942 that insurance company offcials ever suggested such a thing or that those in the National Socialist regime ever contemplated or indicated any interest in confscating insurance policies per se, paying premiums, and patiently awaiting the day when it could collect the full sum to which its Jewish victims would have been entitled. Such an arrange-ment would undoubtedly have served the interests of the insurance companies. Furthermore, neither before nor after 1942 was the welfare of the insurance com-panies with respect to Jewish life insurance assets a National Socialist priority. Hence, from the regime＊s perspective, the central problem was to create circum-stances in which the Jews or the companies were compelled to monetize these insurance assets and to then fnd ways and means of gaining access to this money. 
8 Kisskalt an Meuschel, 23.Feb. 1940, MR, B 12 /19. 

Insurance policy of a Jewish customer of Allianz Leben, started in 1930 and running for sixteen years. The sum insured amounted to 5,000 RM. 
This could be done indirectly, by placing Jews in the position where they had to monetize their insurance assets in order to cover the costs of government imposi-tions and emigration, or directly, by forcing the insurance companies to disgorge the cash value of the policies they held. Either way, it involved policy cancel-lations. If one wishes to understand what happened to Jewish insurance assets then it is a mistake to concentrate attention on the problem of unclaimed insur-ance policies, since the ultimate goal of the National Socialists was to make sure that there were no unclaimed policies. 
The record before 1940 suggests that, in Germany and the areas annexed to the Reich, the National Socialists were highly successful in achieving their purpose of relentlessly collecting the cash value of most Jewish life insurance policies in one form or another. What should be obvious from the foregoing description is that the National Socialist government, not the insurance company, beneftted from the confscation of such insurance assets, and that it was the government, not the insurance company, that cheated the customer of the fruits of his policy. The reality is that confscation of Jewish insurance assets was a realm in which the insurance business had nothing to gain and, indeed, something to lose from the despoliation of the Jews by the National Socialist regime. Insurance compa-nies trying to hold on to their Jewish customers were thus doing so at the very least because it was in their interest. Even though the industry and its leaders in-creasingly adapted to the demands of the regime out of self-interest and thereby became increasingly implicated in its misdeeds, there were nevertheless points at which the interests of the regime were simply incompatible with those of the insurance industry. One of these was the transformation of life insurance poli-cies 每 from policies on which premiums were regularly paid to premium-free policies 每 or the premature monetization of insurance assets through the repur-chase of policies by their owners before they achieved their full potential value. What is involved here is not a question of ※resistance§ on the part of the in-surance companies to measures of the regime but rather of an ultimately futile self-interested effort (though not without some evidence of humane concern in signifcant instances) to hold on to a group of valued customers. 
The importance of Jews as customers was recognized even where insurers were anything but friendly toward Jews, as was the case with the German Lawyers and Notary Insurance Company of Halle. Hostility toward Jews within the over-populated German legal profession was notorious, and Jewish lawyers were a favorite target of anti-Semites in the public at large. Unsurprisingly, then, they were already the target of special measures aimed at undermining their eco-nomic existence 每 especially in connection with the purging of the civil service soon after the Nazis took power 每 and were singled out in the anti-Jewish boy-cott at the turn of March每April 1933. As one of the company＊s offcials noted, this presented some unpleasant problems: 
The consequences of the present political movements in Germany for the lawyers insured by us, especially the Jewish lawyers, cannot be predicted with any certainty. I do not 
know how many Jewish lawyers are insured by us and also do not know for how much they are insured. Since in general the Jew is not exactly lax when it comes to the care of his family, I must assume that the number of Jewish lawyers insured by us and also the amount of the insurance corresponds approximately to the number of Jewish lawyers in the bar. I must therefore assume that a substantial portion of the 900,000 RM in premium payments due on April 1 will not come in because the gentlemen will probably hold back their cash for the time being due to the intransparency of their own situation. I must also calculate that, despite the most urgent advice against doing so on our part in each in-dividual case, a large number of the gentlemen, in order to have cash on hand, will not only prematurely transform their insurance into premium-free policies but will also even buy back their life insurance or at a minimum ask for a prepayment. The sum of such de-mands made upon us cannot for the moment be in any way calculated. Where before I could view an average liquidity in the amount of 500,000 RM as completely suffcient, I must for the forseeable future count on the necessity of raising this to a million RM.9 
However, when calculations were made by another offcial of the company later in April, the situation appeared less gloomy, with an anticipated loss of only 10%. Indeed, as the offcial in question cynically noted, loss might be turned into opportunity: 
On the other hand, we cannot tell today whether or not the income of other lawyers would not rise through the loss of a large number of Jewish lawyers in such a way, that once a certain equilibrium is attained, the former will be able to make larger payments for their insurance than before. We must assume that this momentary loss will be thereby balanced out over time.10 
One of the ways this organization sought to protect itself in the meantime was to take a tough position whenever it could manage not to accommodate its Jewish customers. Thus, it pursued a policy of refusing to allow buy-backs by persons affected by the Law on the Cleansing of the Civil Service, insofar as the policies were held for too short a time or did not qualify for some other rea-son. When it came to pensions, however, the organization abandoned such legal niceties. For instance, when a Jewish lawyer who had purchased a pension (but could no longer be a member of the Lawyer＊s Association) asked for the return of his eight years＊ worth of premiums, he was rudely invited to take the associa-tion to court: ※payment is refused, and we leave it up to you to take legal action. We would like to see the German court that would fnd against us in favor of a Jewish lawyer.§11 A refusal to pay back premiums, however, did not constitute the right to deny Jewish lawyers with life insurance the fruits of their investment. Thus, until the ※striven after goal of cleansing the bar of Jewry§ was achieved 
9 Schreiben an Oberjustizrat Barth, 1. April 1933,FHA, H 18 II/21, Bl. 51. On the treatment of 
Jewish lawyers in 1933, see Simone Ladwig-Winters, Anwalt ohne Recht. Das Schicksal jischer 
Rechtsanw.lte in Berlin nach 1933 (Berlin, 1998), pp. 33每9. 10 Auswirkungen des etwaigen Ausscheidens jischer Rechtsanw.lte auf die Ruhegehaltskasse, 21. 
April 1933, HM, A0308-00013. 11 AZLB, F 227781. See Erste Aufsichtratssitzung der Ruhegehalts-, Witwen-und Waisenkasse f 
deutsche Rechtsanw.lte und Notare zu Halle a. d. S., 25. Juni 1933, FHA, H 18 II/16, Bl. 1. 
by the 5th Decree to the Reich Citizenship Law of September 27, 1938, a great many Jewish lawyers seemed to have held on to their policies. Only then did practically all the Jews buy back their policies. Although the costs were high, the company reported that it had weathered the drain quite well and was manag-ing to pay the costs out of current accounts, thereby demonstrating the solidity 
12
it had achieved since 1933. 
This ugly little example was paradigmatic for the manner in which Jewish insurance assets eroded in the frst fve years of the Third Reich and of the mixed feelings with which even an anti-Semitic insurance company confronted the process. Whatever the views on the ※Jewish question§ held by offcials and employees of the Allianz concern, Jews were good customers with a favorable attitude toward insurance as a means of investment and toward providing secu-rity for themselves and their families, and a company like Allianz wanted to hold on to them. A measure of the value placed on their business 每 albeit a some-what bizarre one, in hindsight 每 can be seen in the response of Allianz to the frst wave of Jewish emigration during the early years of the National Socialist regime. Thus, in February 1935, one of Allianz＊s daughter companies, the Wil-helma in Magdeburg, sent a circular to its branches that read: 
As is known, the Swiss National Insurance Company in Basel is connected to our com-pany. It is therefore to our interest that our policyholders who move to Switzerland become customers of the Swiss National. If you hear about the emigration of a policy-holder to Switzerland, we should be informed about this as quickly as possible so that we can recommend that the customer take out a policy with Swiss National. We reiter-ate that this information should be provided as quickly as possible. If it transpires a few months after the move has taken place, then it will not seldom be the case that the policy-holder will already have concluded a new policy with another company. Allianz however also has its own representatives in other countries or has close business connections with indigenous companies. Where other German customers emigrate to such areas, Palestine for example, we also would like to bind them to us in their new homeland. It is there-fore necessary that we receive report of such cases as speedily as possible so that we can report the moves to the international section of the company in Berlin.13 
While it is interesting to note that one of the signers of this circular was the Jewish director Eichbaum, who ended up working for Allianz in the safety of Jo-hannesburg, South Africa, it should be clear that this was general Allianz policy in the period before radicalization of the regime set in. Such a circular would have been inconceivable two years later. While it is diffcult to tell how well Al-lianz and its subsidiaries abroad managed to hold on to Jewish customers who emigrated, the will to do so certainly was there, and it corresponded to the com-pany＊s efforts to maintain the policies of its Jewish customers at home in the face 
12 Erster Bericht des Vorstandes er das Gesch.ftsjahr 1938,FHA,H 18 II/16, Bl. 53. 
13 Rundschreiben vom 25.Feb. 1935, Versicherungen der aus Deutschland auswandernden Ver-
sicherungsnehmer, FHA, S 17.7/62; see also Rundschreiben Allianz vom 15.Feb. 1935,FHA,AZ 
5.1/4. 
of mounting economic pressures that were forcing them either to cease paying premiums or to monetize their policies by repurchase. 
Before turning to further discussion of the relationship between Allianz and its Jewish customers, it is important to describe the evidence available for the en-suing discussion and to provide some quantitative sense of the process by which Jews surrendered their insurance entitlements as well as some procedural models for the liquidation of Jewish insurance policies and the fate of the monies re-ceived for them. Fortunately, a substantial number of life insurance policies and records thereof survived the war and have been stored by Allianz Leben 每 specif-ically, 1.3 million policies held in Berlin. In addition, there are another 600,000 policies for the Vereinte Versicherung (successor of the Isar Life Insurance Com-pany and Magdeburger companies taken over by Allianz in recent years) that are stored in Munich. This second collection is composed primarily of very small policies that provide only the sparsest information about the policyholder and the fate of the policies. Taken together, the Allianz collection is the largest such collection of policies available in Germany; the policies of other companies ap-pear to have been destroyed in the war or in the aftermath of the restitution process. Nevertheless, it is by no means a complete collection, and the major-ity of the older small life insurance policies may well have been destroyed over the last decades when the required preservation period expired. It is extremely important to recognize that policies held by Jews were not subject to special identifcation, and while some policyholders had names that were clearly Jew-ish, many did not. ※Rosenberg,§ for example, as the personage of Nazi ideologue Alfred Rosenberg demonstrates, need not be a Jewish name. The regime tried to solve this problem of identifcation by decreeing on August 17, 1938, that every Jew had to have a clearly recognizable Jewish given name or to take on the mid-dle name of ※Israel§ or ※Sarah§ by January 1, 1939, but this was not evidenced in insurance policy documents unless there was correspondence after that date in which the policyholder specifcally used the names. Also, Jews who had already emigrated were not covered by this decree. Thus, the identifcation of Jewish policyholders is possible only if the policies contain some other evidence 每 for example, correspondence indicating an intention to emigrate, termination of the policy at the time of the November Pogrom, or Gestapo demands for the repur-chase value. The best evidence, in fact, is provided by policies involved with postwar restitution claims and compensation calculations, which apparently led Allianz employees to write the word ※Jude§ on some policies to make reference easier. In short, Jewish insurance policies are diffcult to single out and identify from the mass of policies available. 
To deal with the problem of possibly unpaid policies in connection with recent lawsuits, Allianz employed the auditing frm of Arthur Andersen to go through its policy holdings and develop a representative sample of policies for analysis.14 
14 For all the information pertaining to the Arthur Andersen investigation, see ※Investigation of 
Life Insurance Files (Presentation for NAIC Task Force, June 23, 1998, Boston)§ and the relevant 
preliminary reports. These documents were placed at the disposal of the author. 
Allianz Leben also undertook efforts to examine and refne the data available from this sample. A repetition of this extraordinarily complex undertaking was beyond the capacity or skills of this writer and would have been pointless besides. However, I did examine about 300 policies that belonged to Jews, some from the group closely examined by Andersen and some from a group of policies clearly identifed as belonging to Jews because of restitution information not included in the Arthur Andersen sample. My impressionistic survey, which was above all aimed at fnding qualitative evidence in the form of correspondence between the company and its Jewish customers, gave me every reason to have confdence in the conclusions drawn by the Arthur Andersen investigators with respect to the character and fate of the policies. These conclusions will be discussed next. Finally, it is important to note that most insurance policies are rather matter-of-fact documents containing little or no correspondence; as noted before, the only way one can identify many of those belonging to Jews is because they contain forms and calculations required by postwar restitution authorities. A few insur-ance policies, however, include revealing and at times moving correspondence that gives us some sense of the trials and sufferings of these Jewish policyholders. 
First, however, let us consider the statistical record provided by Arthur An-dersen, which selected and systematically examined some 35,538 policies and then randomly chose another 31,798 out of a total of 1,188,000 fles. Thus, a to-tal of 67,336 fles were examined. Of these, 6,338 were believed to be policies owned by Jews. Most of the persons in question were businessmen, lawyers and notaries, medical doctors, or other professionals. Jews constituted 1%ofthe German population under the racial laws of 1935 每 and only 0.77% insofar as they self-identifed as Jews 每 and it is diffcult to say whether as a group they were more or less inclined to take out life insurance than others. 
The Austrian evidence suggests not.15 However, the amounts for which Jews insured themselves would appear to have been higher than average. Thus, where the average large life insurance policy at Allianz Leben, which had only been founded in 1922,was 5,902 RM in 1933 and the average small life policy was for 1,025 RM, the corresponding sums for the Jews identifed in the Andersen sample were 15,235 RM and 1,812 RM, respectively. Needless to say, the lion＊s share (90%) of these policies, many of which were written by Favag and inher-ited by Allianz when it acquired that frm, were taken out between 1923 and 1932; the 10% taken out after 1933 came from the acquisition of other compa-nies and their old stock. This explains why the number of Jewish-owned policies grew slightly during the early years of the National Socialist regime and did not diminish as dramatically as might otherwise have been the case in 1935每1936. Thus, the number of Jewish policies in force in 1934 was 4,904 and had only diminished to about 4,500 in early 1937 before a dramatic reduction to 801 by 
15 Helen B. Junz, ※Report on the Pre-War Wealth Position of the Jewish Population in Nazi-Occupied 
Countries, Germany, and Austria,§ in Independent Committee of Eminent Persons, The Volcker 
Commission: The Report on Dormant Accounts of Victims of Nazi Persecution in Swiss Banks 
(Bern, 1999), Appendix S; http://www.icep-iaep.org . 
1939. In that year, the value of Jewish policies was 10% of what it had been in 1928, while that of the remainder of the Allianz portfolio was 240% of its worth in 1928. The cash value of Jewish policies in force, which was about 650%of what it had been in 1928 at the beginning of 1937, was reduced to 20%ofits 1928 value in 1939每1940, while the actual RM value of the policies in force had decreased from 14.4 million to 0.4 million. 
What had happened to these policies? Some, of course, came to term and were paid off, while the exact fate of some others is unknown. Nevertheless, clear conclusions may be drawn about the majority of the policies. Turning frst to the 1,708 Allianz Leben policies identifed as belonging to Jews whose insur-ance assets were lost because of Nazi persecution, 80% were cancelled and 30% were converted into paid-up status. The percentages add up to more than 100% because some policies were frst converted and then cancelled. Of the policies whose repurchase date is known, 91% were repurchased before 1940 and 9% were repurchased after 1940. The initiator of the surrender can be determined in 1,273 cases: in 92% it was the policyholder, 6% the government, and 2% the company. Prior to 1940, 96% of the policies were terminated by the policy-holder and 2% each by the government and the company. After 1940, 47%of terminations were initiated by the policyholder, 50% by the government, and 3% by the company.16 This pattern demonstrates the powerful effects of inten-sifed persecution of the Jews in the late 1930s and also the increasing role of the government 每 above all, the 11th Decree to the Reich Citizenship Law (to be discussed shortly) 每 in the 1940s. 
The Allianz Leben sample of 1,708 policies is obviously a small one, so there is something to be gained from adding the Vereinte policies in order to see if analy-sis of the two together confrms the aforementioned pattern. It clearly does.17 Of the 5,715 Jewish policies surveyed between 1928 and 1945, 3,683 (64%) were cancelled and 967 (17%) were converted into paid-up policies. As these statis-tics and Table D18 demonstrate, the number of cancellations far outweighed the number of conversions, with the latter most preponderant in the early years of the regime and in 1938. Conversion, of course, involved a signifcant diminution of cash value, but it was a way of holding on to the policy without the burden of premiums. In many cases, however, conversion was a prelude to cancellation. Manifestly, cancellation reduced the life of the policies 每 in the case of the large life policies, by an average of half (i.e., from 20 to 10 years) 每 and this meant that the cash value on average was reduced to almost 38% of the sum insured. 
Finally, it is useful once again to consider who initiated the cancellations. In a survey of 2,603 policies prior to 1939, 95% of the policies had been cancelled 
16 Darstellung der Zahlenermittlung, Kdigungen und Beitragsfreistellungen im jischen Port-
folio der Allianz Lebensversicherungs AG (Ausarbeitung Allianz Leben, 16. Juli 2000), FHA, S 
17.22/181. 17 Life Insurance in Germany 1928每1940 (Ausarbeitung Allianz Leben, 1998), FHA, S 17.22 /181. 
18 
Ibid. 
Table D. Allianz-Vereinte Jewish Portfolio: Policy Cancellations and Conversion to Paid-up Policies, 1928每1946ff. 

Year  Cancellation  Conversion  
1928  0  0  
1929  0  4  
1930  0  21  
1931  1  32  
1932  7  69  
1933  90  170  
1934  99  145  
1935  93  122  
1936  357  93  
1937  406  69  
1938  1,213  140  
1939  1,100  60  
1940  91  14  
1941  50  7  
1942  66  8  
1943  58  2  
1944  21  1  
1945  14  2  
1946ff.  17  8  

by the policyholders, who collected the repurchase value of the policies, while 3% involved direct appropriation of the repurchase value by government agen-cies and 2% were cancelled by the company itself. These proportions changed after 1940. Of the 249 cancellations that took place after 1940, 44%wereat the request of the policyholder, 50% by order of the government, and 6%by the company. Hence, what emerges from these fgures is that most policies were cancelled by policyholders themselves and that, insofar as proceeds from the re-purchase of insurance policies were then confscated (as most of them indeed were, in one way or another), the confscation was indirect in that it took place after the cancellation. Only after 1940 did direct confscation of insurance pol-icy proceeds by government agencies predominate. 
Even if the record shows that Allianz and its allied companies paid off their Jewish customers and followed their instructions about disposition of their in-surance assets, this does not mean that the policyholders could freely dispose of the money they received or, indeed, that they had not acted under constraint when they transformed or cancelled their policies. To be sure, there were rare cases like that of a Frankfurt lawyer who read the handwriting on the wall early in the game. As he later reported in claiming compensation after 1945: 
In March 1933 I was arrested by the Nazis twice. I saw the disaster coming and made plans to fee. Naturally, I wanted to have as much cash as possible when feeing. Between the frst and the second arrest, that is in March 1933, I therefore went to the Favag and declared that I wanted to buy back my insurance. The Favag offcial told me that I should think long and hard about the matter since I would lose ※a crazy§ amount of money. I explained my situation and bought the insurance back.19 
He managed to get the money out and changed his marks into francs in Saar-brken. 
This, however, was early in the regime. Later on, when Jews cancelled their policies and received their money, there was little mystery as to why they were doing so. Sometimes, as in the case of a merchant from Wzburg in November 1939, the simple facts were made explicit: ※Now that I do not have any further means of existence for myself and for my family and need cash for living, I here-with cancel my life insurance policy with you and ask for its repurchase value.§20 In many cases, however, the disposition of monies derived from life insurance assets was far more complicated and was to increase in complexity. Insofar as Jews intended to emigrate, their assets were subject to the Reich Flight Tax of 1931, a measure instituted at the highpoint of the Depression and whichtherefore antedated the National Socialist regime; it was intended to discourage Germans from leaving the country and taking their capital with them. The National So-cialists, who wished the Jews to emigrate but also wished to seize their assets, transformed the tax into a mechanism for despoiling the Jews. Thus, where the original law provided that all persons having a yearly income of 20,000 RM or taxable assets of 200,000 RM had to pay 25% of their assets upon emigration, the changed law of May 1934 provided that those earning over 20,000 RM a year or having assets worth 50,000 RM were required to pay 25% of their net worth as a tax if they wished to emigrate. This substantial reduction in the thresh-old amount of assets liable to taxation, and the inclusion of assets like Reich Railroad bonds (which had previously been exempt from consideration), were clearly aimed at the Jews: the new law was designed to force them, in the lan-guage of the rapacious Finance Ministry, to make ※a last large contribution§ as compensation for the taxes thereby lost in the future.21 The repurchase values of insurance policies were assets subject to taxation under the Reich Flight Tax, and Jews intending to emigrate found themselves cashing in their policies in order 
19 AZLB, F 227781. 20 AZLB, F 244902. 21 Dorothee Mu.gnug, Die Reichsfuchtsteuer 1931每1953 [Schriften zur Rechtsgeschichte, Heft 60] 
(Berlin, 1993), pp. 30ff. See also Stefan Mehl, Das Reichsfnanzministerium und die Verfolgung 
der Deutschen Juden 1933每1943 [Berliner Arbeitshefte und Berichte zur Sozialwissenschaftlichen 
Forschung, Bd. 38] (Berlin, 1990), pp. 41每50. This was a lucrative tax, with the Reich collecting 
941.7 million RM between April 1, 1933, and March 31, 1944. During this time, 270,000 Jews emigrated; 135,000 were deported between 1940 and 1944. The peak year, as might be expected, was the fscal year 1938每39, when 342.6 million RM was collected; ibid., pp. 44每5. 
to raise the money they needed to pay this tax and other impositions, especially the infamous atonement tax, after the November 1938 Pogrom. In order to en-sure that payment was made, insurance proceeds were deposited into a so-called emigrant blocked account 每 usually the normal bank account of a Jew who had stated his intention to emigrate, or the normal bank account of a Jew that had been blocked by order of the local revenue offce. Take, for example, the case of a Breslau lawyer and notary who held a 15,000-RM policy, which he had taken out in 1925 and which was to reach full term in 1940. Although he had planned to wait until February 28, 1939, to cash in his policy and thus beneft from the interest he would receive, the events at the end of 1938 made him think again; on January 5, 1939, he wrote to Allianz as follows. 
I herewith exercise my cancellation and repurchase right and sincerely request that you do not wait until February 28 to make payment but rather undertake payment immedi-ately, if necessary by calculating back interest since the payment is urgently needed for purposes of paying the Reich Flight Tax. In view of my many years as one of your policy-holders and your known fairness, I can certainly assume that you will fulfll my request. 
In the case of Allianz and its associated companies, there was no need for such anxiety; the customer＊s request was fulflled when 13,794.66 RM were placed, as requested, in the blocked account under the control of the president of the rev-enue offce in Silesia.22 At this point, of course, Allianz had paid off the policy. The real problem was that the right of the ※owner§ of such accounts to dispose of the assets contained in them was subject to the permission of the revenue au-thority, and release of the funds (of which the insurance payment was usually only a part) depended upon satisfaction of the Reich Flight Tax requirement as well as other tax obligations. Thus, what was confscated was not the insurance asset but the money derived from it. 
The anxiety that was somewhat muted in the last-discussed case was often made very explicit in others. For instance, a Berlin lawyer held two 20-year poli-cies taken out in 1924 with a face value of 10,000 RM; the repurchase value of one of the policies had already been seized by the authorities to cover liabilities, and he wrote to Allianz on November 12, 1938, about his second policy: 
I sincerely request the immediate reporting of the repurchase value as of November 12, 1938. The matter is very pressing, since I must already report the repurchase value on early Tuesday morning. I would be very grateful if the matter could be taken care of with the greatest possible speed and as an urgent matter and if you could give me the informa-tion by telephone. The costs can be charged to me.23 
For whatever reason, Allianz was not able to provide the information until the late afternoon of November 28, but by this time the revenue offce had placed a 
22 AZLB, F 235109. 23 AZLB, F 220947. 
lien against the policy, which was fnally lifted in February 1939 after the policy-holder had used other resources as security for payment of the atonement levy. In the process, he had turned the policy into a paid-up one and was able to buy it back for 3,356.78 RM in February 1939. 
One of the more depressing aspects of the correspondence between Allianz and its policyholders was the witting or unwitting race against time and circumstance to which it bore witness. A good illustration was a 55-year-old Berlin lawyer with a 50,000-RM policy that he had taken out in 1924. On October 28, 1938,he wrote to Allianz pointing out that his biannual premium was due on November 
1. However, all Jewish lawyers were losing their licenses effective November 30, and whether he would be allowed to practice as a consultant (i.e., a specialist in handling the legal problems of Jews) was doubtful. If he could not be licensed then he would probably have to buy back his policy, since he needed the inter-est it had accrued, and he wanted to know what the difference in the repurchase value of his policy would be if he paid the November premium or if he waited until January 1, 1939, and then bought back the policy. That is, would he lose money by paying the premium and then cancelling at the beginning of the year, when he would know for sure about his appointment as a consultant? Allianz responded to him almost immediately, frst misunderstanding his question but then answering it once he had clarifed matters. By the beginning of December, however, the question had become irrelevant, and the policyholder asked for the repurchase value of his policy to be paid to a blocked account at the Commerz-und Privatbank ※since I need the money for the levy on Jewish assets.§24 
Here, obviously, the insurer was in no position to help the customer beyond paying out promptly, but it is worth noting that the company did seem to strive to explain its regulations to Jewish customers and to bend the regulations when it seemed possible to show a modicum of decency. This is well illustrated by the case of a Jewish merchant from Lehrensteinsfeld, who turned his policy into a paid-up policy in 1936 when he could no longer afford the premiums. When he discovered that the value of the policy was now reduced below the total sum of the premiums paid, however, he was quite shocked and complained to his agent. The latter pointed out that the premiums were calculated in such a way that risk of early death had to be taken into account as well as other costs connected with acquiring customers, and that these weighed more heavily the earlier the cus-tomer decided to stop paying premiums. The policyholder in question remained upset, however, and Allianz made a point of sending him a lengthy letter explain-ing its policies. Whether this satisfed him or not is unknown, but he maintained the policy until the end of December 1938, when he informed the company that he was planning to emigrate and wanted to cancel the policy. Although paid-up policies could normally be cashed in only at the end of the ※insurance year§ 每 in this case, August 1939 每 Allianz informed him that, in view of his intention to emigrate, they were prepared to accommodate him and pay immediately if 
24 AZLB, F 234892. 
he supplied the necessary documents within two weeks. At the same time, they urged him to bear the currency exchange regulations in mind and make the nec-essary arrangements should he be planning to emigrate before the money was paid. Whether this was ※company policy§ is impossible to say, but it is by no means the only instance of such efforts to inform and assist Jewish customers.25 
It was indeed quite important to inform emigrating Jews to take the currency exchange regulations into account, for they were a crucial barrier to many Jews acquiring full disposition over their paid-out insurance assets. There were two aspects of this question, which should not be confused with one another. The frst pertains to life insurance policies denominated in gold marks, fne gold, or foreign currencies such as the dollar or the Swiss franc. The second and, for Jews, far more important aspect pertains to the money emigrants could take out of Germany. 
A substantial number of life insurance policies (particularly larger ones) held by Germans, whether Jewish or not, were held in ※real values.§ This was an understandable response to the hyperinfation of 1922每1923, when the value of the paper mark simply evaporated. Although life insurance policyholders were entitled to some revaluation of their insurance assets, the experience of hyper-infationmadeGermanswary,despitethestabilityoftheReichsmark. Itisunder-standable that, after 1923, many Germans did not want to take out insurance policies denominated in Reichsmark but rather wanted policies denominated in what they considered secure values: gold mark values. They continued to do so even after passage of the Reich Currency Law of August 30, 1924, establishing the Reichsmark. These efforts took various forms. Some policies were denom-inated in fne gold, this being measured as 1/2790 kilograms fne gold equaling one gold mark or, at a minimum, 1 RM, thereby ensuring the customer receipt of at least the Reichsmark equivalent in fne gold. Policies denominated in gold marks were presumed to be on a dollar basis (i.e., 4.2 gold marks to the dol-lar), thereby allegedly ensuring the customer whatever the real value might be in Reichsmark. Other policies were denominated in dollars or Swiss francs. For good measure, some people took out their policies with Swiss or other foreign companies operating in Germany, and there were even some cases where pol-icyholders reserved the right to cash in their policies either in Germany or in Switzerland. In early 1925, the RAA sought to strengthen support for German currency by urging that insurers issue policies denominated in foreign currencies only in exceptional cases.26 
What those seeking security by gold mark and foreign currency policies did not anticipate was the currency instability of the Great Depression 每 especially after September 1931, when England went off the gold standard. The Germans did not go off the gold standard in theory but they effectively did so in practice by 
25 AZLB, S 268967. 26 RAA, Rundschreiben vom 23. Jan. 1925, Basler Lebens-Versicherungs-Gesellschaft, Altarchiv, 
Registraturnummer 000 034. 
introducing exchange controls during the banking crisis of July 1931. With the end of currency convertibility and the controls on foreign exchange, the RAA be-gan totakeatougherline, sinceitwasvery muchto theGermanadvantagetohave insurance assets denominated in Reichsmark and to reduce the amount of for-eign exchange held by insurance companies to guarantee their policies. Thus, on September 10, 1931, the RAA insisted that premiums for policies denominated in foreign currencieshad to be paid insuch currencies andstronglyurged that the in-surancecompanies ceasepromoting insuranceingoldmarksorforeign exchange. In June 1932 there were warnings that the insurers were not going to fnd the cov-erage they needed for such policies because of the exchange control regulations.27 
In April 1933, however, the benefts of gold mark每denominated insurance on a dollar basis were dealt a severe blow when the United States went off the gold standard and then devalued the dollar by 40% in January 1934. Two years later, the Swiss devalued their franc by 35%. Thus, beginning in 1933 (when the news of the dollar devaluation came out), one could make a good case for the trans-formation of such policies into Reichsmark-denominated policies. To encourage such transformations, Allianz directors decided in May 1933 to offer to change gold mark每denominated policies at a rate of 4.20 RM, which was generous in-deed since the rate was to become 2.50 RM to the dollar. The company decided to conduct this operation by sending all its policyholders a letter informing them of this offer and an addendum to be returned if they agreed, charging the fat rate of a mark for the operation. Those who did not reply were visited by insurance agents who explained the situation and benefts to them.28 Not surprisingly, most customers took advantage of this offer, among them Kurt Schmitt himself, who converted his own policy to RM on June 28, 1933, ※whereby a gold mark is replaced by a Reichsmark and a dollar by 4.20 Reichsmark.§29 These efforts by Allianz and other insurers were promoted by actions of the RAA. In Octo-ber 1933 it announced that no foreign exchange would be provided to customers who had concluded policies in foreign currency after December 20, 1931; at the end of May 1934, it banned outright the conclusion of policies in gold mark on the basis of a foreign currency. Soon after, the RAA turned its attention to poli-cies denominated in foreign currencies themselves, ordering in September that future premium payments on such policies 每 as well as their future denomina-tion 每 were to be in Reichsmark and announcing that no foreign exchange would be released to pay premiums on such policies. Hence, such policies now had a ※foreign currency portion§ and an RM portion. Once again, Allianz sent out a notifcation to its customers and a form for them to fll out agreeing to the trans-formation of their policies. However, this time they pointed out that they were, in effect, acting out of constraint because they were no longer in a position to obtain the foreign exchange necessary to cover such policies in full and could 
27 RAA, Rundschreiben vom 29. Juni 1932, ibid.; Rundschreiben vom 10. Sept. 1931, BAK, B 280/583. 28 21. erweiterte Vorstandssitzung am 10.Mai 1933, FHA, S 17.2 /4. 29 Nachtrag zum Versicherungsschein Nr. A 2 250 885,FHA,NL 1/7. 
thus only guarantee full coverage for policies whose remaining portions were de-nominated in RM. Since the courts ruled in 1935 and again in 1936 that the insurer rather than the policyholder had to bear losses attendant upon devalua-tion of the dollar in January 1934, policyholders had every interest in agreeing to the offer made to transform their policies.30 
Nonetheless, those portions of life insurance policies denominated in foreign currency and backed by foreign currency assets still remained an object of irri-tation to the government, especially as the regime＊s thirst for foreign exchange became desperate in 1937每1938. Early in 1937, the RWM came to the conclu-sion that its earlier plan to promote the voluntary conversion of policies with a foreign currency component would not achieve its purpose and that compulsion would be necessary. The form that this would take, however, was a complicated matter. Clearly this would constitute a breach of contract between the insur-ers and their customers 每 81.6 million RM in such coverage was involved 每 and the companies were anxious to have it appear as a government-imposed measure rather than have it refect badly on the German insurance industry itself. Also, they saw the change as an opportunity to shift the risk of any depreciation in the Reichsmark, which they would now receive in return for their surrender of hard currency to the Reichsbank upon cessation of hard currency coverage. 
The government faced particular diffculties with the Swiss. Four compa-nies 每 the Schweizerische Lebensversicherungs-und Rentenanstalt in Zich, Basler Lebens-Versicherungs-Gesellschaft, the Vita Lebensversicherungs-AG in Zich, and Winterthur Lebensversicherungs-Gesellschaft 每 had policies denom-inated in foreign currencies and were much concerned about their future cred-ibility if they did not receive some guarantee from the Reich respecting their long-term obligations under the life insurance policies they had issued. Lengthy negotiations were thus conducted with the wily Hans Koenig (general director of Schweizerische Lebensversicherungs-und Rentenanstalt and chief negotiator for the Association of Swiss Insurance Companies) and his colleagues. In the end, the government decided to issue a law whose ultimate justifcation was that the Reichsbank needed the foreign exchange used as coverage for these policies in order to pay for the Four-Year Plan. The law of August 26, 1938, mandated the conversion into RM of all forms of policy protection denominated in for-eign exchange or in the form of exchange-rate guarantees.31 It was a lucrative piece of legislation for the German government and was made all the more so by its requirement that insurance companies invest the RM they received (in return for the surrendered foreign exchange) in Reich bonds. The Swiss companies, for 
30 On the court decision, see Rundschreiben 144/135 des Verbandes Deutscher Lebensversicherungs-
gesellschaften vom 2. August 1935,GDV, 2-094/1. For the forms sent out by Allianz in 1934 in 
dealing with this question, see BAK, B 280/1453, Bl. 79每92. 31 Vermerk, 2.Feb. 1937,SM, 1458/1/154, Bl. 26f.; RAA an die Reichsstelle f Devisenbewirtschaf-
tung, 13. April 1937; Vermerk RWM, 3. Juli 1937, ibid., Bl. 45f. For the negotiations with the 
Swiss in early 1938, see the Koenig memorandum of March 10, 1938, Bl. 143每52 and the other 
relevant documents in this volume. The fnal version of the law is in ibid., Bl. 168每74. 
example, had to surrender 19.4 million Swiss francs, 378,000 U.S. dollars, and 66,000 Dutch forins in return for Reichsmark.32 The amounts at Allianz were considerably smaller, adding up to only 100,000 RM in coverage. When one ex-amines the list of 36 persons who still held such policies in March 1939, nearly all were living abroad and at least 15 can today be plausibly identifed as Jews by their names and places of residence.33 It is important to bear in mind, however, that this was not a policy aimed specifcally against Jews. All German insurance policy holders were subject to these conversions. 
There were apparently some cases of Jews (as well as non-Jews) who did not change the denomination of their policies into Reichsmark, although Allianz continued to offer the favorable exchange rate as late as September 1936 and to urge conversion on its customers. In one such case 每 that of a Jewish merchant in Stuttgart whose policy had been denominated in dollars 每 this stubbornness worked in favor of the insured, since his lawyer was able to arrange a deal in 1935 whereby the policy dividends were paid in RM while the dollar portion of the policy was paid in dollars via an account in New York. It would appear that the policy may have been transferred to the Allianz assets in the United States. Whatever the case, the policy was repurchased in 1938, and $900 was paid to the customer＊s account at the Chase Manhattan Bank after his lawyer presented a confrmation by Allianz that the foreign exchange was paid from its own sources and did not involve using the Reichsbank.34 This, however, was most certainly a rare instance in which nonconversion worked to the customer＊s beneft. In con-trast, the agent of a Regensburg merchant (who still had not converted to RM while this was still voluntary) was asked by Allianz to persuade the merchant to change his mind; but as the agent reported in November 1936: 
Herr V. is for the moment not to be moved to transform his insurance denominated in Goldmark into Reichsmark. Rather he prefers to ask that the repurchase value of the aforementioned insurance should be paid if at all possible. According to what he says, he has to anticipate that his commercial license will soon be revoked because he is a non-Aryan and that he is compelled to consider the necessity of emigrating from Germany. 
A month later, the customer himself wrote personally (as was required) to buy back his policy, pointing out that he was doing so ※since I am in fnancial diff-culty at the moment and am dependent on every penny.§ In receiving the Reichs-mark equivalent of his policy, however, he actually lost money because of his previous failure to transform the policy into RM at a favorable rate.35 
The case of a Nuremberg lawyer is an even more revealing illustration of how the expectations entertained at the time when a life insurance policy was taken out could be brutally disappointed by the conversion policy. In this case, the 
32 Besprechung, 2. Dez. 1938,SM, 1458/1/156, Bl. 20每6. 33 Allianz an das RAA, 18. M.rz 1938,BAK,B 280/1480, Bl. 22每7. 34 AZLB, F 271147. 35 AZLB, F 220318. 
lawyer had a 50,000每gold mark policy taken out in 1925 that was to reach term in 1947. However, the policyholder chose to convert it to a paid-up policy in 1930. In early 1939, he asked for a payment in advance on the repurchase value of his policy, assuming that it would be 6,764 RM, but he received only 3,571 RM. He complained to Allianz in a letter dated April 27 and received the following reply: 
If you read the addendum precisely, then you will fnd that the premium-free insurance sum is given, not as RM 11,364, but rather as GM 11,364 (1 GM = 10/42 USA$). The insurance sum originally was namely GM 50,000 with the provision that 1 GM = 10/42 USA$. The measure of value of the insurance, therefore, was the USA$. When this was devalued in 1933, you along with all other insured were offered the insurance at a rate of RM 4.20 for a USA$. You did not pay attention to our offer and we therefore informed youonJune 7, 1934 that we will continue your insurance on a dollar basis and will mea-sure our obligation according to the dollar rate at the time. You have accordingly also paid the supplementary premiums for the prepayment granted to you at the going dol-lar rate for Reichsmark. On the basis of the law of 26. August 1938 and the orders of the RAA connected with this law, the policy had to be changed into a policy denomi-nated in Reichsmark. In accordance with the rate agreed upon with the RAA of RM 2.50 for one USA$, there was an insurance sum of RM 6,764. Naturally the advance payment granted on the 6,000 GM was transformed according to the dollar value of the Reichs-mark. The prepayment is therefore now 3,571 and supplementary premiums will also be charged only for this amount. 
The policyholder, however, still found the situation insupportable, since he had been making supplementary premium payments 每 presumably in order to qual-ify for prepayments in 1935 and 1937 on the basis of the original gold mark value. Now, when he desperately needed the money to pay the levy on the Jews, he was getting far less than that which the company had led him to believe was his due a short time earlier. He therefore did ※not consider it permissable that the insur-ance be continued on another basis without my express agreement.§ As Allianz explained, however, their position was based on the change required by the law of August 26, 1938. At this point, the customer, who was planning to emigrate, decided to cash in not only this policy but his two others and received 10,660 RM from Allianz, which was placed in his blocked account at his bank.36 Clearly, he felt cheated, and the new law certainly gave him good reason for such feelings. Allianz obviously was following the law and, as the correspondence shows, was prepared to give the old dollar rate until the new law was passed. However, the salient point with respect to this man＊s insurance would have held whether he received the money at 4.20 RM to the dollar or 2.50 RM to the dollar: any re-ceived money that was not immediately eaten up by taxes and impositions would not be at his disposal anyway, owing to the exchange regulations governing the rights of emigrants. 
This leads to the second and more important aspect of the foreign exchange regulations imposed on the Jews 每 namely, their role as an effective barrier to 
36 AZLB, F 235862. 
emigrating Jews who wished to gain access to proceeds of their insurance pol-icy cancellations. From its inception, the National Socialist regime had been watchful of how Jews might use insurance as a means of evading the Reich Flight Tax and foreign exchange controls. Thus, on April 6, 1933, an informer in Ham-burg notifed NSDAP leadership in Munich of Jews who were transferring capital abroad by taking out policies with the branches of foreign companies in Ger-many, paying for them with a single premium in RM, and then borrowing as much as 90% of their worth abroad in foreign currency. This led to immediate inquiries by the RAA as well as to measures aimed at plugging this gap in the regulations. Allianz fatly insisted that it never transferred money from its hold-ings at home to its holdings abroad, but the Italian frm Generali admitted that the conditions stated in its existing contracts permitted loans on policies taken out in Germany and suggested that a new regulation might provide for payment only in blocked marks in the case of its German customers.37 
The exchange regulations proved increasingly complicated from the perspec-tive of transferring insurance assets to customers living abroad when the amounts exceeded the allowance. In early 1934, an emigrant could still take as much as 10,000 RM in cash and another 5,000 RM in securities and other forms of paper assets out of the country. On June 23, however, the allowance was reduced to 2,000 RM. Special provision could be made for the transfer of monies for re-purchase of insurance or loans against policies in cases of hardship. Special provisions were also made for Jews emigrating to Palestine. In certain instances, as we have remarked, one could even transfer a policy into the company＊s foreign holdings. It is important to remember that the insurance business was subject to favored treatment with respect to the foreign exchange regulations, and corre-spondence with customers in the earlier years of the regime suggests a measure of confdence and fexibility with respect to the management of their assets that soon became less relevant as the regulations tightened.38 
An interesting illustration of this process 每 and of relations between the com-pany and a Jewish customer 每 is provided by case of a theatrical agent who fed Germany for Paris in 1933. 39 He ceased to pay the premiums on a 10,000-RM policy taken out in 1928 and, after warning letters from Allianz went unan-swered, was informed that the policy had been transformed into paid-up life insurance but could be reinstated in its previous form if he decided to pay pre-miums again. In January 1934, the policyholder fnally replied: 
I took out a policy with you some years ago and paid the premiums for many years. In the meantime, I have been summarily fred from my semi-public position on April 1, 1933 
37 See Auskunftei Kramer an die Reichsleitung der NSDAP, 6. April 1933, and the ensuing corre-
spondence in BAK, R 3104/3. 38 Rundschreiben 63/34 of 10.Feb. 1934 of the Reichsverband der Privatversicherung, GDV, RS/5, 
and Rundschreiben 278/34 of 2. Aug. 1934, ibid., RS/6. See also Walk, Sonderrecht, Nr. I 409 
(p. 84) and Nr. II 147 (p. 160). 39 AZLB, S 1886079. 
because of the National Movement and have been robbed of every possibility of carrying on my career in Germany. I therefore saw myself forced to leave Germany without a job and without means and to try to fnd the possibility of an existence in France. I present these facts initially to justify my previous silence. 
He wanted to know if the policy still had any value, and was told by Allianz that it was worth 950 RM but could not be cashed in for another year. The policyholder, whose wife had remained in Germany, seems actually to have cor-responded with Allianz about paying the necessary premiums and renewing the policy, fnally deciding against it in July 1934 ※because I have learned that accord-ing to the new legislation that, in the case of the demise of the insured, payments to Germans who have lost their profession in their homeland under the pressure of the National Socialist Revolution are not allowed to be compensated.§ 
The legal department of Allianz responded almost immediately, assuring him that he was misinformed: 
The view that under the newest German legislation the payment of an insurance obliga-tion that has fallen due is not permitted upon the decease of a domestic person who has emigrated in connection with the German Revolution is in no way correct. On the con-trary, the German currency regulation has shown wide-reaching consideration for the insurance industry and has allowed it to maintain its considerable foreign business as be-fore. What is involved is by and large certain limitations and control measures which are chiefy intended to prevent emigrating domestic persons from being in a position to bring a substantial portion of their domestic wealth abroad without any control. What is to be prevented therefore is the fight of capital. Any reservation that one is dealing with cap-ital fight basically and naturally does not at all exist if one is dealing with the death or the insurance payments becoming due on a policy taken out by a foreigner. In such cases there are only certain limitations with respect to the taking of the replacement value, prepayments (loans on the policy), and by clearing questions, while insurance payment obligations arising through death or the coming to term of the policy are easily permit-ted payment on the basis of an empowerment to make payment repeatedly given us at regular intervals. 
For such payment, death was always viewed as a qualifying hardship that ex-cluded all suspicion of capital fight; his wife would certainly get the money. Apparently, this reassured the policyholder enough to maintain the policy be-cause, in June 1936, Allianz was again insisting that his wife would be paid in the event of his death and that the foreign exchange agency regularly gave the permission required. By this time, however, foreign exchange regulations had be-come tougher. Allianz informed him that payment of the policy to him abroad would depend on the ※foreign exchange situation.§ In the following year, both the policyholder and his wife went abroad, which made them both ※currency foreigners.§ Needless to say, they could no longer gain access to their asset un-less they returned to Germany, which they happily did not do. The policy was reported to the revenue authorities in 1942 under the decree of November 25, 1941 (discussed later in this chapter), and in 1960 Allianz sent a letter to the pol-icyholder in Paris offering him a special policy arrangement for persons over 85. 
No response was received; although the compensation due was calculated, there is no evidence of what happened subsequently. 
What makes this case interesting is the peculiar combination of normality and abnormality in the relationship between the company and its customer. On the one hand, the Allianz legal department clearly was genuinely interested in maintaining the policy and helping its customer to understand and deal with the government regulations. No attention whatever was paid to the political comments of the customer except to suggest to him that he underestimated the goodwill and fairness of the regulations, a belief reinforced at Allianz by the spe-cial treatment of the insurance industry with respect to currency matters. On the other hand, the policyholder himself was genuinely uncertain about what to do. He was justifably angry at the regime that had put him into this situation and was uncertain about whether his wife should join him in exile and whether or not to continue his policy. Fortunately, he and his wife seem fnally to have made the right existential decision and so were spared the terrible events of 1938 and what was to follow. 
The role played by the currency and exchange regulations was thus of cen-tral importance because they effectively denied Jews the possibility of taking their insurance proceeds with them when they emigrated. Insofar as they had any money left after paying the Reich Flight Tax, the later Jewish asset tax, and other impositions, they had the choice of either leaving their money in a blocked account that could only be used in Germany 每 sometimes for relatives who stayed behind 每 or cashing in what money they had for a pittance of its worth at the gold discount bank. 
The signifcance of foreign exchange and currency controls for the confs-cation of Jewish insurance and other assets is not, however, exhausted by the regulations themselves. The organizational structures connected with these con-trols also played a crucial role, especially because of changes that took place in 1936每1937. In August 1936, Ging created a Foreign Exchange Investigation Bureau in Berlin, which he placed under Himmler＊s right-hand man in the SS, Security Police Chief Reinhard Heydrich. As a result, not only the customs in-vestigation bureaus but also the foreign exchange and currency bureaus became subject to instructions from the more ruthless and fanatically anti-Semitic ele-ments in the regime. One of the concrete consequences of this change was a decision taken at the end of 1936 that allowed the foreign exchange agencies to take control of the disposition of all assets of anyone suspected of capital fight, and this came to mean all Jews planning to emigrate. Despite the frictions this created between the Finance Ministry and the SS, these changes proved to be an important administrative bridge between the indirect and direct confscation of insurance and other assets from blocked accounts. What was missing, how-ever, was an informational bridge, and this was created by the decree of April 26, 1938, on the reporting of Jewish assets, which required all Jews with over 5,000 RM in assets to give a full and complete statement of their holdings, by category and worth, as of the date of the decree and to update it yearly. The head of the Four-Year Plan was empowered ※to take measures that are necessary to secure the mobilization of the assets subject to reporting for the beneft of the German economy.§40 This meant that the Nazi authorities would now have a list of a large proportion of the policies and policy numbers owned by Jews that was provided by the Jews themselves. Thus, a substantial amount of administra-tive and informational machinery was in place prior to the Pogrom of November 1938, and naturally this facilitated the confscation of Jewish assets. In the case of insurance, most confscation remained indirect 每 that is, it was subsequent to monetization of the policies. By early 1939, the processes of indirect confsca-tion were becoming barely distinguishable from those of direct confscation. 
Whether direct or indirect, however, one must emphasize the importance of monetization in the confscation of insurance assets, since their value was based on the payment of premiums and since both the face value and the dividends depended on collection by the insured or on his or her ※behalf.§ This made insurance policies different from securities, which the Reich Finance Ministry permitted to be used as payment where cash was not available to pay the Reich Flight Tax, installments on the atonement tax, or fees necessary for emigration.41 In such instances, securities were deposited to the account of the Prussian State Bank, known as the Seehandlung. Dividends could then be paid into these ac-counts, and the shares could also be marketed if the government chose to do so. An examination of 30,000 (or 15%) of the 200,000 Allianz shares issued before and during 1928, for example, reveals that some 761 were forcibly sold to the Seehandlung between 1939 and 1944, 686 in 1939, 54 in 1940, 12 in 1941, 7 in 1942, and 2 in 1944. The evidence from this source indicates that about 2.5%of Allianz＊s shares were held by Jews.42 These shares were deposited to the account of the Seehandlung at the shareholder＊s bank, and Allianz paid dividends to the account and apparently continued to correspond with the original shareholders insofar as they could be located. In 1941, for example, Allianz sought to con-tact Heinrich Jacobi in Mannheim, who held 60 shares worth 11,880 RM (each share was worth 198 RM on the market). When the letter was returned as unde-liverable, Allianz wrote to the Deutsche Bank branch in Mannheim, which had deposited his 1940 dividend, and was informed that Jacobi had been deported to an unknown address.43 This, then, was a procedure very different from the confscation of life insurance assets, yet in both cases the regime was profting 
40 Walk, Sonderrecht, Nr. II 457 (p. 223), and Verordnung er die Anmeldung des Vermens von 
Juden vom 26. April 1938,∫5, Abs. 1,in RGBl 1938, Teil I, pp. 414每15. On the organizational mea-
sures see Frank Bajohr, ※Arisierung§ in Hamburg. Die Verdr.ngung der jischen Unternehmer 
1933每1945 [Hamburger Beitr.ge zur Sozial-und Zeitgeschichte, Bd. 35] (Hamburg, 1997), pp. 
190每5; Mehl, Reichsfnanzministerium, pp. 24每31. 41 Ibid., pp. 81每4. 42 These calculations have been made from eight available books of shareholder listings by the re-
search team at the Center for Corporate History of Allianz AG. 43 Allianz an Deutsche Bank Mannheim, 24. Dez. 1941 and reply of 29. Dez. 1941, HADB, Filiale 
Mannheim, Polizeipr.sident/Finanzamt, HC-I. 
from assets related to Allianz and other insurance companies even though Al-lianz could in no way be considered to have gained from the asset＊s transfer. Only where Allianz (or one of its chief shareholders) was in a position to pur-chase Jewish-held shares directly, as we have shown in the case of real estate, could there be a private proft. Such an instance was the sale of a large block of the Allianz-controlled Berlinische Lebensversicherungs-Gesellschaft AG to the house bank of Allianz, Merck, Finck & Co. in the summer of 1939 by the pri-vate Jewish banking house of Samuel Neumann. The shares of Berlinische Leben were not traded on the open market, and Neumann had purchased the shares at the request of one of the Berlinische Leben directors. They viewed the price they received as well below the worth of the shares, which it was subsequently adjudged to be in the postwar restitution proceedings.44 
direct expropriation of jewish life insurance assets 
The expropriation of Jewish assets was a theme with a number of variations, and it is now necessary to turn our attention to the direct confscation of Jewish insurance assets. This had different foundations from the indirect confscation in connection with tax and other currency and fnancial obligations discussed previously. The basis for direct confscation already existed in the Law for the Repeal of Nationalization and Recognition of German Citizenship of July 14, 1933, and the accompanying Law for the Seizure of Assets of Enemies of the Peo-ple and the State of the same date, which allowed the government to confscate the assets of Communists and other designated enemies of the regime who had gone abroad.45 The confscation of the assets of Jews and others deprived of cit-izenship was centralized in the revenue offce of Moabit-West, which was under the command of the chief regional revenue offcer of Berlin 每 after February 1942, Berlin-Brandenburg. Some use of this legislation was made to confscate Jew-ish assets throughout the 1930s, particularly of Jews who had emigrated and those who had aroused the ire of the regime through their activities abroad. The names of those deprived of citizenship were normally published in the off-cial government journal (Reichsanzeiger), and the Gestapo then proceeded to inform the relevant banks and insurance companies that the assets in question were confscated and were to be turned over to the fnancial authorities. The lists of names were also published regularly in the form of circulars sent out by the Reich Group for Insurance to its members. This meant that repurchase values were to be calculated by the insurance company and the sum transferred to the designated revenue offce. In April 1939, for example, the Gestapo informed Al-lianz of the revocation of the citizenship of a Munich lawyer, his wife, and his four children 每 all of whom had emigrated to Australia 每 and announced that 
44 
For this case, see WG., 62 WGA 3397/51 (Peter Newman, frer Neumann). 45 Walk, Sonderrecht, Nr. I 172 (p. 36) and Nr. I 177 (p. 38); Mehl, Reichsfnanzministerium, p. 33. 
their property was confscated. Allianz was asked to pay the repurchase value of the 10,000-RM policy, which came to 3,611.85 RM, to the revenue offce in Moabit-West, from whom the company subsequently received a receipt. It is in-teresting to note that this policyholder had been paying premiums up until this time from his emigrant blocked account, an arrangement he had made with the company in return for the company＊s assurance that it would ultimately pay the proceeds of the insurance into the blocked account when the policy fell due in 1952. 46 It is indeed true that where there is life there is hope, and this was by no means the only Jewish emigrant who maintained a life insurance policy through premiums from a blocked account and apparently entertained the illu-sion that something might come of such an investment in the end. In October 1941, for example, the regional revenue offce in Moabit-West demanded and received the repurchase value 每 in this case, over 60,000 RM 每 of an unusually high 100,000-RM life insurance policy of a denaturalized German Jew living in the United States that he had taken out with the Cologne branch offce of a Swiss insurance company. He, too, had paid his premiums through his agent in Germany. In other cases, of course, the policyholder had already cancelled the policy, received the money, and placed it in his or her blocked account. In such cases, Allianz duly reported to the Gestapo that the policy had been paid and to whom.47 
The initiative to terminate insurance policies in these cases clearly came from the Gestapo and other relevant authorities, and it is diffcult to tell how much en-ergy the companies themselves demonstrated in dealing with the lists provided by the insurance industry＊s peak associations. By 1938每1939, those lists were growing in size and were being augmented constantly owing to the stepped-up measures against the Jews. On September 15, 1939, the Economic Group for Pri-vate Insurance announced that it would no longer circulate the names published by the government 每 in order to save paper but also because the publications were losing value since they came out so late owing to the load of work at the Reich Printing Offce. Member companies were now referred to the offcial an-nouncements themselves.48 
The piecemeal approach to revocation of Jewish citizenship and confscation of Jewish property came to an end in November 1941 with the issuance of the 11th Decree of the Reich Citizenship Law of November 25, 1941. This decree had been long in preparation, the frst discussions taking place in the Ministry of the Interior on January 15, 1941. Sometime in March, Hitler was engaged directly in the matter and was reported to have issued an order; but when mem-bers of the Foreign Offce asked to see it, they did not receive an order bearing Hitler＊s signature but rather a letter from the head of the Party chancellory and the Minister of the Interior stating that ※the Frer wishes purely and simply the 
46 AZLB, F 239003. 47 AZLB, F 234839, and a policy placed at the author＊s disposal by the policyholder＊s heirs. 48 Rundschreiben B197/39 der Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung, 15. Sept. 1939,GDV,RS/19. 
withdrawal of citizenship from Jews living abroad and the confscation of their property.§49 Apparently, there had been a disagreement as to which Jews were to fall under the decree, and Hitler had resolved the confict in this manner. At the same time, however, the projected decree became linked with plans to deport Jews from Germany, which may help to explain the delay in its issuance. Even in early November there were objections to the draft of the decree from the For-eign Offce and military authorities, who were fearful that the measure would lead other nations to seize German assets abroad in retaliation.50 
Undoubtedly, had banks and insurance companies been consulted about the 11th Decree, they also would have expressed reservations and objections 每 espe-cially with regard to section 7, which read: 
All persons who are in possession of some portion of the forfeited assets or who have lia-bilities to it are to report the thing in their possession or the debt to the superior revenue offce president in Berlin after the forfeiture goes into effect. Whoever violates this re-porting obligation deliberately or through negligence, will be punished by jail for up to three months or a fne.51 
This was nothing less than an effort to shift the responsibility for locating, iden-tifying, and surrendering Jewish assets to the nongovernmental sector, above all to banks and insurance companies. Thus, the reporting and confscation of Jewish assets was turned into a requirement by the 11th Decree of the Reich Citizenship Law of November 25, 1941, whose basic provisions mandated the revocation of citizenship and the confscation of assets of all German Jews who were regularly residing abroad. By this time, of course, most of those who had not emigrated were being deported to ghettos or concentration camps in the East. Jews deported to such places were viewed as having ※regular residence abroad§ and were now systematically deprived of their citizenship. Indeed, the decree was directly connected with the effort to deport all Jews remaining in the Reich who had not already been deported under an order issued on November 4, 1941, mandating the transfer of all Jews not employed in plants important to the war effort. On June 1, 1943,a 13th Decree to the Reich Citizenship Law 
49 Vermerkereine BesprechungimAusw.rtigen Amtam 7.Nov. 1941, Bundesarchiv-Milit.rarchiv, RW 19/1584, Bl. 170每3. There is an excellent discussion of the decree in Hans Gther Adler, Der verwaltete Mensch. Studien zur Deportation der Juden aus Deutschland (Tingen, 1974), pp. 491每545. 
50 See the Vermerk of 7.Nov. 1941, Bundesarchiv-Milit.rarchiv, RW 19/1584, Bl. 170每3. Most remarkable is a letter from Hans Oster, later an important member of the Resistance, of the intel-ligence (Abwehr) branch to the military representative in the Foreign Offce, Gen. Lt. Reinecke, of Nov. 11, 1941, warning not only of setting a dangerous precedent that might lead to retaliatory actions but also, on the one hand, that there were Jews abroad working for German intelligence whose role would be endangered by the measure and, on the other, that it would complicate the punishment of Jewish former citizens for crimes if they were no longer Germans; see ibid., Bl. 168每9. 
51 RGBl, 1941,I,pp. 722每4; Adler, Der verwaltete Mensch, pp. 500每3. 
was issued which declared that the property of all deceased Jews 每 whose num-bers were, of course, increasing dramatically as they were being murdered 每 were the property of the Reich. Finally, because of the massiveness and complexity of the confscations mandated under the 11th Decree, an effort was made to de-centralize the administration of the confscations. The regional revenue offces now became the recipients of the property and assets of the Jews in question, which meant that the collection point no longer was Moabit-West. Neverthe-less, a measure of centralization continued to exist in the person of the chief regional revenue offcer in Berlin-Brandenburg, who was given responsibility for the maintenance of a central registry of those affected by this decree.52 
The November 25, 1941, decree raised serious legal and administrative prob-lems for banks and insurance companies by shifting so much of the responsibility and initiative for searching out accounts and policies of persons living abroad. The banks complained that they could not be certain which of their account holders living abroad were Jews, especially if the names were not clearly Jewish names. Even if the bank knew that a person was a Jew, it did not necessarily know if the individual in question had not taken up some other citizenship before the offcial date set under the decree for losing German citizenship. Under ex-isting laws, persons who requested a foreign citizenship automatically lost their German citizenship, and this would hold especially true for Jews who had em-igrated early. There was also the question of whether an account holder living abroad was doing so temporarily or permanently. The banks were reluctant to take it upon themselves to treat the accounts in question as subject to govern-ment seizure without the express confrmation of the Reich Security Head Offce (Reichssicherheitshauptamt), as required under section 8 of the decree. Other-wise, there was a danger that the reputation of German banks abroad would be damaged and also that they would be liable to lawsuits by the countries that had granted Jews citizenship. Furthermore, since the Gestapo was insistent that the persons involved not be informed of the surrender of their assets to the rev-enue offce, the banks were barred from making the necessary investigations.53 It is important to recognize that the persons in question were not Jews being deported or Jews whose loss of citizenship had been offcially declared prior to 1941, because such actions were considered suffcient in and of themselves to assure the legality of the property confscation; rather, they were emigrants who had sought and gained foreign citizenship. Finally, a further concern of the banks, and especially the closely regulated savings banks, was that they were required by law not to surrender monies in savings accounts without presen-tation of the savings account book; here, too, they wanted protection against future claims and suits. Of course, what the banks were seeking by means of the 
52 Walk, Sonderrecht, Nr. IV 261 (p. 354), Nr. IV 272 (p. 357), and Nr. IV 480 (p. 397); Mehl, 
Reichsfnanzministerium, pp. 89每98. 53 Wirtschaftsgruppe Privates Bankgewerbe an den Reichsminister der Finanzen, 10. Jan. 1942, BAB, 
R 2 /9172b, Bl. 62每3. 
grotesque correspondence on this matter was a shifting of responsibility, both legal and fnancial, to the State. The government sought to provide such relief in the form of procedures under which the Reich Security Offce would act expedi-tiously to confrm that the persons in question were held to have been German citizens on November 27 and were thus liable to property confscation. Simi-larly, the government relieved savings banks of their legal obligation to require savings account books in these cases and assumed responsibility in the event of legitimate fnancial claims against the banks.54 Whether the traditional business principles of equity and good faith had now been preserved, and whether those involved believed this, were of course two entirely different questions. 
The considerations raised by the banks were not irrelevant to the insurance business, since there was no way of telling whether or not an insurance asset whose repurchase value was ordered to be deposited at the regional revenue offce belonged to a Jew who had acquired foreign citizenship prior to November 27, 1941. As far as the material at my disposal is concerned, there is no evidence that the insurance companies raised this particular issue with the same intensity as the banks; the evidence does show that they requested such information from the Gestapo, however. Legal cases did arise with respect to insurance confsca-tions, but these were against Swiss companies operating in Germany and against Swiss reinsurers of German companies. Jewish emigrants took Swiss companies to U.S. court, before and during the war, charging that the Swiss companies had no right to turn their assets over to the German government. Ironically, Ameri-can courts rejected such arguments; they pointed out that, under international law, branches of a foreign company were subject to the laws and regulations of the country in which they operated. In the words of the Supreme Court of the State of New York, ※as for the very obnoxious and offensive character of the Ger-man decrees, the court is obliged to hold that governing law is no less controlling because it is bad law.§55 
Even more ironically, Swiss courts took a more critical stance toward these insurance companies. There was a considerable body of opinion that held that it was also true under international law that the central headquarters of a com-pany was ultimately responsible for the obligations of its branches and, more generally, that the anti-Jewish legislation of the Third Reich violated the Swiss ordre public. Swiss courts decided in favor of Jewish plaintiffs in instances where the policies were payable either in Switzerland or Germany and where a Swiss reinsurance company was the guarantor of a policy taken with a German customer. Naturally, the German authorities sought to assert their position in 
54 
Rundschreiben Nr. 73 vom 21.Mai 1942 und Rundschreiben Nr. 81 vom 5. Juni 1942 der Wirt-
schaftsgruppe Privates Bankgewerbe, ibid., Bl. 105每10; RWM an RFM, 12.Feb. 1942, ibid., Bl. 84. 55 Decisions of the Supreme Court of the State of New York, New York County, Kleve et al. v. 
Baseler Lebens-Versicherungs-Gesellschaft in Basel, Dec. 24, 1943, 182 Misc. 776, 45 N.Y.S. 2d 
882. See also Bloch et al. v. Basler Lebens-Versicherungs-Gesellschaft in Basel, June 24, 1947, 73 N.Y.S. 2d 523. 
negotiationswith theSwiss, andthe ever-compromising Hans Koenigof Schweiz-erische Lebensversicherungs-und Rentenanstalt promised to present the German position to his colleagues for use in future court cases. It is revealing, however, that the Reich Justice Ministry in November 1943 argued against appealing re-cent unwelcome decisions before higher courts, considering it too risky given the attitude in certain Swiss legal circles.56 
At home, of course, the German government did not have to worry about such formalities. Even so, the authors of the 11th Decree had 每 as in the case of the November 9, 1938, Pogrom and the decrees issued in connection with it 每 given little heed to the implications for banks and insurance companies. Under sec-tion 7 of the 11th Decree, banks and insurance companies had six months to report accounts or policies liable to confscation, after which time penalties were to come into force and the companies would also be liable for interest payments. In 1941, there were 85 German-owned life insurance companies in Germany with premium income of over 1 million RM. They had portfolios that included 4.875 million large life policies with a value of 18.9 billion RM and 24.5 million small life policies with a value of 8.9 billion RM. They had also issued group risk in-surance policies involving 1.3 million persons with a value of 18.9 billion RM and other group insurance policies involving 6.2 million persons with a value of 3 billion RM. Additionally, there were four Swiss-owned companies operating in Germany with 80,600 large life policies worth 648 million RM and 108,000 small life policies with a value of 84.5 million RM. They had also issued group policies involving 4,600 persons which were worth 14.7 million RM. Finally, the insurance industry also serviced burial funds for 1.3 million members and pen-sion funds for 152,000 persons.57 Combing through these policies was a massive operation, especially at a time when the number of those working in the insur-ance industry was being reduced to serve the war effort. With the frst deadline approaching, the Economic Group for Life Insurance informed its members in late February 1942 that it had asked the RAA to do something about the im-possible situation, and the RAA stepped in more than once in an effort to deal with the problem. Thus, at a meeting on May 20, 1942, a representative of the RAA informed his colleagues in the Finance Ministry 每 above all Regierungsrat Btcher, president of the revenue offce in Berlin-Brandenburg 每 that the effort to comply was ※diffcult and time consuming§ and that the companies were hav-ing problems in defning the legal status of the Reich in replacing the original 
56 See RJM an RAA, 12.Nov. 1943,SM, 1458/11/229, Bl. 29每30. This volume contains extensive correspondence on the case made against Swiss Re, which had guaranteed a Jewish policy issued by Der Anker Allgemeine Versicherungs-AG in Vienna. For the discussion among Swiss author-ities, German authorities, and insurers concerning cases involving insurance policies issued by Vita Lebensversicherungs-AG giving double places of payment and the claims of emigrants in general and the role of Koenig, see BAR, E 2001 (E) 2/582. 
57 Zusammengefa.ter Gesch.ftsbericht er die T.tigkeit des Reichsaufsichtsamtes f Privatver-sicherung 1939 bis 1945 [Verfentlichungen des Bundesaufsichtsamtes f das Versicherungs-und Bausparwesen, Sonderheft 3] (Berlin, 1955), pp. 64, 80. 
owners of the life insurance policies. Insofar as the delay of the deadline was concerned, the RFM had already taken action on behalf of the banking sector in this respect and now chose a similar solution for the insurance industry 每 namely, periodically suspending the legal penalties for not meeting the deadline without changing the deadline itself. At the same time, the RAA, using its vir-tually dictatorial powers under section 81 of the Reich Insurance Law as revised in 1934, agreed to regulate the legal status of the policies in ways favorable to the Reich. The insurance companies also intended to be as accommodating as possible to the Reich. Thus, while having the right to deduct insurance premi-ums due from the repurchase price, they automatically set December 31, 1941, as the date on which all policies falling under the 11th Decree were offcially ter-minated. In other words, discovery of policies after that date would not lead to further deductions of premiums. Furthermore, the insurance companies agreed to pay a repurchase price on annuities and pensions even though they did not carry repurchase provisions.58 
At a meeting between representatives of the RAA, the Finance Ministry, and the insurance industry on May 29, 1942, the RAA was able to report a half-year suspension of the penalties for noncompliance. They also informed insurers that the Reich would continue the property liability and other forms of insur-ance on property taken from Jews under the 11th Decree until disposition of the properties was determined. No one, of course, objected to continued col-lection of premiums, but the companies did complain that half a year was not enough time to comb through the policies, especially those that were paid up and contained little tell-tale correspondence. Btcher suggested that the com-panies report to him on their progress shortly before the next deadline came up, and he would then show consideration for justifed petitions for exemption from penalties: ※the most important thing is that individual companies can demon-strate at any time that they have not violated their obligation to do their duty.§ A particularly grotesque aspect of the situation was that the Reich, after all, had in a certain sense replaced the Jewish policyholder as a customer itself. This be-came clear when it was pointed out that the Reich did not have to take advantage of the general cancellation date of December 31, 1941, but could opt instead to continue paying premiums on the policy if this seemed advantageous 每 as might indeed be the case with a policy nearing its term. The companies agreed to pay interest on the repurchase values they held until surrendered effective January 1, 1942 (in the case of policies still in force), and as of July 1, 1942 (in the case of paid-up policies). They would also pay to the Reich 75% of the maintained coverage for confscated pensions.59 These provisions did in fact receive codif-cation by President Amend of the RAA in an order to the insurance companies 
58 Rundschreiben vom 23.Feb. 1942,GDV, RS/30, and Niederschrift, Sitzung am 15.Mai 1942 im 
Reichsfnanzministerium, BAB, R 2 /9172b, Bl. 91每4. 59 Niederschrift, Sitzung am 29.Mai 1942 im RAA; RAA Rundschreiben vom 29. Juli 1942, ibid., 
Bl. 123每4, 127. 
of June 29, under which insurance policies on Jewish assets forfeited to the Reich were to remain in force until the Reich decided to terminate them. Concerning life insurance policies, Amend provided that ※the Reich can continue individual policies by further payment of the scheduled premiums, if it asks for the con-tinuation of already reported insurance policies within three months after the appearance of this writing and by renewal requests up to the reporting date of the end of the quarter following on the proximate quarter.§60 
Despite such opportunities, the government found itself having to continue to grant de facto (if not de jure) extensions to the insurance companies on into 1943 and 1944, and the situation was made more complicated by still other factors. The Gestapo was too stretched in its duties and obligations to provide con-frmations under section 8 in a timely manner, and insurance companies were authorized to send the superior revenue offce in Berlin-Brandenburg a copy of its inquiry with the Gestapo in order to demonstrate that the inquiry had been made and that a response would be forthcoming. Probably the most serious complication, however, resulted from the Allied air forces, whose bombing mis-sions were destroying insurance policies in ways that were making it diffcult for the companies to service their regular customers, let alone Btcher＊s offce in Berlin-Brandenburg.61 Under such circumstances, the insurance companies could hardly have been expected to show an excess of enthusiasm and diligence with respect to the 11th Decree. There is no visible evidence that this had any-thing to do with resistance or sympathy for those being dispossessed so much as the sheer absurdity of being asked to comb through millions of policies under such conditions and for such purposes. Where the task was easy, however, it was carried out. Thus, on May 19, 1942, Allianz reminded its branches of the re-sponsibility to report the pensions and other claims of former Jewish employees as required under the 11th Decree by the next deadline 每 and also of the penalties involved in failure to do so.62 
What kind of evidence does Allianz＊s collection of insurance policies provide with respect to implementation of the 11th Decree? The frst point to be made is that most of the policies paid out directly to authorities of the Third Reich were paid out before the decree 每 in the form of cancellations that went directly to the revenue offces at the request of the customer or into blocked accounts that had to be dealt with by the banks, not the insurers. A second point is that the task of discovering Jewish assets often remained in the hands of the authorities. A good illustration is provided by a Frankfurt policyholder who had taken out a 20-year policy in 1926 for 60,000 RM. This was turned into a premium-free policy at the request of the policyholder at the end of 1938. Subsequently, the 
60 Schreiben Amend, 29. Juli 1942,BAK,B 280/1880, Bl. 4. 
61 On the problems of the Gestapo, see Rundschreiben Wirtschaftsgruppe Lebens-und Krankenver-
sicherung, 14. April 1943,GDV, RS/30, which also contains numerous Rundschreiben concerning 
loss of insurance policies. 62 Rundschreiben of 19.Mai 1942 signed by Lux and Seyffert, FHA, O 1.4.2 /31. 

Cover of the life-insurance fle of the customer whose policy was shown on p. 242. After the insured had emigrated to Beirut in 1935, the policy was transformed into a paid-up policy free of premiums at a value of 1,880 RM. This amount was to be paid out when the contract expired on January 1, 1946.On March 30, 1943, Allianz Leben reported about this policy to the president of the revenue offce of Berlin-Brandenburg in accordance with the 11th Decree of the Reich Citizenship Law. The sum insured was not requested by the offce probably because the citizenship of the customer had remained unclear. In 1952, Allianz Leben paid out the policy to the insured. 
policyholder emigrated to England, but it was only on July 6, 1943, that the rev-enue offce informed Allianz that the policy fell under the 11th Decree and asked for the repurchase value; Allianz then paid 29,218 RM to the revenue offce on July 27. The signifcant point is that this was an obviously Jewish policy (because of its conversion at the end of 1938) but nevertheless was not found or reported by Allianz; rather, it was cashed in at the demand of the revenue offce.63 Mat-ters went much more ※smoothly§ in the case of deported Jews, since there was a procedure in place involving fairly rapid acquisition of the monies collected from repurchase. For example, Samuel and Nora Hellmann of Wzburg, before their deportation, were forced to sign over their life insurance policy with Berli-nische Lebensversicherungs-Gesellschaft and two other life insurance policies to the Bavarian district offce of the Reich Association of Jews in Germany. As was so often the case once the war started, Jewish organizations were used to collect the assets of the deported, thus making confscation easier and more effcient. Within two weeks after their departure for Theresienstadt at the end of July 1942, the money from the repurchase had been collected, a total of 3,388 RM, more than enough to cover the ※home purchase contract§ of 2,500 RM for their domicile in Theresienstadt. It was a measure of the bureaucratic scrupulousness of Berlinische Lebensversicherungsgesellschaft that the company had insisted on Gestapo permission before turning the money over to the Reich Association.64 
A third point is that there was often a considerable time gap between the is-suance of the decree and the identifcation and transfer of insurance assets. A good illustration was a Jewish businessman from Baden who wrote to Allianz in April 1940 asking advice about changing his 25-year 10,000-GM policy, taken out in 1925, into a paid-up policy so that ※later, when the time of my emigration comes into prospect, to consider possibly repurchasing it.§ Allianz responded within ten days and urged him to maintain the policy in force if possible. In late January 1941, they sent him another letter urging him to pay his premium, and in February 1941 Allianz tried to locate him through the Residents＊ Regis-tration Offce 每 only to discover that ※he and his family were deported to an unknown destination on October 23, 1940.§ Nevertheless, Allianz went through all the formalities connected with the policy, writing to his old address in March 1941 asking for payment of his premium plus interest, and then sending the stan-dard form letter on April cancelling the policy and subsequently transforming it into a paid-up policy worth 5,298 RM to be paid either on the death of the in-sured or on April 1, 1950. Unknown to Allianz, as postwar correspondence with the policyholder＊s daughter showed, the policyholder and his wife were killed in 1942. Needless to say, this would not have mattered at all given the 11th Decree: the policy was easily identifable as belonging to a Jew, and it contained cor-respondence demonstrating that he was ※regular resident abroad§ well before November 27, 1941. Nevertheless, it was not until February 8, 1943, that Allianz 
63 HessHStA, Wiedergutmachungsakten, Wsb-566. 64 Adler, Der verwaltete Mensch, pp. 832每4. 
wrote once again to the Residents＊ Registration Offce about the policyholder＊s whereabouts. They reported the repurchase value of the policy to the president of the revenue offce in Berlin-Brandenburg a month later and fnally sent the money to the offce for the Administration of Jewish and Enemy-of-the-Reich Property of the Mannheim revenue offce on November 12, 1943. 65 
Once again, there is no reason to construe the leisurely pace of these expropri-ations as ※resistance.§ The available evidence suggests that Allianz employees duly reported Jewish policies qualifying under the 11th Decree as they found them. Moreover, the revenue offces did not always proceed with alacrity, so that months would sometimes pass between reporting to Berlin-Brandenburg and collection by the regional revenue offce. What is unsettling is the matter-of-fact quality to the entire business and the sense one has of a brutal depersonaliza-tion of the life insurance business 每 the inclination to treat the Nazi State as some kind of natural successor to the former Jewish policyholder. This is exemplifed not only by the discussions in the RAA and RFM about perpetuating certain policies in order to maximize their return to the government 每 which also meant maximizing their return to the company 每 but in more concrete ways, too. This can be seen in the case of a 44-year-old Jewish men＊s clothing manufacturer from Munich. In April 1942, Allianz was still sending him bills for premiums due on the 25-year 10,000-RM policy he had taken out in 1931. The policyholder had paid premiums in 1940.In 1942, however, Allianz received a reply from the poli-cyholder＊s legal adviser or consultant that read: ※I am required to inform you that Herr Israel G. was assigned to emigrant transport from Munich already on No-vember 20, 1941 and that he, as every other evacuated person, was provided with a declaration under which his property will be declared forfeit in favor of the Ger-man Reich.§ The consultant suggested that Allianz write to the regional revenue offce in Munich and ask if they wished to pay the premiums. This was promptly done by the relevant offce of Allianz, which asked whether the revenue offce wished to pay the premiums or dissolve the policy and collect the repurchase value. The correspondence continued with the revenue offce asking for more details about the policy. In the meantime, another premium became due and the bill was sent to the address of Herr G. In July 1942, however, Allianz wrote again to the revenue offce, pointing out that a decision had to be made because the policy was losing value through the failure to pay premiums. In this instance, as was indeed probably the case most of the time, the revenue offce decided it had a greater interest in securing cash than in playing successor to the policyholder. It cancelled the policy and requested the repurchase value of 2,820.10 RM.66 
Obviously, those responsible for dealing with this case at Allianz were quite ready and prepared to replace one ※customer§ with another 每 in this case, a customer who had paid premiums for almost a decade with one who had de-spoiled and probably murdered him 每 while the revenue offce assumed the role of ※trustee§ for the deported Jew who had taken out the insurance. It was another 
65 AZLB, F 235590. 66 AZLB, F 274892. Policyholder treated as anonymous by author. 
legal charade, not as complicated and opaque as the one put on in connection with insurance ※payments§ for the November 1938 Pogrom but well in keep-ing with the deviousness and disingenuousness that characterized the systematic robbery of the Jews. For reasons already explained in connection with the events of 1938, the number of German Jewish life insurance policies subject to the 11th Decree probably was relatively small, and even a company (e.g., Isar) with many such policies probably lost most of its Jewish customers in the course of 1938每 1939 through policy cancellations. The diffculty in fnding the Jewish policies subject to direct confscation was indicative of this. 
In one exceptional case, however, there was a substantial number of easily identifable Jewish insurance policies: the Austrian Jewish policies in the port-folio of Deutscher Ring .sterreichische Lebensversicherung-AG. The number was large because Phix Life was much favored by Jews, and the policies were more easily identifable because of the effciency and speed with which the Aus-trians identifed Jewish assets after the Anschlu..67 Furthermore, the policies taken over from Phix Life in Austria had certain special qualities deriving from the arrangements made when the concern collapsed in 1936. These poli-cies were subject to special restrictions, which made borrowing on them (or their cancellation) either very diffcult or impossible. 
Even before the 11th Decree, the revenue offces in Vienna and in Moabit-West had a substantial number of Jewish-owned Phix Life policies on their hands as security for payment of taxes and especially for payment of the Jewish assets tax of 1938. Moabit-West offcials were particularly irked by the special conditions attached to the policies and sought some means of monetizing them rapidly; in the summer of 1941 they were negotiating with the Zentralkasse Norddeutscher Volksbanken about selling the Phix Life portfolio it had been building up in order to obtain cash. No agreement had been reached when the 11th Decree came into force and substantially increased the number and value of the poli-cies subject to confscation. Deutscher Ring, however, argued that the policies should be held in its own portfolio until they came to term, and it sought to block the sale of the portfolio. Its views were shared by the RAA, which felt that there was no rush since the policies were guaranteed by the entire industry. However, Regierungsrat Btcher of the Berlin-Brandenburg offce was not at all taken with this delaying tactic; as he pointed out in December 1942: 
The death rate of the Jews in question has, as experience has shown, increased greatly. Among the many emigrated Jews it will hardly or never be possible to provide evidence for death. As a consequence, the purchaser or cessionary of the policies will have regu-larly to await the due dates of the policy and must therefore renounce proft from [the policyholder＊s] early death, which will therefore bring Deutscher Ring a special consid-erable proft. But a purchaser of the policies has tied up his substantial means for a long period and therefore performs a valuable service as option holder.68 
67 See the important discussion of the Austrian ※model§ in Friedlander, Nazi Germany and the Jews, 
Ch. 8. 68 Denkschrift Btcher, 1. Dez. 1942,BAB,R 2 /13531, Bl. 41每4. 
Btcher, who certainly had a good idea of what was happening to the Jews, wanted the Phix Life portfolio treated as a type of security; he justifed this stance in terms of the guarantee given for them by the insurance frms at the time of the Phix Life collapse in 1936. Securities can be bought and sold and, from his point of view, it was more important to get cash for the Reich imme-diately by selling the portfolio than to allow Deutscher Ring to enrich itself by holding on to the assets until they matured. The issue was fnally settled when Deutscher Ring agreed to pay 20 million RM to the Finance Ministry in return for being allowed to absorb the bonds that had been guaranteeing the policies. In this way, both the Finance Ministry and the insurance company were able to secure for themselves the benefts of these policies. In August 1944, Deutscher Ring Hamburg paid 1 million RM to the revenue offce in Vienna-Niederdonau, while Deutscher Ring Vienna paid 5 million RM. In addition to this down pay-ment of 6 million RM, the other insurance companies in Austria reported paying 1.4每1.5 RM under the 11th Decree to the fnance authorities in repurchase value on confscated Jewish life insurance assets.69 
As in Austria, so in the ※Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia§; the late-comers in the business of confscating Jewish assets were able to proceed with greater thoroughness and brutality than had been the case in the Old Reich. As early as April 29, 1939, the Interior Ministry issued instructions that Jewish insurance policyholders were forbidden from changing the terms of their poli-cies and could only receive insurance payments into blocked accounts of a se-lected group of banks. Although Jews were allowed to receive a certain amount of payment from insurance companies and to withdraw a certain amount of money from their accounts without permission, the regulations were progres-sively tightened.70 
The discussion here has concentrated on the confscation of life insurance assets, but it is important to bear in mind that the Jews were increasingly denied the right to insurance itself. This was most explicit and direct in the case of pri-vate health insurance, where the branch group for private health insurance had petitioned the Economics Ministry as early as 1935 to exclude Jewish customers. By this time, numerous health insurance companies had already written the ex-clusion of Jews into their general insurance conditions or had instructed their agents not to sign up Jews. As the branch group pointed out, 
the companies were not only compelled to take these measures for reasons of world view, but also because the Jewish insured turned out to be the subjectively worst risks and 
69 
A fuller documentation of this case and its postwar aftermath is to be found in .StA-AdR, BMF, 
VA, Karton 329, Akte 80/1. See especially .sterreichische Lebensversicherung-AG Deutscher 
Ring an das Staatsamt f Finanzen, Versicherungsausfsichtsbehde, 18. Juni 1945, with ap-
pended Aktennotiz, and the Verband der Versicherungsanstalten .sterreichs an das Bundesmi-
nisterium f Finanzen, Versicherungsaufsichtsbehde, 2. M.rz 1946. 70 See Tomas Jelinek, ※Insurance in the Nazi Occupied Czech Lands: Preliminary Findings,§ in J. D. 
Bindenagel (ed.), Washington Conference on Holocaust-Era Assets November 30每December 3, 
1998, Proceedings (Washington, D.C., 1999), pp. 612每15. 
grossly exploited the community of insured to the detriment of the insured of German origin. One could not therefore expect the Aryan insured to belong to a community of risk with the Jewish insured.71 
The RWM had turned down the group＊s exclusionary request on the grounds that subordinate bodies were not to undertake such measures unless and until legislative measures had been enacted. In November 1938, however, the branch group was emboldened 每 by the recent decree on the exclusion of Jews from Ger-man economic life 每 to renew their request because the decree had excluded Jews from participation in cooperatives effective January 1, 1939. The similarity be-tween cooperatives and insurance mutuals was so great, it was argued, that one could also exclude Jews from health insurance. Such an interpretation was all the more necessary because many insurance companies did not have the right to terminate the policies of members after three or fve years, so that the member-ship of Jews who had joined before 1933 could often not be terminated.72 
The ※problem§ in question exercised the corrupt talents of Franz Schlegel-berger of the Justice Ministry, who had distinguished himself by perverting civil law in the service of the regime.73 He did not think the issue fell under the decree excluding Jews from economic life, but he also did not think that a special law was necessary. The desired goal could be attained instead by measures of the RAA. If one accepted the proposition (as Schlegelberger obviously did) that Jews were the worst possible risk then the distinction between mutuals and corpora-tions was irrelevant, since both were communities of risk and thus were entitled to protect themselves. They could do so by agreeing not to insure Jews and by terminating the policies of Jews, insofar as their statutes allowed this. Where the statutes did not allow termination of Jewish policies, however, the RAA could step in and require that Jews 每 as especially severe risks 每 be required to pay ex-ceptionally large premiums.74 In the end, Amend used his sweeping powers to settle the matter in an RAA decree of April 13, 1940, under which the private health insurance companies were ordered to change their business plans in such a way that ※Jews could neither take out insurance nor be insured.§75 All policies held by Jews were to be terminated as of April 30, 1940, and no further premi-ums were to be collected from them; premiums already paid for the period after that date were to be returned. Non-Jewish relations of Jews could continue their insurance. The decree did not encompass special Jewish health insurance organi-zations. Thus, the fve-year effort by private providers of health insurance to have a legal basis for excluding their Jewish customers had fnally met with success. 
71 Fachgruppe Private Krankenversicherung an den Reichswirtschaftsminister, 14.Nov. 1938,SM, 1458/1/98, Bl. 19每20. 
72 
Ibid. 73 SeeMichael Fster, Jurist im Dienst des Unrechts: Lebenund Werk des ehemaligenStaatssekret.rs 
im Reichsjustizministerium, Franz Schlegelberger, 1876每1970 (Berlin, 1995). 74 Schlegelberger an den Reichswirtschaftsminister, 31. Jan. 1939,SM, 1458/1/98, Bl. 57每8. 75 Amend an die privaten Krankenversicherungsunternehmungen, 13. April 1940,BAB,R 22 /2017, 
Bl. 112. 
No similar effort seems to have been made with respect to other forms of in-surance, but the exclusion of Jews from economic life effectively meant a steady reduction of Jewish customers. Since Jewish lawyers and other professionals could no longer practice, they ceased to take out liability insurance. In the case of doctors, the government took away their right to treat all but Jewish patients effective October 1, 1938, under the 4th Decree of the Reich Citizenship Law.76 Allianz reacted to this action by instructing that all professional liability insur-ance for Jewish doctors was to terminate on that date. There was to be no reimbursement for premiums paid for the year, but premiums paid in install-ments and due after September 30, 1938, were not to be billed. It was made clear that only professional liability insurance policies 每 not other forms of liability in-surance, covered in combined liability policies 每 were to be terminated and that premiums were to be reduced accordingly.77 The ultimate worth of the little insurance Jews held may be gathered from the fact that all insurance claim pay-ments to Jews exceeding 500 RM had to be reported to the revenue offces. Here, as elsewhere, the likely benefciary of Jewish policies would be the Nazi State.78 
The decision about insuring Jews appears to have rested with the companies themselves, and it is depressing to record that Allianz took action very rapidly after the November Pogrom. At its expanded meeting of directors on Novem-ber 29 that was held in connection with the recent anti-Jewish demonstrations, the matter of insuring Jews was taken up; on December 8, guidelines were issued (under the signatures of General Director He. and Director Haase) barring any new insurance contracts with Jews.79 Although an exception had been planned for automobile insurance, the withdrawal on December 3 of the right of Jews to drive automobiles eliminated the need to offer Jews such insurance. At the same time, the exclusion of the Jews from German economic life meant that insurance policies of Jewish enterprises would immediately terminate if they were closed down; the insurance would continue in cases where the enterprises were oper-ated under Aryan owners. Finally, the various branches of Allianz were allowed to decide for themselves as to what further measures they might take with re-gard to Jewish insurance policies 每 for example, negotiating with Jews on early termination of their jewelry insurance or reducing the amounts of their accident insurance. There is, unfortunately, scant evidence as to how this directive was implemented. Curiously, Wiener Allianz waited until December 1941 before in-structing that all Jewish requests for insurance be refused in principle. The only exceptions would be for government requests for insurance of Jewish property, and such cases were to be referred to the management.80 
76 RGBl, 1938,I,p. 969每70. 77 The giving up of liability insurance by Jewish lawyers was already noted at the Vorstandssitzung 
of 10.Mai 1935, FHA, S 17.2 /4. For the liability insurance for physicians, see the Rundschreiben 
of 25. Aug. 1938, FHA, AZ 7.1/9. 78 Direktionsverfungen der Wiener Allianz vom 24. M.rz und 5.Mai 1939, AZ Wien. 79 Rundschreiben, Nr. 37/38 betr. Jisches Versicherungsgesch.ft, 8. Dez. 1938,FHA,AZ 5.1/5. 80 Direktionsverfung der Wiener Allianz, 12. Dez. 1941, AZ Wien. 
In concluding this sorry tale, it is important to record that the government did indeed insure what had once been Jewish property 每 namely, the transport of jewels, platinum, gold, silver, pearls, and other valuable items from the mu-nicipal pawn shops throughout the Reich to the central bureau for pawn shops in Berlin, where the Jews had been forced to deposit them. In circular notes of early February 1940, the central bureau provided precise instructions regarding the manner in which the expected value of these items should be determined as well as their packaging and modes of transport. Hence, in each case the in-surer would know precisely what was being sent and its value. The cost of the insurance would be carried by the central bureau itself, which had concluded a general insurance policy for the transportation of these valuables with a single company: Allianz.81 
81 St.dtische Pfandleiheanstalt Abt. III/Zentralstelle an alle Pfandleiheanstalten, 3.Feb. 1940; Rund-schreiben (eingetroffen in Frankfurt am 19.Feb. 1940) an alle gemeindlichen Pfandanstalten im Reich betr. Verwertung der aus jischem Besitz stammenden Edelmetalle, Jewelen und Perlen, Institut f Stadtgeschichte, Frankfurt a.M., Bestand 812 /109. I am grateful to Ralf Banken for bringing these documents to my attention. 
7 

Allianz, Munich Re, and the Insurance Business in ※Greater Germany§ 
allianz in 1940 
When the Allianz concern celebrated its fftieth anniversary on January 13, 1940, Germany was once again at war, and thus a certain sobriety was in order despite the victories of 1939. The concern presented itself to its various constituen-cies in a two-volume Festschrift: the frst, an informative and useful history of the company by Wilhelm Kisch entitled ※Fifty Years Allianz. A Contribution to the History of German Private Insurance§; the second, a picture chronicle of the concern that was a balance of photos of major executives in times past and present, leading representatives of the concern＊s external service, festive events, various headquarters buildings, vacation homes belonging to the concern, and sporting events.1 Certainly the goal was to present Allianz and the role of pri-vate insurance in the most favorable light possible, but Kisch＊s narrative was not heavy-handed and was reasonably free of hyperbole. Not surprisingly, it con-tained a number of positive references to the National Socialist regime and its values; the photo volume showed what can only be termed a requisite number of pictures of uniformed employees and Swastika fags, so that one was aware who held power in Germany and of the Allianz concern＊s ※devotion.§ 
The flm Allianz produced for the occasion, Allianz 1890每1940,2 which can justly be called a high-quality cinematic self-presentation of the concern, was similarly constructed. Slightly less than half the flm is devoted to the business side of Allianz, which is presented as a story of growth and success. The land-marks were Allianz＊s founding in 1890, the fusions of 1921 and the appointment of Schmitt as general director, the merger with Stuttgarter in 1927 and the on-set of the ※concern§ idea, and 1929 每 when Allianz sprang into the breach after the collapse of Favag. The acquisition of Elementar-Phix in 1938 (discussed later in this chapter) was presented as a new phase of growth in the concern＊s history. Much attention was also paid to the expanding number of felds of insurance, employees, branches, and new and modern offce buildings, with pic-tures of the ongoing construction in the Mohrenstra.e areas as well as a model of the projected Runder Platz. It is only in connection with Allianz＊s emphasis 
1 Kisch, Ffzig Jahre Allianz. 2 Allianz 1890每1940, FHA, Filmarchiv, 80.F.001. 
278 
on damage prevention and in the portion of the flm showing the Allianz lab-oratories for materials testing that mention is made of the economic ideas of National Socialism, which are otherwise blessedly absent from the flm. Indeed, the Nazi role in Allianz is placed very much in the background: a portrait of Hitler distantly visible on the wall of an offce, a fag-raising ceremony on the roof of the Cologne offce building that almost seems to be speeded up and lasts barely more than a few seconds, and a glimpse of the work brigade marching in the background (and then briefy in the foreground) of the fall sporting event at Mariendorf in Berlin, along with a great many Swastika fags in a row at the same occasion. 
Still, the flm could be interpreted as a sustained effort to satisfy DAF values of a model factory. There is a great deal of emphasis on the well-lighted, comfort-able offces 每 especially at the newer Cologne headquarters, but also elsewhere 每 and on the various social measures taken at the company branches, including canteens, libraries, and recreation areas. Indeed, more than half of the flm is devoted to various vacation homes of Allianz and their idyllic qualities, where ※Allianzers§ and their families are shown enjoying the facilities, and to the sports facilities and sporting events of the concern. The emphasis on gymnastics and other sports 每 involving female and male employees both 每 is extraordinary; it is notable that the presentation of Allianz＊s major executives was quite limited. There was a picture of Allianz＊s ※Big Four§ (Schmitt, He., Hilgard, and Schloe.-mann). The only speech in the entire flm is that of the ※old sportsman§ Hans He., an impressive fgure and energetic speaker, who was most convincing in his argument for the importance of sport for body and soul and relating the em-phasis on sports to the healthy competitive spirit at Allianz 每 as refected in the competition for the Spear Thrower and other prizes. This was presented as the essence of the ※Allianz spirit.§ In general, Allianz is certainly shown to be serv-ing the nation and ready to meet every new danger that requires implementation of the ※insurance idea,§ propagated across the length and breadth of the land by a well-trained external service. But it is also presented as a world unto itself, and the Allianz fag and emblem are so omnipresent that they do indeed appear to be more the symbols of sovereignty (that Speer objected to in the design proposed for the Runde Platz building) than a company logo. The flm gives the impression of a corporate culture with familial and organic pretensions 每 displaying itself in ways that certainly satisfed DAF desiderata, primarily because DAF desiderata were quite compatible with Allianz＊s own corporate self-understanding. 
It would be a mistake to think that the opportunism of Allianz＊s leadership in the Third Reich was ※pure,§ that is, totally cynical and hypocritical, and that the linguistic turn of people like Hilgard was completely artifcial and unnatural. Opportunism requires an environment with at least some familiar and even con-genial elements if it is to succeed in achieving the goal of being acceptable to those whose favor is being courted. Germany had never been a land of ※shareholder values,§ and even today corporations like Allianz stress their responsibility to their ※stakeholders,§ that is, a broader community encompassing employees, 

General Director He. making a speech to employees assembled at the jubilee meeting to celebrate the 50th anniversary of Allianz, May 29, 1940. 
customers, and the public at large as well as those holding shares.3 Neverthe-less, German corporate culture, thanks to the long struggle with both dirigisme and Socialist tendencies, was well practiced in legitimizing the quest for proft in a vocabulary of service to State and community. There was a conceptual affn-ity between the language used in corporate strategies of self-defense before 1933 and that used when dealing with the National Socialist regime. The ※ideals§ and ※values§ of the regime were, after all, themselves products of the ※nation-alist§ and ※socialist§ movements that had played so powerful a role in German history, and though the National Socialists certainly were more threatening and unpredictable than anything the German insurance business had previously en-countered, its leaders were already familiar with talking about their function as ※trustees§ for ※risk communities§ and working to serve the ※national econ-omy§ and ※national community.§ They said little or nothing about their right to demand a proft for their companies and a dividend for their shareholders in 
3 See, for example, ※Die Allianz tr.gt auch soziale Verantwortung,§ an interview with Finance Di-rector Paul Achleitner in the Allianz Journal, 2 /2000, pp. 21每2. These differences in national corporate cultures and the language they employ are important because they are grounded in different political, legal, and business traditions. German corporations taking over American companies, for example, try to adapt to the notion of being ※good corporate citizens.§ 
exchange for the risk of capital.4 Kisch, for example, did not treat the existence of private insurance as self-legitimating; he fully accepted the principle of State direction of the economy and the right of the State to abolish private insurance. If the State wisely maintained the private insurance sector, it was because the latter had demonstrated that it put community interests before its own and be-cause private enterprise was better able to respond fexibly to new demands and requirements, since its management faced a higher degree of accountability than did the civil servants who would run a state monopoly.5 
The leadership of Allianz was well aware that one major criticism of such a huge concern was that it was so large that it might lose coherence and suffer the attendant costs, a danger Allianz sought to meet through its policy of combin-ing centralization and decentralization. As noted previously, the 1930 takeover of Favag marked a pause in Allianz＊s growth. This was to usher in a period of consolidation and rationalization, interrupted in 1938每1939 by new acquisi-tions in Austria and what had been Czechoslovakia. As part of this period of consolidation, a major restructuring took place in 1939 that was designed to simplify the concern＊s organization and to complete the absorption of compa-nies created or brought into Allianz in 1930. At the shareholders meeting on June 13, 1940, the old name 每 Allianz Versicherungs-Aktiengesellschaft 每 was re-stored; ※und Stuttgarter Verein§ was dropped. As Chart II shows, Neue Frank-furter, Vereinigte Berlinische und Preu.ische Lebensversicherungs-AG, Karls-ruher Lebensversicherungsbank, and Hammonia 每 along with its sister frm Providentia 每 were severally joined in a community of interest with a single company, now named Frankfurter Versicherungs-AG, that became a concern within Allianz under the Frankfurt regional headquarters. A similar arrange-ment was made for the recently acquired Elementar-Phix, which was renamed Wiener Allianz Versicherungs-AG and made identical with the newly established regional headquarters in Vienna. At the same time, the branch in Danzig was downgraded, while Kigsberg was made the center of a new regional headquar-ters for East Prussia and Memel.6 
Consolidation in the concern was accompanied by an equally important re-structuring of the relationship between Allianz and Munich Re. The two con-cerns still formally operated under a 50-year joint contract of 1921, under which Munich Re agreed to center its German direct insurance interests in Allianz 每 receiving in return 25% of Allianz＊s capital stock and 50% of its reinsurance business.7 Munich Re then participated in the massive development of Allianz, 
4 See the refreshing criticism of this obfuscating language by Arps, who felt that it prevented rather than helped the public to understand the nature of capitalist enterprise; Arps, Durch unruhige Zeiten, Bd. 1,p. 187, Bd. 2,p. 29. 
5 Kisch, Ffzig Jahre Allianz, pp. 186每8, 223每6. 
6 Ibid., pp. 93f., 108每12, and Allianz Gesch.ftsbericht 1939, pp. 11f., FHA. See also the Akten-
notiz of Schmitt, 11. Aug. 1939, MR, A 1/20. The shares of Neue Frankfurter, Hammonia, and 
Providentia were divided between Allianz and Munich Re. 7 See Chapter 1,p. 10. 

Chart II. Organization of the Allianz Concern in 1940. Source: Kisch, Ffzig Jahre Allianz. 
with many of the fusions indeed depending on the former＊s liquid assets. In the process, however, Munich Re＊s quota of Allianz＊s reinsurance business dropped from 50%to 37.5%. The reality was that Allianz＊s growth and premium income had taken on entirely different dimensions, from 50 million marks in 1913 to 500 million, if one included the Karlsruher and Berlinische companies, in 1938.At the same time, Munich Re＊s profts had also risen dramatically, so that there were grounds to question whether it was justifable for Allianz, with its huge reserves, to pay so much to Munich Re for reinsurance. Munich Re may have founded and dominated Allianz for a substantial period, but the days of junior partnership were long past and the continued dependence expressed in the 1921 contract provisions on reinsurance was proving bothersome. It was time, Schmitt told the Munich Re supervisory board at a meeting on April 16, 1940, to revise the contract.8 
Everyone, of course, recognized that Munich Re could stand on its own rights and could morally justify such a course by its past and continuing contribu-tions to Allianz＊s success. In Schmitt＊s view, however, such a posture made little practical sense. It would produce an atmosphere of tension that would increase over time and undermine the relationship, which was to be formally up for renewal in 1970 but which obviously could not be thought of in such formal terms. At the same time, it would be diffcult (if not impossible) for Munich Re to secure its stance by gaining suffcient control of Allianz＊s cap-ital shares. Most importantly, however, this seemed to be the time to settle the differences between the two concerns and to found their future relation-ship not only on holding one another＊s shares and business arrangements but ※above all on mutual friendship and trust.§ It was essential ※that the younger generation feels the carrying on of their common endeavor to be a personal obligation.§9 
The situation was probably more diffcult than Schmitt was indicating. Im-portant evidence for such tension is that Allianz was much concerned about a potential effort by Munich Re to control its shares. This was revealed when Al-lianz began to liquidate its real estate companies under RAA pressure that it hold all its real estate in its own name. The one exception was Freia Grundstksver-wertungs-AG, to which Allianz actually planned to transfer a property in 1939 before this met with objections from the RAA. Allianz representatives responded that the concern needed to keep Freia alive since, as they confessed, its real pur-pose was to administer a large block of Allianz shares. Director Ernst Rausche 
justifed this by pointing out that Allianz must unconditionally prevent that further Al-lianz shares are bought up by the Munich Re because it would then get a majority holding. Allianz does not want to place itself completely in the hands of the Munich Re. The sale of the shares on the stock market exchange is impossible because there is no interest in 
8 251. Sitzung des Aufsichtsrats, 16. April 1940, MR, A 3.4/5. 
9 
Ibid. 
shares at the present time. Even small-scale sales would therefore lead to a drop in the quotation.10 
This argument led the RAA to relent in its pressure, although it expected Allianz to dissolve the Freia company eventually. Allianz, however, continued to hold the company throughout the war.11 
The signifcance of this silent control of its own shares through Freia may be measured by a brief review of the shareholding in Allianz. At the sharehold-ers meeting in May 1938, the number of shareholders voting totalled 529 每 12 by themselves personally, 517 through an assigned representative. A total of 19 persons (i.e., 12 individual shareholders and 7 proxies acting for corporations and individuals) voted some 27.3 million RM in shares. The importance of Mu-nich Re was made evident by the fact that it held 17.3 million RM shares, which were voted on its behalf by Schmitt, who additionally held and voted 173,400 RM shares on his own account. Kisskalt held 122,700 RM in shares personally. The next largest corporate block of votes cast was that of Merck, Finck & Co. August von Finck, who headed the bank and was also presiding as chairman of the Allianz supervisory board, voted 2,625,000 RM in shares for the bank and a few hundred thousand RM in shares for small shareholding individuals and companies. The banking house of Sal. Oppenheim jun. & Cie. in Cologne held over 600,000 RM in shares, Dresdner Bank 400,000 RM, Bayerische Vereinsbank 150,000 RM, and Henckel & Cie. GmbH 240,000 RM in shares. The Deutsche Bank did not hold its shares as a corporation, but leading directors and persons associated with the bank held substantial amounts of shares, possibly exceeding that of Dresdner Bank. The Stuttgart chemical industrialist August Brgemann was a signifcant individual shareholder with 408,600 RM in shares. The vari-ous Allianz and Allianz Leben directors held modest but signifcant amounts in shares, after which came a substantial group of shareholders 每 many of them women and often wives and widows of prominent businessmen 每 who held shares ranging from 1,500 RM to 15,000 RM in value.12 
The total share capital of Allianz was 60 million RM, and it is thus obvious that many shares were not present at the shareholders meeting and were not voted 每 among them the 7,436,100 RM in shares held by the Freia.13 What the described distribution of shares demonstrates, however, is that Allianz was vul-nerable to a Munich Re takeover unless it continued to control a substantial number of its shares through Freia. However, given the history of the two con-cerns and their common interests, the goal was now to prevent the development 
10 Niederschrift, 28.Feb. 1939,BAB,R 3104 /20513, Bl. 191. 11 RAA an den Vorstand der Allianz, 25. M.rz 1939, ibid., Bl. 197. The Allianz business reports for 
1940每1945 continue to mention that Allianz had 100% of the 300,000 RM in Freia shares. 12 Verzeichnis der in der 48. ordentlichen Hauptversammlung der Allianz und Stuttgarter Verein 
Versicherungs-Aktien-Gesellschaft in Berlin am 31.Mai 1938 erschienenen Aktion.re und Ak-
tion.re-Vertreter, BAB, R 3104/20522, Bl. 77每85. 13 Vermerk, undated but from 1940, ibid., Bl. 60. 
of an adversarial relationship. Schmitt 每 whose personal history was largely bound up with the growth of Allianz and who was a newcomer to the general directorship of Munich Re 每 favored a revised joint contract over an unfriendly attempt at domination that was probably doomed to failure and would under-mine a long-standing and mutually benefcial relationship. Hence Schmitt, He., and other members of both concerns negotiated a new contract whose formal terms were intended to continue until 1990 and beyond if neither party objected. Finally signed on November 11, 1940, the contract began with a remarkable preface that traced the history of the relationship and argued that the ultimate proof of its correctness was to be found in the fact that Allianz had emerged as the greatest German direct insurer and that Munich Re was the most important reinsurance enterprise in the world. (Actually, in 1939 Swiss Re was the largest reinsurer in the world.14) It was now their purpose to restructure the old collabo-ration, ※which has become a proven partnership,§ to satisfy changed conditions and ※to anchor it in an unchangeable manner for all times.§15 Thus, section 1 of the contract obligated the two corporations ※to support one another in every way and mutually promote the interests of one another along with their own.§ This was to be especially the case in times where one might be in diffculty; the frms were expected to come to each other＊s aid 每 without any legal obligation to do so 每 insofar as it did not involve doing serious damage to their own interests. 
From a practical standpoint, the most important revision was probably con-tained in section 2, which declared that shareholding in one another＊s enterprises was to be based on the principle of parity. At the moment, Munich Re held 30% of Allianz＊s shares whereas Allianz held only 7.5% of Munich Re＊s shares. Mu-nich Re was not to increase its Allianz holdings above 30% without permission, and Allianz was allowed to increase its Munich Re holdings to 30% 每 provided it did so gradually and without disturbing the stock market quotations. Insofar as there was a disparity between the shareholdings of the two concerns, Munich Re obligated itself not to vote its additional shares at the shareholders meetings if Allianz so requested. 
As was the case with the 1921 contract, provisions were made for personal and institutional reinforcement of the relationship, but these were now strength-ened in signifcant ways. Thus, each supervisory board was to include the other frm＊s chairman of the board of managers; the goal was for each supervisory board to include at least three members from the other frm＊s board. They were expected to support each other at their respective shareholders meetings and, of great importance, three quarters of the members of the smaller committees that made the major decisions on the supervisory boards were to be persons who were members of both supervisory boards. At the same time, a new institution was created in the form of a ※joint managerial council,§ composed of the chair-men of the boards of management of the two corporations, two members of each 
14 Assecuranz-Compass, Internationales Jahrbuch f Versicherungswesen 47 (1939), pp. 364, 1055. 15 Gemeinschaftsvertrag, 11.Nov. 1940, MR, A 3.4 /5. 
of the boards, and previous chairmen of the boards who might still be serving on the supervisory boards. The new body was to serve a purely advisory func-tion and was assigned the task of promoting cooperation, especially in business conducted abroad. 
The division of labor between the two corporations was to remain as before: Allianz doing direct business in Germany and Munich Re refraining from di-rect insurance in those areas where Allianz was active, which for all intents and purposes was every branch of insurance of any signifcance. Munich Re was allowed to have minority holdings in other companies, however, which was es-sential given that it reinsured a variety of other companies. The two corporations were to promote one another＊s business as much as possible, and Allianz was to refrain from competing with Munich Re and from signing contracts to which the latter objected or concerning which it had reservations. Furthermore, section 6 of the agreement gave Munich Re a considerable participation in Allianz busi-ness: 30% of all business done by Allianz or its daughter companies at home and abroad, 50% of the foreign business that Allianz might take over from its foreign daughter companies, and 50% of the shares of Allianz in domestic and foreign daughter companies. In the frst two categories, participation was to take the form of reinsurance contracts on the business in question. In the case of estab-lishing new companies or capital participations, Allianz was to offer Munich Re 30% of the shares, and Munich Re was to offer Allianz 50% of the shares of new companies or participations in which it might engage. However, arrangements that Munich Re might make with friendly companies abroad were not covered by these conditions. Finally, the contract provided for arbitration provisions and for the silent renewal of the contract for ffty years after 1990 unless one of the corporations announced a desire to terminate the contract by 1985. In the event that the contract was to be terminated by one of the parties or to effectively end for some other unforeseen reason, Allianz was obligated to compensate Munich Re the price of its lost reinsurance portfolio每aprovision more important than it might appear, since it was intended to compensate Munich Re for surrender-ing its right to acquire 50% of Allianz＊s shares 每 and both corporations could insist on the sale of their respective shares to designated purchasers. 
The signifcance of this contract and relationship, which was maintained until very recently (albeit with changes to meet new circumstances), was neatly stated by Kisskalt at the Munich Re supervisory board meeting in April 1940 where the draft contract was considered. The establishment of parity in shareholding rights meant that Munich Re ※would be changed from the mother to the sister, that there would be two independent corporations bound together by the joint contract and common interests.§16 They did not and would not constitute a sin-gle concern, which would have required a single supervisory board and board of management at the very top of the organization or of a holding company. While the connection between the two corporations since 1921 had caused some bad 
16 251. Sitzung des Aufsichtsrats der Mchener Rk, 16. April 1940, ibid. 
feeling in the industry at the time of Allianz＊s major acquisitions, the basic re-lationship was hardly a secret, since everyone knew that they were shareholders in one another＊s corporations and that they had supervisory board members in common. Nevertheless, in January 1941 it was thought wise to supplement sec-tion 2 with a clause that, in the interest of Munich Re＊s other business relations, the acquisition of more than 10% of its shares by Allianz was to be treated con-fdentially, with the shares placed in portfolios of daughter companies that were not in the insurance business.17 The advantages clearly outweighed the disadvan-tages for both sides, and this was to be all the more the case when Germany was expanding abroad. While wartime obviously reduced business with Germany＊s enemies, foreign business with Germany＊s allies and with neutrals would increase in importance, as would acquisitions there and in the occupied areas. Thus, in January 1941, another change was made under which the Munich Re would also have to offer Allianz participation in new acquisitions abroad for daughter com-panies ※which perhaps should have to be disguised for political reasons.§18 
What these arrangements also make clear is that the historian of Allianz must not neglect the history and role of Munich Re, especially for the years 1938每1945 when the two corporations expanded in tandem. They were, taken together, a truly formidable economic power. Also, one should not forget that Allianz Leben had been a party to the relationship between the Allianz and Munich Re since 1928, when a syndicate contract was concluded that gave each of the two last-named corporations more than a quarter of the Allianz Leben shares and also gave Munich Re 25% of Allianz Leben＊s reinsurance business. At the shareholders meeting in 1942, Allianz held 6,168,200 RM＊s worth of voted Al-lianz Leben shares, while Munich Re held 6,151,400 RM. The total value of the shares voted was 13,992,400 RM out of a total capital share value of 20 mil-lion RM. The only other shareholders with signifcant amounts to vote were banks and bankers as well as individuals with substantial holdings 每 for exam-ple, Schloe.mann, who owned 162,000 RM in shares.19 
All three corporations stood far above their next leading competitors at the outbreak of the war. Thus, among the 81 insurers of property, accidents, and liability in 1939, Allianz took in 217.9 million RM in premiums; coming next were Kraft (a daughter company of Allianz), with 50.4 million RM in premiums, Nordstern, with 48.9 million RM, and Gerling, with 44.9 million RM. Neue Frankfurter followed with 39.2 million RM in premiums, but it, too, was a mem-ber of the Allianz concern 每 as was Bayerische Versicherungsbank, which ranked eighth with 23.9 million RM. The other companies in the top ten were Aachener und Mchener (30.9 million RM), Albingia (25.2 million RM), Agrippina (23.7 million RM), and Magdeburger Feuerversicherung (22.5 million RM). In the case 
17 For par. 2, section 2, see Briefwechsel 4./16. Jan. 1941, ibid. 18 Schreiben der Mchener Rk vom 4. Jan. 1941, ibid. 19 Syndikatsvertrag, 25. Juni 1928, MR, A 3.4/6; Verzeichnis der in der ordentlichen Hauptver-
sammlung der Allianz Lebensversicherungs-Aktiengesellschaft in Berlin am 24. September 1942 
erschienen Aktion.re und Aktion.re-Vertreter, BAB, R 3104/20486, Bl. 136每8. 

Wilhelm Kisskalt (1873每1958), general director of Munich Re 1922每1937 and member of the supervisory board of Allianz 1922每1945, about 1940. 
of reinsurance, there were 21 companies with premiums above a million Reichs-mark; Munich Re ranked frst with 210.1 million RM in premiums, followed by Knische Rkversicherungs-Gesellschaft with 45.5 million RM, Frankona Rk-und Mitversicherungs-Gesellschaft (39.1 million RM), Bayerische Rk-versicherung AG (31.7 million RM), and Gerling-Konzern (22.4 million RM). Among the 74 private life insurance companies with over a million in premiums listed, two were far ahead of the pack: Allianz Leben, with 232 million RM in pre-miums, and Volksfsorge, with 99.9 million RM. The latter was listed as a pri-vate company because it was organized as a corporation (AG). It was followed by Victoria (66.4 million RM), Gerling (50.4 million RM), Deutscher Herold Volks-und Lebensversicherungs-AG (46.9 million RM), Deutscher Ring (45.7 million RM), Karlsruher Leben (41.6 million RM), Alte Leipziger (37.9 million RM), Gothaer Leben (37.2 million RM), Vorsorge Lebensversicherugs-AG (33.3 mil-lion RM), and Berlinische Leben (32.8 million RM). Since both Karlsruher and Berlinische belonged to Allianz, the receipts of the concern in life insurance poli-cies was even stronger than the place assigned Allianz Leben would suggest.20 
At the same time, the life insurance rankings 每 where Volksfsorge is a strong second and Deutscher Ring is among the top companies 每 points to the ex-istence of serious competitors from the ranks of the DAF companies, whose successes (above all, those of the Volksfsorge) produced serious concern at Al-lianz Leben. Thus, in a report of March 5, 1940, General Director Schloe.mann 每 who, along with his staff, had been following the growing competition from the publicly chartered companies 每 came to disturbing conclusions. In the period 1934每1938, the number of policies at Volksfsorge increased 144% while the number at Allianz Leben increased only 44%. Fixed capital investment increased 110% at Volksfsorge and 100% at the publicly chartered companies, but only 67% at Allianz Leben. Company costs for new business in 1938 at Volksf-sorge were 30.9% and 33.5% at the publicly chartered companies; they were 51% at Allianz Leben. Once behind Victoria and Gerling, Volksfsorge was now well ahead of them and, most serious of all, was competing with Allianz Leben in large policies by offering lower premiums. Schloe.mann and his col-leagues concluded that the Volksfsorge advantage could not be attributed to its propaganda and instrumental use of its DAF connections. Rather, it must lie in lower costs, not in internal administration (where it had far more policies to handle than Allianz Leben and thus inevitably had higher costs) but rather in the costs of external service 每 that is, in the acquisition of new customers. It is not without irony that the general director of Volksfsorge, Diedrich Pollmann, came from the middle management of Allianz. Along with its nazifcation, which included the integration of many former Socialist and Christian trade unionists into the Nazi fold, the company developed an extraordinary dynamism and used its every advantage, including access to flm facilities for its effective advertising. At the same time, it cut costs, offered lower premiums, and was obviously an increasingly troublesome competitor to Allianz Leben in precisely those areas where the latter had previously been most triumphant.21 
allianz and ＆＆greater germany＊＊: expansion into austria and the sudetenland 
This was not the only realm in which DAF insurance companies were to prove a dangerous competitor, as demonstrated by developments following the An-schlu. (annexation) of Austria on March 12, 1938. The Anschlu., it should be 
20 Anlage b, f, and 6 to Anlage 4 of the draft of a report to be sent for commentary to insurance 
leaders by Hilgard on April 6, 1941, intended for the RWM and dealing with the problem of com-
petition in the industry, FHA, S 17.4/6. 21 See Schloe.mann＊s letter of March 5, 1940, and its appended reports by his staff, FHA, B 1.3.1/20, 
and Ble, ※Die Volksfsorge Lebensversicherungs-AG im ＆Dritten Reich＊,§ pp. 64每91. 
noted, took place shortly after Bra.＊s highly controversial speech of February 25, 1938, to the Reich Association of Private Insurers in which 每 to the great irrita-tion of Hilgard and leaders of the industry 每 he seemed to concede that many of the charges against the private insurance industry were correct and called for re-forms. It was also coincident with some of the most severe attacks on the private insurance business by the Schwarze Korps and the efforts mounted by Schwede-Coburg, Hans Goebbels, and Amend to nationalize the insurance business. It was inevitable that the substantial ambitions of German insurers, both public and private, would be intertwined with their internecine conficts. Schwede-Coburg swung into action as soon as he could, asking in early May 1938 for an interview with Gauleiter Josef Bckel, the Reich Commissar for the Reunifca-tion of Austria with the German Reich.22 He was anxious to learn of decisions being taken regarding insurance in Austria and to infuence them. It does not appear that Bckel was able to ft Schwede-Coburg into his schedule, but either he or his chief aide, Oberregierungsrat Kratz, met with Thiele of Rudolf He.＊s staff in Munich on May 24 每 a meeting at which the Party＊s interest in the insur-ance question was made clear. An agreement was reached that Bckel＊s offce was to conduct an investigation of the state of Austrian insurance, after which the NSDAP in Munich would be informed of the results. Thiele made a point of the fact that Schwede-Coburg, whom he described as the ※leader of the Reich Group for Insurance,§ intended to bring about the nationalization of the in-surance industry and was negotiating toward this end with Ministerial Director Lange of the RWM. He urged that Bckel＊s offce get in touch with Lange, and also warned that ※the strictest secrecy is necessary so that the private insurance companies do not get premature information. An especially strong opponent of the plan is the previous Reich Economics Minister Schmied [sic!] who is Chair-man of the Board of the Munich Reinsurance Company.§23 
As might be expected, Hilgard 每 the actual leader of the Reich Group 每 was anything but inactive. He had already made contact with Lange at the end of March and, in a good illustration of his close connections with the RWM, ac-tually drafted instructions for Lange to send to Hilgard, as leader of the Reich Group, setting up a committee to examine the condition of the Austrian insur-ance business, both private and publicly chartered. The committee was to be kept as small as possible and to include a representative of the Austrian insurers. Until it reported in, no actions were to be taken with respect to the reorgani-zation of the Austrian insurance business. When Hilgard appointed a commit-tee whose majority consisted of persons from the private insurance feld, Hans Goebbels 每 who was acting as deputy for Schwede-Coburg＊s Reich Group for 
22 
Schwede-Coburg an Bckel, 3.Mai 1938, .StA-AdR, Bckel/Materie, Karton 94, Akte 2170/0. Bckel had held a similar position after the population of the Saar area voted to join the Reich in 1935. On Bckel, see Gerhard Paul, ※Josef Bckel 每 Der rote Gauleiter,§ in Ronald Smelser, Enrico Syring, & Rainer Zitelmann (eds.), Die braune Elite II. 21 weitere biographische Skizzen (Darmstadt, 1993), pp. 51每65. 
23 
Aktennotiz, 25.Mai 1938, .StA-AdR, Bckel/Materie, Karton 94, Akte 2170/0. 
the publicly chartered companies 每 claimed that he had been double-crossed be-cause Hilgard had promised a smaller committee and also parity between the groups. He warned that, if Hilgard failed to act in good faith, then the pub-licly chartered companies would refuse to do anything more through the Reich Group and would instead deal directly with the RWM. Hilgard responded by sending Funk a copy of Goebbels＊s letter, pointing out that it was not consonant with the leadership principle on which the organization of the economy was based, and refusing to put up with Goebbels＊s tone. The management of the in-surance industry problem thus served to intensify the war between Hilgard and Schwede-Coburg, who (Hilgard constantly argued) had neither the competence nor, as an active Gauleiter, the time to properly deal with insurance questions.24 
Nevertheless, the commission as constituted went to work with the approval of the RWM; by summer, it turned up with ffteen reports on the Austrian in-surance business. At the same time, insurance companies in the Old Reich were not permitted to set up their offces in Austria until at least October 10, 1938,a regulation not limited to insurance but rather part of a decree of April 14, 1938, aimed at protecting the Austrian economy from being subjected to an ※economic invasion§ in which the stronger German business enterprises would simply over-whelm their weaker Austrian counterparts. In his dealings with the RWM, Hil-gard claimed to be uncertain as to what the implications of this temporary freeze against German companies unlicensed to operate in Austria would be for oblig-atory or preexisting insurance relationships in the Reich (e.g., hunting insur-ance, automobile accident insurance, and insurance of vehicles at the Hermann-Ging-Werke in Linz). Hilgard was as cautious as he was shrewd, and he was anxious to play the honest broker and assure the head of the Austrian insurance organization, Hans Sittenberger, that he was concerned to prevent unlicensed German companies from illicitly trying to drum up business in Austria. The Reich Group offered its services, since the Germans obviously wished to avoid having such matters show up in the courts. At the same time, there were practi-cal problems to be solved, and Hilgard was successful in getting Sittenberger to urge Bckel＊s offce to have existing contracts 每 certain types of group insurance and the insurance of large companies like the Hermann-Ging-Werke 每 settled between the Austrian organization and the Reich Group in a way that would give the Austrian companies some portion of the business in question while allowing the Old Reich insurance companies to extend this business into Austria.25 
Indeed, it did not take long for Sittenberger to fnd Hilgard possibly more sympathetic to Austrian insurance interests than the NSDAP headquarters in Munich. Having contemplated what the Austrian companies had to offer the Party and its member organizations from the standpoint of both coverage and cost, NSDAP treasurer Schwarz told Bckel in late June 1938 that he could not 
24 Hilgard an Gottschick, 31. M.rz 1938, Entwurf Hilgard an Funk, 18.Mai 1938, Goebbels an 
Hilgard, 15.Mai 1938, and Vermerk RWM, Juni 1938,SM, 1458/2 /200, Bl. 3每5, 48每51. 25 Hilgard an RWM und Sittenberger, 31.Mai 1938; Sittenberger an Kratz, 21. und 25.Mai 1938, 
.StA-AdR, Bckel/Materie, Karton 94, Akte 2170/0. 
give Austrian companies exclusive insurance rights to Party insurance in Austria. He was willing to give them 10% of some insurance business of the Party and urged that Sittenberger be sent to negotiate with Amend, who was still handling Party insurance matters. However, when these negotiations fnally took place on September 15, 1938, Amend was more generous. The chief reason was un-doubtedly that the lion＊s share of the business in question was given to ※Austrian§ insurance companies that already were under the control of companies and con-cerns from the Old Reich.26 
Thus, one of those present was Hans Schmidt-Polex, the former deputy di-rector of Bayerische Versicherungsbank who had become general director of Elementar-Phix, whose name would soon change to Wiener Allianz. While there were temporary regulations against the licensing of frms in the Old Reich to operate in Austria, there were no barriers to the acquisition of Austrian frms by German ones. Elementar-Phix had been owned since 1936 by a consor-tium composed of the Munich Re, the Italian Assicurazioni Generali, and Cred-itanstalt; the company had been struggling to make a proft under General Di-rector Eberhard von Reininghaus since the debacle of Phix Life. From the perspective of Munich Re, the Anschlu. with Austria provided an opportunity toconduct an ※Anschlu.§ ofitsown bygivingAllianz a dominantroleinthecom-pany and either subordinating or driving out the Italians. Thus, at a meeting on May 23, 1938, in Venice with the Generali leadership 每 President Edgardo Mor-purgo, General Director Michele Sulfna, and Central Director Camillo Gentilli, who represented Generali in Phix＊s administrative council 每 General Direc-tor Schmitt and Director Walther Meuschel of Munich Re announced that the problems of Elementar-Phix, whose shares had suffered a reduced real value because of the schilling＊s overvaluation and which was expected to continue to suffer business losses, could best be solved by collaboration with Allianz and the latter＊s placing ※of an industrious man in the leadership who knows the meth-ods commonly employed in Germany and can bring them to fruition and that the Allianz then deliver its name, leadership, and responsibility, so that there will be a relationship similar to that of the Bayerische Versicherungsbank ....§27 The big difference, however, was that the latter company made a proft, while Phix was in bad shape. Schmitt pointed out that something could be made of Elementar-Phix, whose name he claimed a willingness to retain, if it had the support of Allianz and Allianz Leben and if it was spared competition from Al-lianz in Austria and other areas where Elementar-Phix was active. If Generali wished to remain a participant then it could do so, provided Allianz assumed the leadership. Alternatively, Generali could be bought out and the company divided between Munich Re and Allianz. Schmitt also suggested a variety of combinations that would keep the Creditanstalt involved, something he knew the Italians wanted. Generali raised no objection to this proposal or to Allianz 
26 Schwarz an Bckel, 24. Juni 1938, and Aktenvermerk er die am 15. Sept. 1938 in Mchen im 
Amt f Versicherungswesen der NSDAP-Reichsleitung stattgehabte [sic] Besprechung, ibid. 27 Aktennotiz, Venedig, 23.Mai 1938, MR, A 2.13/46. 
becoming the leading participant in Elementar-Phix, but insisted that it had made a heavy investment. It did not want to lose money and hence was more in-terested in participating as a reinsurer of Elementar-Phix 每 in its Austrian and Czech business, and also in the Old Reich 每 than as a shareholder. It was, after all, an insurance company and not a bank. When Morpurgo suggested that the organization that Generali had built up in Austria should be taken into account in calculating the compensation due Generali, the Germans dismissed the idea, pointing out that the organization of Elementar-Phix in Austria was largely Jewish and had already ※cleared out.§ 
Thefact was that Morpurgo was himself Jewish, aswasa good deal of the lead-ership of both the leading Italian companies 每 Generali and the Riunione Adriat-ica di Sicurt角 (RAS) 每 which were products of the enterprising Jewish community ofTrieste that hadassumed a veryimportantpositionasinsurersinCentral, East-ern, and Southeastern Europe. We will show that the leadership of Allianz and Munich Re was by no means averse to working with their Italian-Jewish counter-parts where it did not cause unpleasant diffculties, but it made little sense for the Italians to hang on in the Austrian Elementar-Phix or in Austrian companies moregenerally. MorpurgoinformedSchmittonJune 9 that Generali had decided to sell its entire holding in Phix, so that the majority group would have greater freedom of action, and also agreed to the appointment of Hans Schmitt-Polex as general director. Generali also agreed to the alienation of its shares in Polish and Romanian companies held by Phix but received a percentage of Phix＊s reinsurance business in Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia as well as in Austria. Its desire to procure such business in the Old Reich, however, was denied.28 
Manifestly, Generali would have preferred to hold on to its position in Phix but was compelled to yield to the situation created by the new constellation of political and economic forces in Austria. There is no evidence that the affair was damaging to the relations between Munich Re and Generali and or that it in any way prejudiced their substantial future collaboration. Indeed, in 1939每1940 Al-lianz and Munich Re agreed to let Generali become a third shareholder in their Milan-based Italian frm La Pace.29 An equally friendly settlement about Aus-trian shares in Italian hands was reached between Munich Re and the RAS at a meeting in Trieste in March 1939, where the latter agreed to sell shares that had given it an ※eternal§ right to a portion of Elementar-Phix＊s direct and indirect business in return for modest compensation. Among those present on the Italian side were the former President of the RAS, Arnoldo Frigessi di Rat-talma; he was Jewish and had been forced to leave his position by the racial laws 
28 Morpurgo an Schmitt, 9. Juni 1938; Generali an Mchener Rk, 28. Juni 1938; Vertrag, 6. Juli 
1938, ibid. See also the fne account of the Allianz takeover in Roloff & Mosser, Wiener Allianz, 
pp. 240每7. 29 On La Pace, see the documents in MR, A 2.8/32. The three companies continued to work to-
gether into 1944, and Generali looked after the interests of the frm after the German shares were 
liquidated at the end of the war. See especially: Aktennote Schmitt, 25.Mai 1939; Aktennote, 
19./21.Nov. 1940; Aktennote, 20./23. April 1944; Aktennote von Reininghaus, 3./6.Mai 1948. 
introduced in Italy in late 1938, but he continued to play a major role in RAS af-fairs. He also was to maintain an excellent personal and social relationship with at least two of the Munich Re leaders present, Schmitt and Alois Alzheimer 每 the latter a participant in Hitler＊s Munich putsch of 1923, albeit as a 22-year-old member of the Free Corps Oberland. Nevertheless, he did not become a Party member until May 1933, when he and Kisskalt came to the conclusion that this would be in the interests of Munich Re. His relations with Frigessi and his gen-eral attitudes suggest that he was anything but a true believer.30 Frigessi also had excellent working relations with his successor as President of the RAS, Ful-vio de Suvich, and the concern＊s managing director, Enrico Marchesano, both of whom were present at the meeting. The ※Anschlu.§ had promoted a measure of restructuring in a still very much intact axis in the insurance business 每 above all, the reinsurance business 每 between Germany and Italy.31 
Nonetheless, the takeover of Elementar-Phix by Allianz and Munich Re was as complete as it could be, and it cannot be said that the Austrians were treated with equal friendliness. Thus, the Creditanstalt was actually compelled by the German government to sell its shares in Elementar-Phix and other en-terprises, and the chief Austrian shareholder was thus eliminated. At the end of October and beginning of November 1938, Schmitt met with He., Hilgard, and others to discuss policy toward Elementar-Phix, which was to be ruled jointly by Allianz and Munich Re with the goal of making it proftable. The new man-agement was to run Elementar-Phix ※like a branch of Allianz§ and was to build up the direct business, while Munich Re was to control the indirect busi-ness. In the end it was unifed with the Vienna branch of Allianz.32 
Indeed, it was not long before the very name ※Phix§ was eliminated and replaced by ※Wiener Allianz.§ As Schmidt-Polex pointed out to the special gen-eral assembly that met on December 28, 1938, the effort to maintain the name ※Allgemeine Versicherungs-Gesellschaft Phix§ for reasons of tradition and in the hope that the public would distinguish it from the life insurance branch had been fairly successful with customers. Nevertheless, the name continued to be a 
30 Alzheimer had a so-called Dauerausweis, which was a special permit giving him the right to at-tend reunions of the participants in the Hitler putsch, but he claims to have attended only the frst of these in 1933. See his interrogation of July 17, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /56/1. Also, see Schmitt an SS-Obergruppenfrer Karl Wolff, 5. Juni 1940, BAB, ehem. BDC, SL 62, Bl. 79f.; on Alzheimer＊s membership in the Party in May 1933, see Schreiben an Gratama, 6.Nov. 1945, MR, D/2. 
31 On the meeting in Trieste of March 6, 1939, see MR, A 2.13/46. Much can be learned about the Italian insurance scene and relations with the Germans from the remarkable papers of Arnoldo Frigessi di Rattalma in the Archives of the Banca Commerciale Italiana in Milan. On the warm relations between Frigessi and his Munich Re colleagues, see for example the postcard with greet-ings to Frigessi from a vacation spot in Hungary of Sept. 21, 1942, signed by Schmitt and Director Mattfeld, BCI, NL Frigessi, cart. 80, fasz. 1. As late as June 9, 1943, Alzheimer, who seems to have paid visits to Frigessi in Cortina d＊Ampezzo with his wife, thanked Frigessi for the friendly reception he had recently received in Trieste and the opportunity to discuss business matters; see Alzheimer to Frigessi, June 9, 1943, ibid., cart. 62, fasz. 5. 
32 Aktennote Schmitt, 2.Nov. 1938, MR, A 2.13/46. 
liability and had become something of a ※slogan§ among the Austrians. The last straw, apparently, wasapictureoftheElementar-Phixbuildinginthe Deutsche Volksblatt with the name of the company in hebraic-style lettering.33 Politics and ※race§ also determined the personnel changes. Although von Reininghaus had some Jewish ancestry, political rather than racial motives were responsible for his departure as general director: he (along with a number of others) were removed from offce by the authorities right after the Anschlu. because of their prior con-nections with the collapse of Phix Life. Although released from custody, he was later to be charged with a variety of crimes and misdemeanors in connec-tion with his work at Phix Life; such harrassment was apparently intended to intimidate prominent members of the Austrian authoritarian corporatist State that ruled Austria prior to the annexation. The Munich Re, however, continued to value his services, providing him with an inconspicuous position in its Munich offces where he became what he himself described as a ※travelling uncle,§ nego-tiating reinsurance contracts for Munich Re in Western and Southern Europe.34 
Von Reininghaus was a special case, an internationally respected fgure who would be safe if he got out of the brutal atmosphere in Vienna and could be sent travelling from Munich. The dismissal of Jews in Austria, however, was im-posed with special vehemence, and the insurance business 每 where Jews played an especially important role 每 was severely affected. All Jews lost their positions effective June 30, 1938, and were placed on leave for the requisite month allowed after notice had been given. They were, however, given only 40% of normal sev-erance pay. Nevertheless, as in Germany, there was a certain differentiation in the ※processing§ 每 to use the brutal term employed by Schmidt-Polex 每 of Jew-ish employee terminations. Thus, Georg Schlesinger, the former general director who had remained on as a consultant to the executive committee after leaving offce in 1936, was given a full year＊s consultancy fee and actually managed to receive it in Hungary by March 1939 through the company offces. He and his wife were able to escape to South America, from whence he was summoned back to his old position after the war, and ※as a faithful Austrian, who had suffered from homesickness the entire time in Chile, happily agreed.§35 Employees who had worked for the Elementar-Phix a long time received a letter of apprecia-tion and sometimes a letter of recommendation rather than the usual summary form letter of dismissal, and the company also gave special fnancial help to long-serving employees who wished to emigrate or were in particularly dire straits. In one peculiar instance, a Jewish female employee was given her full severance pay 
33 See his remarks at the Au.erordentliche Generalversammlung vom 28.Nov. 1938 and to the Ver-
waltungsrat am 19. Jan. 1939, AZ Wien. 34 On Reininghaus, see Gertrude Enderle-Burcel (ed.), Christlich-St.ndisch-Autorit.r. Mandatare 
im St.ndestaat 1934每1938. Biographisches Handbuch der Mitglieder des Staatsrates, Bundeskul-
turrates, Bundeswirtschaftsrates und L.nderrates sowie des Bundestages (Wien, 1991), pp. 196f. 
He was a prominent member of the Bundeswirtschaftsrat. There is a substantial compilation of 
materials on him by Martin Herzog in MR, D/8. On von Reininghaus＊s arrangements with Mu-
nich Re, see Fey to Frigessi, July 7, 1938, BCI, NL Frigessi, cart. 68, fasz. 1. 35 Aktennote von Reininghaus, 25. M.rz/5. April 1947, FHA, S 17.14/78. 
after a leading Austrian Nazi (Josef Mayrhofer, to be discussed shortly) testifed that she had not reported illegal Nazi Party meetings even though she had been aware of them. Such ※good conduct§ in the time of the ※system§ 每 the Nazi ex-pression used to describe the preceding regime 每 deserved special consideration. There does not appear to be an exact record of how many Jewish employees were thrown out of their jobs at Wiener Allianz, but the number was reported to be substantial. This is also suggested by General Director Schmidt-Polex, who remarked especially on the costs of ※processing§ Jewish employees at the super-visory board meeting of December 16, 1939. 36 
Elementar-Phix was not the only takeover of a major Austrian insurer by a concern from the Old Reich during the period when Austrian business was al-legedly being protected from the entry of Germans into the Austrian market. The counterpart to the taking over of the Phix and its transformation into Wiener Allianz was the acquisition of control over the .VAG by the insurance companies of the DAF in the late spring of 1938, although the renaming to ※Deutscher Ring. .sterreichische Versicherungs-AG der Deutschen Arbeitsfront§ would wait un-til 1940. The actual takeover of .VAG began even before its shares came into DAF hands and was accomplished by the recall of all its representatives on the supervisory board of the majority shareholder 每 the Municipality of Vienna 每 including the president, Heinrich Foglar-Deinhardstein. Thus, the sharehold-ers＊ meeting on June 2, 1938, was chaired by a dedicated Austrian Nazi, Josef Mayrhofer, at that time director of Nordstern Allgemeine Versicherungs-AG and of Nordstern Lebensversicherungs-AG in Vienna. Among his many dubious dis-tinctions, Mayrhofer could boast a father who had been Hitler＊s guardian and membership in the NSDAP since 1931. He was also the highest Party judge in Austria. Mayrhofer, whose fundamental assignment was to serve as conductor in the orchestrated transfer of control to the DAF, began his brief tenure in this offce by announcing that he considered it his special task to turn the .VAG into a model National Socialist company and create a ※retinue§ with a single political orientation. Resignation of the representatives of the Vienna Munici-pality was accompanied by their proposal for replacements on the administrative board that included Schwede-Coburg and Gustav Mattfeld of Munich Re. The new supervisory board then performed its assigned duties at an special share-holders meeting on July 16, where the DAF was able to claim a majority of the shares. Indeed, between the two meetings, the Austrian companies hold-ing shares in the .VAG were persuaded to sell them to the DAF and thus help strengthen its majority holding. Because the statutes barred such a change in majority control during the frst two years of the .VAG＊s existence, the statutes were changed; Mayrhofer resigned as chairman along with his colleagues, and a new administrative board was voted in that included Mayrhofer himself, Rudolf 
36 Protokoll er die Aufsichtsratssitzung vom 16.Nov. 1939, AZ Wien. The account of Aryaniza-tion in Roloff & Mosser, Wiener Allianz, pp. 502每5, is a fair and accurate description of what I have found in the archive of Wiener Allianz, where Mayrhofer＊s testimony of July 29, 1938,on behalf of Dora Schapire is also to be found. 
Kratochwill of Deutscher Ring in Hamburg, Andreas Bra., Dietrich Pollmann of Volksfsorge, and other DAF offcials. The dynamic Volksfsorge did not stop here, however. It also purchased the Vienna-based Allianz und Giselaverein Versicherungs-AG, whose shares were held by an Italian company and by the Prague-based Star Company. At the beginning of October, the new acquisition was renamed the Ostm.rkische Volksfsorge; some Austrian executives were put into the board of directors for tactical reasons, but the company was dom-inated by persons from Volksfsorge in Germany. In fact, Alfred Pohlmann, Dietrich＊s brother, ended up on the board of directors in 1940. 37 
It is thus clear that insurance enterprises from the Old Reich, led by Allianz and Volksfsorge, were moving aggressively in Austria by simply taking over Austrian companies. In the last analysis, they had the strength and capacity to provide the insurance needed (e.g., by the Party and its organizations in Aus-tria). This was why Schmidt-Polex and Mayrhofer, along with representatives of other German-controlled companies, were invited to the aforementioned discus-sions at Party headquarters in Munich of September 15 about the distribution of insurance contracts to Austrian and German companies, with results so favor-able to Austrian companies owned by German concerns. Of course, this ended neither the competition nor the hostility, which was now even more complicated because DAF companies were competing with Austrian publicly chartered com-panies in making new acquisitions.38 
The big battle, however, was over the question of just when the German com-panies who did not control Austrian enterprises could be licensed to practice in Austria. The law of August 14, 1938, protecting the Austrian economy was set to expire on October 1 of that year. The committee to investigate the Austrian insurance business recommended that the ban on licenses for German compa-nies be extended to the end of 1939. The RWM refused to accept this proposal but did extend the regulation until the end of 1938. But opposition to further prolongation of the licensing ban was already mounting in the summer of 1938 and, as might be expected, it came from one of the excluded companies. Al-bingia responded to the RWM＊s August denial of its request by pointing out that it was false to argue that the Austrian insurance business needed protection for the very simple reason that there was scarcely any truly Austrian insurance business to protect. Albingia had made a survey of the various private non每life insurance companies in Austria and found that the most important of them were either under German or foreign control. In the case of fre insurance, the Ger-mans dominated the Austrian frms. Hence, in the last analysis, the protection 
37 
See Hans Thuer, ※Die .sterreichische Versicherungs-AG und Deutscher Ring .sterreichische Lebensversicherung AG der Deutschen Arbeitsfront (1936每1945),§ in Wolfgang Rohrbach (ed.), 
Versicherungsgeschichte .sterreichs, Bd. 3: Das Zeitalter des modernen Versicherungswesens 
(Vienna, 1988), pp. 705每41, esp. pp. 728每32; see also Ble, ※Die Volksfsorge Lebensversi-
cherungs-AG im ＆Dritten Reich＊,§ pp. 114每20. On the pressure to sell the shares to the DAF, see 
Fieger to Frigessi, July 6, 1938, BCI, NL Frigessi, cart. 68, fasz. 2. 38 Fieger to Frigessi, July 28, 1938, ibid. 

April 1938 edition of the Allianz-Adler magazine covering the annexation of Austria. 
of ※Austrian§ life insurance was in reality ※the protection of the interests of a few German and foreign large concerns and a disadvantaging of interests of single medium-sized companies, which according to the National Socialist economic view should be closer to the heart of the government than the large concerns.§ 
Albingia already had built up a transport and automobile insurance business in Austria, and its employees there had worked hard to keep it going, despite the bad economic conditions, in the hope that Albingia could expand its activities into fre and other insurance areas. Now this seemed impossible and, because of the departure of Jews from the insurance feld, there was a shortage of skilled insurance people and a danger that their employees would be won away from Albingia by competing frms.39 
The criticism that the existing regulation was unfair was also shared by Gen-eral Director Ullrich of Gothaer Versicherung, who argued on September 22 in a meeting of the Reich Group Advisory Council that ※those companies which have an Austrian company in their possession are able thereby to do business in the Ostmark, while the others are excluded from doing business in the Ostmark.§ Hilgard agreed with Ullrich, but he also pointed out that the RWM was not only proposing a continuation (until April 1, 1939) of the embargo against Old Reich frms selling property insurance but wanted also to treat each licensing applica-tion individually. This led Hilgard to suggest that the embargo be eliminated and that the RWM immediately go over to a system of concessions. He thought it even more unfair that the RWM was asking to extend the embargo against Old Reich life insurance companies for fve years while also asking the excluded com-panies to participate for fve years in contributing to the funds guaranteeing the old Phix policies in the .VAG. This was obviously a matter of no small inter-est to General Director Schloe.mann of Allianz Leben, who did take the ※high road§ by arguing that the licensing of Old Reich life insurance companies would beneft the Austrian consumers, ※who would get cheaper insurance protection from the German than from the Austrian corporations.§40 
Schloe.mann, who was head of the branch organization for life insurance within the Reich Group, followed up these remarks with a series of aggressive moves designed to persuade the RWM to let Old Reich life insurance companies into Austria. He was able to play upon the reports being issued by the com-mittee investigating the Austrian insurance business, which argued both that the Austrians would need time to adjust to the German system and that they would probably still be uncompetitive even if the embargo were lengthened. In a lengthy memorandum to the RWM of October 24, Schloe.mann contended that the life insurance premiums charged by the Austrian companies were about the same as those charged by the Germans but, in contrast to the latter, did not offer any share of profts. Thus, Austrians were actually paying 15%每20% more than their German counterparts: 
The systematic development over many years of life insurance with proft sharing by the German companies of all types has enabled the life insurance business in the National So-cialist State to fulfll its tasks in the service of the People＊s Community in the best possible 
39 
Albingia to RWM, Aug. 26, 1938. Albingia made a renewed plea on Oct. 24, 1938; see .StA-AdR, 
BMF, VA, Karton 315, Akte 55/A, a-4, 1, Bl. 46每50, 85每91. 40 Beiratssitzung vom 22. Sept. 1938,GDV,RS/26, pp. 8每13. 
way. The advantages of this development cannot any longer be withheld from the na-tional comrades of the Ostmark who have returned to the Reich.41 
Schloe.mann claimed to be in no way convinced that such protectionism for the Austrians was necessary: not for the original publicly chartered companies of the states and cities who were mobilizing into one association, nor for the DAF companies, nor for foreign dominated companies like Der Anker (which was controlled by Swiss Re), nor for Donau Allgemeine Versicherungs-AG, in which Magdeburger Feuerversicherungs-Gesellschaft had the leading infuence. Furthermore, these foreign-owned Austrian frms did most of their business out-side Austria. As far as Schloe.mann was concerned, the companies in question should either be able to compete or should leave the scene, both in Austria and in Germany. As was the case with Albingia, the life insurers also sought to mo-bilize the rapid dismissal of Jewish employees in the insurance business for their purposes: 
The workforce of the Austrian companies should experience a marked diminution through the departure of the non-※Aryan§ employees so that the manpower available will be needed to deal with the remaining tasks. By permitting the entry of the German companies there will be a rising demand for insurance personnel. In any case, the totality of the German life insurance companies can undertake to guarantee that there will be no social hard-ships for the insurance employees.42 
As Schloe.mann was well aware, however, the real argument of the investigatory committee for continued protection of the Austrians from German competition was the unfavorable cost structure in the Austrian insurance industry. This had arisen from its underdeveloped provision of customer service, the legacy of the Phix Life affair, and the bad economic conditions that had plagued the Aus-trian economy. In his view, these defcits could not be repaired in one year or in fve but could only be corrected by improved economic conditions 每 to be ex-pected from the Anschlu. 每 and improved business methods. He viewed it as totally unfair that German companies should be expected to pay for Austria＊s failures and be excluded because of their productivity or that the Austrian pop-ulation should be deprived of the blessings of the German life insurance system. 
The demand 每 with which he concluded his memorandum 每 of Schloe.mann and his group that the German companies be allowed to set up shop in Aus-tria no later than January 1, 1939, met with strong resistance at a meeting of the RWM on October 26. Mayrhofer bluntly accused the German insurers of caring only about the extension of their business and, along with Hans Sitten-berger and Franz Fieger of RAS, called for an expansion of the deadline until the end of 1939. They claimed they needed at least that long to adjust to the new 
41 Italics in original. Fachgruppe Lebensversicherung an den RWM, 24. Okt. 1938,SM, 1458/2/194, 
Bl. 241每50, quote on Bl. 243. 42 Ibid., Bl. 246. 
conditions. Bra. took the side of the Austrians, which compelled the other Ger-mans (Schloe.mann and Ullrich) to retreat from their position. The latter had, as Schloe.mann later confessed to Fieger, committed a grave tactical error in not frst consulting with the Austrians to come to some understanding instead of thinking the Germans could simply ride roughshod over them. After the indus-try representatives left the meeting, the RAA also came down on the side of the Austrians, although the RWM held back on its decision. In a subsequent mem-orandum of November 24, the RAA supported maintaining the barrier against German property insurers until March 31 or June 30, 1939 每 the latter date was to be chosen in the end 每 and that against life insurers until December 31, 1939. 43 
These prospects mobilized the ever-watchful Schwede-Coburg, who was anx-ious to strengthen an alliance he had forged among the leading publicly chartered companies in Austria 每 Landesbrandschaden-Versicherungsanstalten, Ostmark-Versicherungs-AG, and St.dtische Versicherungsanstalt der Gemeinde Wien 每 and who was still conspiring to nationalize the industry. In November he thus turned to Bckel once again and urged the summoning of the Austrian Gauleit-ers to take special measures designed to protect Austrian companies and counter the German companies once they came in; when he received no response from the busy Bckel, he wrote again on December 21 and January 18. Bckel f-nally replied on February 3 and fatly turned down Schwede-Coburg＊s proposal, a decision that was determined by events in Berlin. Through his personal repre-sentative Kratz and a letter from Lange of the RWM, Bckel had been informed about Hitler＊s order suspending all further debate on the insurance national-ization issue for ten years and Ging＊s demand that the two sides cease their quarreling. As Bckel informed Schwede-Coburg, Ging wished a cessation of all discussion of insurance matters ※in order not to disturb or endanger the effciency of the German insurance business at the present time.§44 Bckel took this opportunity to express greater optimism than Schwede-Coburn about the capacity of the Austrian insurers to survive the end of protection, especially since the RAA would have to approve all requests by German companies to do busi-ness in Austria. 
Like Ging, Bckel was a pragmatist about the insurance business. A good illustration was his Aryanization policy. Bckel was a vicious anti-Semite and promoter of Aryanization who was frmly convinced that his supposedly long-suffering Austrian comrades deserved ※restitution§ for the alleged political and economic discrimination they had suffered at the hands of the Jews. This was shorthand for saying that the Austrian Nazis felt that they had been deprived of power and wealth by the Jews and that, having now attained power, they had a 
43 See Fieger to Frigessi, Oct. 29, 1938, BCI, NL Frigessi, cart. 68, fasz. 2;Vermerk,Nov. 1938,SM, 1458/2 /194, Bl. 251f., and RAA an RWM, 24.Nov. 1938, ibid., Bl. 256每9. 
44 
Bckel an Schwede-Coburg, 3.Feb. 1939, .StA-AdR, Bckel/Materie, Karton 94, Akte 2170/0. This was a verbatim repetition of the language used by Lange in a letter to Bckel of Jan. 18, ibid. 
right to plunder Jewish assets. Nevertheless, he was insistent that Jewish busi-nesses not fall into incompetent hands and that export interests be taken into account in the transfer or shutting down of Jewish enterprises.45 
The investigations into Austrian insurance had demonstrated that it was an overpopulated industry with an excessively high cost structure and was victim of a variety of ills stemming from the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian Em-pire, infation, depression, and the Phix Life mess. It was clear that some companies could and should not survive, and that takeovers by Allianz and the DAF had a stabilizing effect and constituted the most acceptable form of reor-ganization by German companies. The call for a period of adjustment probably was justifed, and the lesson taught Schloe.mann seemed to have taken hold. There was considerable cooperation between the German and Austrian insur-ers in 1939每1940, as old group insurance contracts for party organizations (and also for major industrial companies) spread to Austria, just as compromises were made in adjusting the premium rate structure in Austria to those of the Reich. If the reports and comments of the Austrian insurance leaders after the dismissal of their Jewish employees are to be believed 每 and there is no reason why they should overstress the importance of the Jews to their business 每 Austria suffered considerably from a shortage of skilled insurance personnel because of the dis-missals, the need to take on young and inexperienced persons to replace them, and the fact that such persons were increasingly being drafted into the army. In this realm, however, economic rationality had severe limits.46 Nevertheless, it was obvious that Germany was expanding, and an important incentive to stabi-lizing the insurance business situation in Austria was that Vienna was assuming an especially vital position at this point because it was ※to serve as a gateway for the economic expansion of Germany in the south eastern space.§47 
Such promising prospects were brightened further by the ※peaceful§ acqui-sition of the Sudetenland in the fall of 1938, the invasion of the rump Czech state in March 1939 and its transformation into the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, as well as the establishment of a nominally independent Slovak state. Needless to say, when the Wehrmacht marched in, German business was never far behind; this, of course, included the insurance business. As Martin 
45 
See his ※Zur Judenfrage in .sterreich§ in .StA-AdR, Bckel/Materie, Karton 89, Akte 2160/2, 
Bl. 44每8. 46 For the various reports on the state of the Austrian insurance business, see SM, 1458/2 /187 
and 215. See also the report on the Umstellungen im ostm.rkischen Versicherungsbetrieb nach 
dem Anschlu., Bezirksstelle Wien der Reichsgruppe ※Versicherungen§ to Amend, 17. April 1941, 
.StA-AdR, BMF, VA, Karton 329, Akte 80; the report of a speech by Tanzner on ※Die Ver-
sicherungswirtschaft in der Ostmark,§ Neumanns Zeitschrift f Versicherungswesen 61 (1938), 
pp. 1162每4; and Hans Sittenberger an Pg. Regierungsrat Ernst, 29. April 1939, .StA-AdR, B-
ckel/Materie, Karton 94, Akte 2170/0. 47 Josef Posselt, Direktor Internationale Unfall, an Frigessi, 17. Okt. 1938, BCI, NL Frigessi, cart. 
101, fasz. 1. See also Sittenberger an Ernst, 29. April 1939, .StA-AdR, Bckel/Materie, Karton 
94, Akte 2170/0. 
Herzog 每 a bright young assessor appointed by the Reich Group to assist Hil-gard around this time and in whom Hilgard was to fnd a reliable and trusted helper 每 pointed out in a memorandum of November 10, the situation in the Sudetenland was quite different from the one found in Austria. The only Ger-man company with a signifcant presence was Concordia of Cologne, which had an offce in Reichenberg, while the rest of the Sudeten insurance business con-sisted of the branches of Czech companies based primarily in Prague and some small local Sudenten-German companies. If one wished to transfer Sudeten-German portfolios into German hands, care had to be taken to avoid German or Sudeten companies simply winning away former Czech customers, since this would give the Czech companies disposal over the reserve coverage of the can-celled policies and also saddle the German companies with reserve requirements on unfavorable terms. At the same time, there was a similarity with Austria in-sofar as the RWM sought to protect Sudeten business from being overwhelmed by companies from the Reich and, with respect to insurance, wished to have ex-isting portfolios transferred to local Sudeten companies as much as possible.48 
This ft in well with the recent business politics in the Sudetenland. Konrad Henlein and his Sudetendeutsche Party had been striving for some time to unite the business interests of the region, while Concordia had sought to win over the pro-German elements by stressing its strong attachments to National Social-ism.49 In the course of November 1938, the local Sudeten insurance companies united into a publicly chartered Sudetendeutsche Union Versicherungs-AG; then both the new company and Concordia made a bid to more or less monopolize the taking over of Czech portfolios in the region 每 the former with respect to property insurance, the latter in life insurance. This plan, however, ran afoul of both RWM policy and other interests. On the one hand, the German govern-ment was concluding a treaty with Czechoslovakia that gave Czech companies control of the sale of those Sudeten portfolios at their disposal. On the other, German companies could see no justifcation for a Concordia monopoly and were also being asked by client industrial companies who were moving into the Sudetenland whether it would be possible to continue using their old insurers.50 
48 Notiz Herzog f Gambke, 10.Nov. 1938, GDV, unsignierte Akten, Sudetenland 10 IV, 2.On 
Herzog, see the remarks by Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7,p. 122. Bra., of all people, had as-
signed Herzog to Hilgard, which turned out to be the only positive thing Bra. ever did for him. 
In his later years, Herzog was to demonstrate a remarkable sensitivity and interest in the history 
of the insurance business that one wishes were more widely shared by his colleagues and that is 
amply demonstrated in his unpublished history of the Munich Re, ※Was Dokumente erz.hlen 
knen,§ FHA. 49 See the revealing reports by Hugo Kornfeld, who headed the RAS offce in Prague, to Frigessi of 
June 30 and July 7, 1938, BCI, NL Frigessi, cart. 79, fasz. 3. This development was not entirely 
unwelcome to the Prague-based companies, who saw it as an opportunity to take on Jewish cus-
tomers who would obviously not be very happy insuring with the Sudeten insurance companies 
or with Concordia. 50 See the various reports by Herzog, especially Herzog an Bra., 7. Dez. 1938, in GDV, unsignierte 
Akten, Sudetenland 10 IV, 2. 
Whatever the case, the amount of insurance involved was too large and the pressures from companies in the Reich too great for the aforementioned monop-olistic efforts to work, and other companies were permitted to assume Sudeten-land portfolios. One of these was Allianz Leben, which concluded a contract with the Slavia Insurance Company in Prague at the beginning of May 1939 in which it took over a portfolio worth 8.4 million RM (70 million Czech kronen). At the same time, Allianz, Wiener Allianz, Bayerische Versicherungsbank, and Kraft took over the Sudeten general portfolio of the Slavia. Additionally, Wiener Allianz took part of the general portfolios of the Prvn赤 ’
Cesk芍 and Rolnick芍 companies.51 The Slavia portfolio marked the last signifcant prewar acquisition by the Allianz concern. Its future gains and international activities, including those in the Protectorate of Bohemia-Moravia created after the German entry into Prague in March 1939, were to be made in the context of war that began at the beginning of September 1939. As before the war, however, so during the confict; Allianz was also to depend on the insurance industry＊s success in repre-senting and defending its interests under the National Socialist regime, and the enemies of the private insurance business were anything but stilled by the com-ing of war. 
the nationalization conflict redivivus and the rewards and travails of collaboration 
The twentieth century produced a variety of tyrannical and bizarre regimes, of which National Socialism and Stalinist Communism were certainly the most extreme. If the former has nevertheless engendered a unique fascination for historians and the historically-interested public, this stems not only from its ex-treme aestheticization of politics and unfathomable brutality but also because it held sway over one of the most institutionally advanced, industrialized, and cul-tured societies of Europe. The German elite had played no small role in helping the National Socialists come to power and, in the case of the business elite, to consolidate their position. A good many had entertained notions of being able to control or dominate the Nazis and bend the purposes of the regime in the direction of their ambitions, but certainly all such illusions had evaporated by 1938每1939; the overheating of the economy by the Four-Year Plan, the Pogrom of November 1938, and Hitler＊s manifest willingness to risk war and wage war to achieve his goals demonstrated that the regime had entered a radical phase. This was a new kind of regime and a new kind of politics. One of the major prob-lems for the historian is trying to comprehend how the elites 每 in this case, the 
51 For a listing of the companies involved, see Tomas Jelinek, ※Insurance in the Nazi Occupied Czech Lands,§ Table 2: The Transfer of Czechoslovak Insurance Activities in the Sudetenland, to be found at the website http://www.hrad.cz/kpr/holocaust/pojistky uk.html . For the con-tract, see BAK, B 280/1446, Bl. 8每13; for the estimated worth of the portfolio, see Allianz Leben an RAA, 30. Sept. 1939, ibid., Bl. 37f. 
leaders of the German private insurance industry 每 assessed the domestic and international situation. This needs to be coupled with an effort to determine where they felt some freedom to maneuver and capacity to shape events or, at least, to determine from whence they thought containment of the regime might come. The insurance industry has good reason to prefer peace to war, since the latter increases the death rate, is by defnition risky in every respect, disrupts international connections, and makes the conduct of business much more com-plicated. Insurance is not a vital war industry in the same sense as, for example, coal mining, and its claims to manpower are of a lower priority. At the same time, it is an important fnancial resource for the government to tap in its war efforts, and this makes it particularly vulnerable to the vagaries of war fnanc-ing. Naturally, victorious war also offers opportunities, just as defeat imposes special penalties, as had been demonstrated after 1918. How the leaders of the insurance business dealt with the new war that began in 1939 was therefore a function of their assessment of the opportunities and risks that war under Na-tional Socialist leadership brought. The problem here is to reconstruct the real strategies of offense and defense available within the existing range of possibili-ties as they were understood by these businessmen 每 that is, to be as historical as possible. There is little point in abusing the advantages of hindsight and impos-ing present-day knowledge and sensibilities in judging past actions where there is little historical basis for doing so. Similarly, as has already been shown, it is absurd to take the post facto accounts by insurance leaders at face value, and it is essential to reconstruct what they were really up to at the time. One of their goals, which often conveniently slipped their minds after 1945, was taking as much advantage as possible of the war to expand their enterprises and interests. Finally, it would be utter folly to treat the decision making of the businessmen in question as an exercise in some pure form of business history and economic decision making, assuming there is such a thing.52 Certainly there was no such thing in the Third Reich. One of the great ※achievements§ of the National So-cialists was to politicize all economic decision making. It is therefore useful to begin this section by considering the available evidence concerning how some insurance leaders viewed the situation on the eve of war. 
In a letter to his father of November 18, 1935, Kurt Schmitt＊s eldest son G-ther ruminated about the hostile attitude of Hitler toward the university frater-nities, to whose existence and values both father and son were frmly committed. Gther gloomily stated that ※we no longer have any complete freedom of exis-tence today 每 no one contests this 每 and we will never attain it in the National Socialist State! And the National Socialist State exists and will remain in exis-tence!§ While some of the Corps brethren thought that the way to go was to convert into a National Socialist organization, it all reminded Gther of the Stahlhelm, Weimar＊s famous veterans＊s organization, which had allowed itself 
52 Here I fnd myself very much at odds with the arguments of Toni Pierenkemper, ※Was kann eine moderne Unternehmensgeschichtsschreibung leisten?§, pp. 15每31. 
to be coordinated right out of existence. The reality was that ※one cannot com-pare the present time with any earlier one; never yet has a State represented the totality principle so strongly and 每 this is the chief thing 每 carried it through!§53 
Gther Schmitt＊s desire to preserve the autonomy of the fraternities appar-ently did not extend to other spheres of life, however, since he joined the SS and was to become a member of the SS Leibsstandarte Adolf Hitler. Indeed, he and his father were quite upset when they believed Gther＊s SS membership and withdrawal from the church had led to his rejection for a Cecil Rhodes Fellow-ship in 1938. This demonstrated that Schmitt, Anglophile though he may have been, had very little understanding of the limits of British toleration for German peculiarities under National Socialism. Schmitt＊s neighbor in the Starnberg Lake area (and frequent visitor at the Schmitt estate Tiefenbrunn), the diplomat Ul-rich von Hassell, who would be executed fve years later for his participation in the Resistance, had more understanding for Gther＊s rejection by the selection committee. In von Hassell＊s view, the selection committee had a responsibility not to send people to England who would give offense, something the Schmitts were apparently too obtuse to comprehend. Von Hassell was a genuine oppo-nent of the regime, but in 1938 he noted that Kurt Schmitt was anything but happy about the state of affairs in Germany: 
In general, Schmitt was just as despairing about the domestic and economic situation as all of us, especially over the fact that the historical opportunity provided by the Jewish Pogrom to put a stop to the development has not been used by Ging despite his bet-ter understanding and by the army through its lack of political power. If Hitler, through further passivity of the Western Powers attains a new success in the East against Poland and Soviet Russia and in making a large economic area in the form of the Ukraine ser-viceable to Germany, then the steamroller will continue on, the economic crisis will be put off or avoided, and the destruction of all ethical values will progress further. With regard to the Jewish matter, he [Schmitt] maintained that Hitler to be sure had given his agreement to measures of reprisal at Goebbels＊s instigation but that he was himself surprised and painfully affected by their actual scope and character. Ging had unfor-tunately failed to recognize this and believed that he was dealing with the clear will of the Frer.54 
While von Hassell quite rightly did not fnd this interpretation of the roles played by leading Nazi actors in the November Pogrom very convincing, what is remarkable is the extent to which Schmitt understood Hitler＊s ultimate goals in the East, the economic dislocation that had been created by the rearmament program, the potential role of conquest and plunder in its solution, and the abso-lutely unethical nature of the regime. As was the case with respect to Goebbels, Schmitt tended to overstate Ging＊s rationality. Indeed, when von Hassell asked 
53 Gther Schmitt an Kurt Schmitt, 18.Nov. 1935, FHA, NL 1/125; for Schmitt＊s view of the stu-
dent organizations, see his ※Erinnerungen,§ pp. 25每9, FHA, NL 1/133. 54 Gaertringen (ed.), Hassell-Tagebher, pp. 73每4 (29. Dez. 1938). 
Schmitt whether he could discern any person or persons about whom opposi-tion might rally, Schmitt was very pessimistic. He thought that Ging and the army still had the potential to force their will on Hitler, but not for long. When von Hassell suggested that Ging was not really the right man because of his fear of Himmler and Heydrich, Schmitt responded that he had heard rumors that opposition to Hitler＊s policies was forming. He considered Heydrich and Goebbels the most dangerous persons in the regime but ※did not want to give up on Himmler entirely,§55 despite the SS leader＊s fanaticism about religion and certain other subjects. He thought Himmler had a good understanding of some of the dangers, but he took a dim view of most Gauleiters, especially Julius Streicher in Nuremberg, Martin Mutschmann in Saxony, Adolf Wagner in Mu-nich, and Schwede-Coburg. 
Manifestly, the disillusioned Schmitt was grasping at straws in thinking that Himmler might somehow moderate the policies being pursued, but such ap-peared to be the options from his perspective at the end of 1938. Schmitt in any case continued to cultivate Himmler as best he could, not only through his mem-bership in and contributions to the Circle of Friends (discussed in Chapter 2)but also by yearly contributions of 240 RM between 1938 and 1942 to the Lebens-born e.V., an SS organization aimed at promoting the production of ※racially pure§ children through the protection and care of their married and unmar-ried mothers. He also made monthly contributions of 100 RM to the ※special fund for SA leaders§ between 1938 and 1943. 56 Not only did Schmitt make per-sonal contributions to such causes, he also sought to gain the personal interest of Himmler in the Munich Re and perhaps exert infuence on him in other mat-ters as well. Thus, in July 1939, Schmitt used the occasion of his intervention with Hilgard about a contribution to some cause of interest to Himmler to ask SS-Gruppenfrer Karl Wolff, thechief ofHimmler＊s personalstaff, ifhe, Himm-ler, and their wives might not come out to Tiefenbrunn for a visit. The estate was particularly beautiful in the summer, and Agriculture Minister Darr谷 was supporting its transformation into an entailed hereditary estate, a goal whose attainment certainly would be promoted by a visit of high-ranking SS leaders. Schmitt suggested that they meet at the headquarters of Munich Re, ※the great-est enterprise of its kind in the world and one of the most beautiful buildings in Munich,§ and then travel out to Tiefenbrunn.57 
The preparations for war in the summer of 1939 allowed Himmler and Wolff no time for such visits, but theinvitation demonstrates that Schmitt had remained persona grata for Himmler and his inner circle. Nevertheless, there was no way that Schmitt could protect Gther from the fatal consequences of membership in the SS Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler. Gther was about to take his university 
55 
Ibid. 56 Report on the investigation of Kurt Schmitt, Exhibit 42,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /58/2每7. 57 Schmitt an Wolff, 6. Juli 1939, BAB, ehem. BDC, SL 62, Bl. 72每4, and Wolff＊s reply, 5. Sept. 1939, 
ibid., Bl. 70. 
examinations, his studies already having been delayed by the call-up of his unit during the Czech crisis, and he was sent to fght at the Polish front in Septem-ber 1939. Understandably, Kurt Schmitt was extremely anxious about his son＊s safety as well as his welfare, and when he learned from his academic connections that students who had been called up could be placed on temporary furlough in order to take a special examination, Schmitt sought to arrange through Wolff for Gther to be given such an opportunity once the campaign in the East ended, so that he could take his examination at the University of Munich. Before getting the favorable news on this effort, he learned from Wolff that his son had ※fallen for his Frer and his homeland§ and found himself requesting that Gther＊s body be exhumed from a cemetery in Silesia and returned to Tiefenbrunn.58 Hitler and Himmler sent wreaths for the occasion 每 certainly no consolation to Frau Schmitt, who had opposed her husband＊s involvement with the National Socialists from the start, and a hollow tribute to Kurt Schmitt＊s frst but not last great personal sacrifce for a regime he increasingly disliked but which, in con-trast to von Hassell, he continued to treat with ambivalence and ambiguity. The news of Kurt Schmitt＊s loss was a shock to many of his compatriots in the in-surance business. As Arnoldo Frigessi, surely not a person one would normally have expected to mourn an SS man, wrote to Alzheimer, ※I cannot refrain from giving expression to you also the genuine emotion which has seized all of us by the news that the son of Reich Minister Schmidt [sic] has fallen.§59 
Schmitt was indeed living in two worlds, the civilized, cultivated international world of European insurance business and the one inhabited by the National So-cialists. People cope with their personal tragedies and life＊s exigencies in different ways, however, and Schmitt seemed to be his old self when Ulrich von Hassell encountered him again in Ebenhausen at the end of January 1940. Schmitt re-ported attending Ging＊s birthday party in Berlin on the 12th, and von Hassell went on to note 
that in general one had succeeded in cloaking and securing the foreign interests of the Mu-nich Re in time, mainly by a kind of dissimulation toward the enemy powers. All lines of contact have not yet been irrevocably cut off, as was the case in 1914. His [Schmitt＊s] report on Berlin refected his so easily impressionable nature, fundamentally completely nega-tive but with exploding freworks of optimism along the way. When Funk tells him that our continuously on-again, off-again offensives against Belgium and the Netherlands are a calculated war of nerves, then he believes this. Ging spoke ※moderately and calmly.§ Yet he was horrifed by Himmler who, with his jiggling pince-nez and the dark expres-sion of his proletarian face, told him that the Frer had assigned him the task of making sure that the Poles could never rise up again. Therefore, a policy of extermination.60 
58 See Kurt Schmitt an Gther Schmitt, 19. Sept. 1939, and Prof. Theodor Ss an Schmitt, 9. Sept. 
1938, FHA, NL 1/125, which also contains the last letters between Gther and his parents. See 
also Schmitt an Wolff, 19. Sept. 1939, Wolff an Schmitt, 9. Okt. 1939, Schmitt an Wolff, 14. Okt. 
1939, and other relevant correspondence in BAB, ehem. BDC, SL 62, Bl. 62每9, 77f. 59 Frigessi to Alzheimer, Oct. 3, 1939, BCI, NL Frigessi, cart. 62, fasz. 3. 60 Gaertringen (ed.), Hassell-Tagebher, p. 158 (28. Jan. 1940). 
Clearly, Schmitt＊s access to the high and mighty of the regime did little to clar-ify his never particularly analytical political judgment. Instead, it intensifed his oscillations. At one moment he looked to Himmler to bring some reason into the situation; at another, he placed hopes in Ging＊s ※moderation.§ He could never face up to the reality that he was consorting with monsters, let alone de-cide to make the kind of existential moral choice of von Hassell and the men and women of the Resistance. Nor, indeed, was he prepared to support the path of open opposition to the regime of Pastor Martin Niemler, whose family were regular visitors at the Schmitts. In 1936, Schmitt told Niemler during a conver-sation in Berlin that ※you stand before the choice of clearly and single-mindedly carrying on the battle you have begun 每 if you do so you will defnitely be put out of the way 每 or continuing to serve your church even beyond the present time by cautious self-restraint.§ Niemler＊s response was that ※this policy might be correct for an economic enterprise but it is not applicable in questions of belief. Here there are no compromises. I must go my way.§61 That way led to a con-centration camp; to Schmitt＊s great credit, he not only sought to intercede on Niemler＊s behalf but also looked after the care and education of Niemler＊s son Hermann at his estate Tiefenbrunn, where he also housed and protected his son＊s teacher and others who were non-※Aryan§ under the Nuremberg laws.62 Schmitt was no hero, but he was no coward either and, as will be shown, could at times be quite reckless in his speech and actions. At the same time, he sin-cerely believed 每 even after the grim experiences since 1933 每 that his path was the correct one and that it was his duty to protect the enterprises in his care and fght for them within the system rather than pursue a ※catastrophic§ policy of futile opposition. 
Ever since his time as economics minister, Schmitt had feared that the regime was heading toward war, and certainly by 1938 this anxiety was widely shared among some of his colleagues. Hilgard, who had travelled with his family from his nearby estate in Irnberg to witness the events surrounding the Munich Con-ference in September每October 1938, later claimed that one could see from the ※naked rage§ in Hitler＊s eyes that the entire effort at a peaceful solution to the Czech crisis ran counter to his real intentions. Still, Hilgard seems to have en-tertained some hope that the English had contained Hitler, but he rapidly gave it up after experiencing the renewed bellicosity of Hitler＊s post-Munich speeches and especially after the occupation of Prague in March 1939. 63 Gloomy fore-boding now dominated the atmosphere and luncheon conversation among the members of what Hilgard described as ※our Allianz family.§ As the political situation became worse, Hilgard met daily with the section heads in the super-visory board room at Allianz, where they could get the latest information from 
61 Schmitt, ※Erinnerungen,§ FHA, NL 1/133. 62 See Niemler＊s testimony on Schmitt＊s behalf in the denazifcation tribunal, Oct. 7, 1947,AM, 
Spruchkammerakten Dr. Kurt Schmitt, Akten der Spruchkammer Starnberg, 2. Teil. 63 See Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7,p. 121f. 
Director Georg Kig, who had served on the General Staff during the last war and who was slated to take up an important military post in a new war. It was diffcult to act on Kig＊s information, however, since the government insisted that nothing be done to suggest that the Third Reich wanted war. Ultimately, one was forced to fall back on the fexibility of the Allianz organization itself and its blend of centralization and decentralization 每 which, as Hilgard proudly noted, did indeed serve the concern well during the war.64 
In contrast to Schmitt, Hilgard was not one to exhibit any anguish about the regime. If he had any purpose in life then it was to serve the ※Allianz family,§ to hold it together and to preserve the private insurance industry in victory or, fnally, in defeat. He accepted the cards dealt to him, never pretended or imag-ined that they were anything but what they were, and played to win according to the rules defned by those who had determined the nature of the game. His great skill was to stay in the game as long as possible by fnessing every dangerous sit-uation, choosing powerful partners, and knowing when to call his opponent＊s bluff and when to cut his losses. That was how he managed to enter the war as head of the Reich Group for Insurance, despite all the efforts to push him out, and to play the key role in defning its policies. 
Hilgard＊swasmostcertainly notthe wayoftheAlteLeipzigerGeneralDirector Johannes Tiedke, who (as has been shown elsewhere65) had sought to maintain the integrity of his enterprise and independence from the regime. Tiedke had actually summarily dismissed two NSBO plant foremen in 1934 for engaging in impermissible agitation and interference in company operations. Were it not for the intervention of his friend, the later Reich Economics Minister Schacht, the ruthless Saxon Gauleiter Mutschmann would have had Tiedke arrested. Tiedke＊s outspoken opposition to Bra. and to the handling of the insurance industry＊s payment to cover damages of the November Pogrom only increased the enmity toward him in Party circles. As he was to discover from documents found af-ter the war, powerful forces had been intriguing to bring him down. On the one hand, the Nazi plant steward at the Alte Leipziger (a man named Schneider) and his Gestapo crony Gothe were conspiring with various directors to remove Tiedke. On the other, the DAF leader for banking and insurance Rudolf Lencer wanted to place Alte Leipziger, which had been doing quite well under Tiedke＊s leadership, under a commissar and transform it into a publicly chartered com-pany. Tiedke made the mistake of failing to have the entire company assemble to hear Hitler＊s speech of September 1, 1939, as was expected by the Party, with the claim that suitable facilities were not available in the building and that the speech could be heard again later. This played right into the hands of his enemies. He was denounced, arrested on September 2, placed in the Leipzig prison, and inter-rogated for fve hours about his political affliations. Released later in the day, he 
64 See Eduard Hilgard, Die Allianz im 2. Weltkrieg [ca. 1955] (unpublished ms., FHA, AZ 1.3/2), 
pp. 3每4. 65 See Chapter 4, pp. 154每5, 176每7. 
was arrested again on September 4 at Lencer＊s instructions because of Tiedke＊s refusal to join a DAF committee connected with Lencer＊s offce in which all lead-ing insurance directors were expected to participate. This time, he spent fve days in jail before being released. When he asked on what charges he had been arrested, he was told by the Gestapo offcial that he had committed no formal offense but that it was hoped he had learned his lesson and would be compliant with the Party and DAF in the future. But Lencer wanted him out, so Tiedke was declared ※politically unbearable,§ removed from all his offces, prematurely re-tired, and refused a position on the Alte Leipziger supervisory board 每 where his advice and experience would most certainly have been welcomed. Lencer was able to accomplish this by threatening the remaining directors and the supervi-sory board of Alte Leipziger with a takeover of the company by a commissar if Tiedke were not removed. To add insult to injury, Tiedke later discovered that Hilgard had cooperated with Lencer in the affair and had simply left Tiedke in the lurch. Ironically, however, Tiedke also came to the conclusion that the most important thing was to protect the Alte Leipziger from Lencer and that the supervisory board did the right thing in dropping him as general director and appointing one of the functioning directors, Fritz Hensel, as his successor. It is clear that Tiedke cannot be described as a resister in the sense of Niemler or von Hassell, and his anti-Nazi posture was rooted in his principled business conservatism. He did not openly challenge the regime ideologically. There were simply limits to the political compromises he was prepared to make and to the types of persons with whom he was prepared to consort. He was bitter about being removed from active life seven years before retirement age. Hilgard and Schmitt undoubtedly would have argued that Tiedke was a good illustration of the futility and impotence to which one condemned oneself by failing to make the necessary public and visible compromises they had made in order to save what could be saved. In any case, the German business community certainly did not suffer from any abundance of persons like Tiedke, let alone from full-blown opponents of the regime.66 
From this perspective, Hilgard was the right man in the right place for the majority of his colleagues, especially when seconded by the potent support of Schmitt. As has been shown, Hilgard, with the help of Schmitt, emerged to be confrmed by Ging as head of the Insurance Industry Reich Group in Febru-ary 1939 despite a strong movement to have him removed during the previous months.67 This by no means terminated the dangers presented by Schwede-Coburg and his followers, and the appointment of Amend as head of the RAA was hardly a promising development from the perspective of the private insurers. Essentially, Hilgard and Schmitt were engaged in a two-front war with the Nazi 
66 Johannes Tiedke, ※Meine Stellung zum Nationalsozialismus erhaupt und die Grde daf, 
da. ich nicht in die Partei eingetreten bin,§ of July 5, 1945, NL Tiedke, and Wei., ※Ist das, was 
wir machen, auch gerecht?§, pp. 45每75. 67 See Chapter 4, pp. 185每7. 
leaders. On the one hand, they had to keep a watchful eye on organizational developments and ※reform§ proposals in Berlin so as to ensure that the domi-nant position of private industry was maintained. On the other hand, especially under wartime conditions, the contest for power between the private and the publicly chartered companies 每 as demonstrated in Austria and the Sudeten-land 每 was also carried into the areas in which Germany expanded. The success of private industry in taking the lead in insurance expansion and forging inter-national contacts under the new conditions would be critical to its position at home and abroad. The domestic context is important for understanding the in-ternational effort and must be considered frst. 
Ging＊s choice of Hilgard in February 1939 came as a great surprise to Schwede-Coburg, the offcials of the RWM, and many insurance industry lead-ers; it had simply been assumed that the DAF insurance general director from Hamburg, Rudolf Kratochwill, would be Hilgard＊s successor. He was expected to preside over a reorganization of the Reich Group in which the private and publicly chartered companies would be combined and in which there would be anywhere between fve and nine economic groups for the key insurance areas, with specialized branch groups under them. Additionally, plans were afoot to create an advisory council for the RAA under the chairmanship of Schwede-Coburg, with Kurt Schmitt and Hans Goebbels as deputy chairmen, that would include heads of the various economic units of the Reich Group as well as other prominent persons. It was not only to advise the RAA but also to propose fundamental reforms of the industry. The Party leadership followed these de-velopments closely. On January 7, 1939, for example, Chief of Staff Martin Bormann approved these plans in the name of Party secretary Rudolf He., pointing out that he had discussed them with Schmitt and that they seemed to have general approval; on February 7, He. informed Ley of his approval of Kratochwill.68 
Thus, everyone seems to have been caught off-guard by Ging＊s change of heart on the leadership question, and it was only on April 21 that a meeting was held involving Schwede-Coburg, Hilgard, Schmitt, Goebbels, Amend, and Ministerial Director Lange in an effort to move matters forward. Now, Hilgard was given the task of organizing fve economic groups within the Reich Group and to create special branch groups for each of them: (1) property under Gen-eral Director Heinrich Bothe of the Landschaftliche Brandkasse in Hannover, a publicly chartered company; (2) life and health insurance under General Direc-tor Kratochwill; (3) vehicles under Director Max Odenbreit of the Agrippina company in Cologne; (4) accident and liability under Director Bruno Reuter 
68 In general, see Karl Adolf Schwartz,※Die Verb.nde der Versicherungswirtschaft bis 1945,§ pp. 86每9,GDV, 0-201/1. See BAB, R 3101/9275, Bl. 152ff. for the details of these developments; see especially Bormann an RWM, 7. Jan. 1939, ibid., Bl. 158每9, and He. an Ley, 7.Feb. 1939, ibid., Bl. 179. 
of .ffentliche Versicherungsanstalt des Landes Sachsen in Dresden, a publicly chartered company; and (5) reinsurance, credit insurance, and other types of insurance under Director Alzheimer of the Munich Re. Hilgard had not been happy about this reorganization plan when it was frst accepted in December 1938, arguing then that one should set up either economic groups or branch groups but not both, since it would produce nothing but overorganization and duplication of effort. He was overriden by the RWM offcialdom on the grounds that every Reich Group had to have economic groups and insurance could be no exception. At the April 21 meeting, however, he did achieve agreement that the branch group question would be put off since leaders of the economic groups had frst to be approved by the Deputy Frer＊s offce (Rudolf He.); once this happened, one could then discuss the personnel for the branch groups. Further, the meeting of April 21 authorized the creation of the advisory council planned earlier, now with Schwede-Coburg as chairman and Schmitt as deputy chairman and a variety of members ranging from Lencer of the DAF and Hans Goebbels to Ullrich of Gotha Versicherung.69 Matters then dragged on until mid-July with Schwede-Coburg becoming increasingly angry that Ging had not delivered on certain promises from when they frst discussed an advisory council 每 namely, Hans Goebbels as co-deputy chairman and a small committee with fewer repre-sentatives of the private industry.70 
What is obvious from both the passage of time and the developments since February is that Schwede-Coburg was losing the initiative and that his intended instrument for the ※reform§ of the insurance business, the advisory council, was being turned into an unwieldy body flled with people he did not want. Even the reorganization of the Reich Group was being delayed. A decree had been issued on September 8, 1939, mandating that the reorganization take place on Octo-ber 1, but Hilgard suddenly took ill in late September and was expected to be bedridden for at least a month. The RWM felt it essential to delay the imple-mentation of the reorganization, since Hilgard had been personally selected by Ging to undertake the reorganization and it simply could not be done without Hilgard if one did not want to run the risk of the old conficts of interest 每 which Hilgard had been assigned the task of eradicating 每 showing up yet again. The RWM went further than originally intended, however, by not simply delaying the reorganization until the new year but actually empowering Hilgard to inte-grate the old apparatus with the new one, to appoint the committees that were to function immediately, and to appoint commissars for the special branch organi-zations falling under the economic groups. Hilgard also appointed Alzheimer to act as his deputy until he returned to work. Hilgard＊s ※indispensability§ had ob-viously been powerfully ratifed by Ging＊s imprimatur, and he knew how to use 
69 Entwurf, RWM an Braunes Haus, 31.Mai 1939, and Hilgard an Staatssekret.r Landfried, 30. 
Okt. 1939, ibid., Bl. 201每2, 300每6. 70 Schwede-Coburg an Ministerialrat Krer, 12. Juli 1939, ibid., Bl. 210每11. 
it. Hilgard＊s illness provided him with an excellent opportunity to preempt fu-ture decisions, both with respect to organization and with respect to personnel.71 
This did not go unnoticed by Bothe and Reuter, who were from the publicly chartered companies and allies of Schwede-Coburg and were slated to head eco-nomic groups. They went so far as to refuse to recognize the commissarial and other appointments that had been made by Hilgard on the grounds that these required approval from He.＊s offce. The RWM responded by characterizing their behavior as ※crude insubordination,§ a violation of the leadership princi-ple and cause for dismissal if not corrected.72 At the same time, Schwede-Coburg was now taking the position that one did not need branch groups after all and that one could settle on having fve economic groups with the persons already appointed. 
For Hilgard, however, this was no longer satisfactory, and he apparently felt that both his renewed authority and the outbreak of the war gave him the oppor-tunity to demand that the private insurance sector receive its due. As he pointed out in telephone calls to Schwede-Coburg and in a lengthy letter of October 30 to Landfried of the RWM,73 the only area where publicly chartered companies had a market share comparable to that of the private insurers was fre insurance, with 40% for the former and 60% for the latter. There was no other area in which the publicly chartered companies could boast more than 15% of market share; in many cases, it was considerably less. Furthermore, the private insur-ance companies were exclusively involved in the most risky areas of wartime insurance: transport, where special community transport insurers had been or-ganized to share the additional risk, and machine insurance. Ninety percent of fight insurance was provided by the private insurers. Hilgard found it inap-propriate that the most important economic groups in which private insurers dominated were nonetheless under leaders of the publicly chartered companies, while those groups led by private insurance industry leaders were almost exclu-sively the province of the private insurers anyway. The only head with whom Hilgard was reasonably satisfed was Kratochwill, since the policies pursued by the private and the DAF life insurance companies tended to be similar. Hil-gard demanded that the weight of the private insurers be increased by dividing property insurance into two groups, one under Bothe for fre insurance and the other under General Director Blase of Aachen-Leipziger Versicherungs-AG for other forms of property insurance. Similarly, while willing to leave accident in-surance with Reuter, Hilgard proposed that Schmidt-Polex be placed in charge of a separate liability insurance group. Hilgard was quite blunt in stating that the acceptance of his proposals was essential if he were to lead the Reich Group 
71 Vermerk, 28. Sept. 1939, and Vermerk, 7. Okt. 1939, ibid., Bl. 229每30, 251每2. 72 Vermerk Ministerialrat Homann, 21. Okt. 1939; Schreiben Neumann an Homann, 16. Okt. 1939, 
ibid., Bl. 280每7. 73 Hilgard an Landfried, 30. Okt. 1939, ibid., Bl. 300每6. 
effectively and maintain the confdence of the private insurers. After further bickering in which Hilgard and Schmitt pressed Ministerial Director Lange to concede the demands of the private insurers, an organizational arrangement was fnally agreed upon that was acceptable to all sides. There would be seven economic groups, with transport under General Director Edgar Schnell of Nord-stern forming a special group (for the wartime period) with all the rights and powers of an economic group. Property insurance was divided into two groups: the frst, under Bothe, had domain over fre, water, interruption of plant oper-ations, storm, hail, and livestock; the second, under Blase, was charged with insurance against theft, civic unrest, rain damage, machinery and machine as-semblage, and glass. Apparently, theft and glass insurance had frst been given to Bothe＊s group but were now transferred to Blase＊s because of pressure from Hilgard and Schmitt. The other groups were life and health insurance, vehicle insurance, accident insurance, liability insurance, and reinsurance and credit in-surance. Five of the economic group leaders came from the private sector and three from the publicly chartered sector. If the purpose of the reorganization ini-tiated by Schwede-Coburg and his friends had been to give domination to the publicly chartered insurers, then the combined forces of Hilgard, Schmitt, and Lange (and the crucial indifference of Ging) had defeated those efforts.74 
One of the reasons that the number and composition of the leadership of the economic groups was so important was that they were to be represented in the insurance advisory council for the RAA and RWM, by this time referred to as the Reich Insurance Committee, which was to be chaired by Schwede-Coburg and upon which he pinned great hopes of carrying through his proposed reforms of the insurance business. Here too, however, Schmitt and Hilgard had claims to make. Thus, on December 7, Schmitt wrote to Lange expressing apprecia-tion for his efforts on their behalf but pointing out that there was yet one more issue that needed to be settled. While insisting that he was glad to work under the chairmanship of Schwede-Coburg, he could not accept being a co-equal deputy chairman with Hans Goebbels 每 not because he had anything against Hans Goebbels personally but rather because it seemed inappropriate to have both the chairman and the frst deputy chairman come from the publicly char-tered companies, given that ※85% of the German insurance, and to be sure the most diffcult areas, are in private insurance.§75 When Lange tried to make light of the problem, pointing out that the danger of an anti每private insurance indus-try majority had been obviated and that the goal was a distinguished committee to provide advice, Schmitt assured him that the issue was not one of prestige but rather a practical one, and that he would be satisfed if he (Schmitt) would 
74 See the correspondence and draft decrees of December 1939 in ibid., Bl. 353每72. See also Tages-
meldung, 30.Nov. 1939; Hilgard an Lange, 2. Dez. 1939, Lange an Hilgard, 13. Dez. 1939, Schmitt 
an Lange, 2. Dez. 1939,SM, 1458/1/282, Bl. 26, 32每8. 75 Schmitt an Lange, 7. Dez. 1939, ibid., Bl. 47. 
be named frst deputy chair and Goebbels second deputy chair. Otherwise, he really could not serve on the advisory committee. Nevertheless, in the end he gave way since the formal announcement of the creation of the committee listed Schmitt, along with Goebbels, as deputy chairmen. What would become of the committee remained to be seen, but Schmitt and Hilgard had clearly established a strong position for dealing with Schwede-Coburg and his cronies by the begin-ning of 1940. 76 
The Reich Insurance Committee did in truth turn out to be an extremely unpleasant, even bizarre, experience. The committee held its frst meeting on January 26, 1940, where Schwede-Coburg and Amend 每 with no prior warn-ing 每 presented members with the draft of an amendment to the Reich Insurance Law under which reinsurance would be placed under RAA supervision and every reinsurance contract would be subject to RAA approval. Schwede-Coburg also announced that he intended to send the legislation on to the RWM and claimed that it had the unanimous agreement of the committee. It cannot be said, how-ever, that he got very far with this tactic. Hilgard and Alzheimer immediately objected that this would destroy Germany＊s position in the international rein-surance business entirely, since no foreign insurer would or could wait upon the approval of some Berlin offce before concluding an agreement with its German counterpart. Schwede-Coburg＊s response was that such arguments did not im-press him since the war would be won ※in three months and foreign insurers will be happy if they are allowed to reinsure with German companies.§77 Schwede-Coburg＊s effort to achieve a fait accompli failed, and the matter was put off for negotiation among the interested parties and commentary from the Reinsurance Economic Group. The latter produced a long letter of protest stating that rein-surance often required speedy action, that the business would be undermined by the proposed requirements, and that a form of state supervision that en-tailed the granting of permission for each and every piece of business constituted an interference ※in the independence and self-responsibility of business.§ The reinsurance business was too complex to be made hostage to a ruinous ※schema-tization and bureaucratization.§ 
Alzheimer also wrote personally to Amend, warning of the dangers to Ger-man international economic interests posed by the Schwede-Coburg proposal. He dismissed the latter＊s claim that reinsurance was completely free of all su-pervision, pointing out that it had to open its fles just as every other branch of insurance. What it could not produce was a business plan in the style of other insurance branches. He reminded Amend that German reinsurance, especially his concern, had played a leading role in spreading the idea of reinsurance in-ternationally, and he claimed (less accurately) that Munich Re was the leading reinsurance company in the world, ahead even of Swiss Re. He noted that fve 
76 Lange an Schmitt, 13. Dez. 1939, and Schmitt an Lange, 21. Dez. 1939, ibid., Bl. 48每9. 77 This account is taken from Alzheimer, ※Die deutsche Rkversicherung 1938每1945. Ein Rechen-
schaftsbericht§ (1948), MR, D/2, pp. 3每4. 
German companies were in the top ten. Germany＊s enemies were well aware of the importance of German reinsurance in the neutral countries, and he re-minded Amend that Munich Re alone accounted for 16% of the participation in the air insurance pool, a portion that was higher than that of all publicly char-tered companies put together. Similarly, German reinsurance played a major role in the fre insurance of big industry under the Four-Year Plan. The RAA simply did not have the resources to go through every reinsurance agreement. More importantly, such surveillance would serve Germany＊s competitors in the feld. Germany, Alzheimer reminded Amend, was competing not only against its rivals in enemy countries but also (and even more) against reinsurers in Italy, who had strong state support, and in neutral countries, especially Switzerland. If Germany won the war, then it could recover its losses against enemy compe-tition but not its losses against allies and the neutrals. He also warned against a policy of limiting concessions to foreign reinsurance companies, since the coun-tries in question would only retaliate and might indeed cooperate in doing so. Finally, Alzheimer emphasized a ※psychological consideration§: 
As you can imagine the German companies have to fght hard for their positions abroad, and to be sure less against English and French than against neutral competition. The sources of our diffculties lie to a large extent in the fear that we will be hindered some day through German government measures 每 against the previous practice of the Reich Economics Ministry and the Reichsbank 每 in the fulfllment of our obligations or that our operations will be made more diffcult. Why should we here deliver another excuse without thereby gaining any tangible advantages?78 
This was not the only proposal that Schwede-Coburg presented to the open-ing meeting of the committee. He also proposed a change in section 81 of the Reich Insurance Law that would give the RAA new powers to dissolve insurance companies or merge them with other insurance companies 每 and even transfer their portfolios, if this were deemed justifable for the good of the insurance in-dustry. This would have enabled the RAA to place private insurance companies under public control and, more generally, to dispose of such private assets at will. Needless to say, Hilgard and his colleagues from the private insurance feld raised a strong protest, emphasizing the danger to private property rights and the pure arbitrarinesss of the projected legislation. Schwede-Coburg was not a man who took well to being contradicted, and when Hilgard＊s arguments be-gan to get on his nerves, he turned on the radio in the room and drowned out Hilgard＊s remarks with a military march.79 
Just as Alzheimer had sought to counter Amend＊s attack on the reinsurance business with rational arguments to Amend, so Schmitt attempted to use per-suasion in dealing with Schwede-Coburg 每 with whom he went so far as to meet for breakfast 每 on both issues but especially on the question of shutting down 
78 Alzheimer an Amend, 22. Jan. 1940,BAB,R 3104/11. 79 See Hilgard＊s manuscript, ※Die Allianz im 2. Weltkrieg,§ FHA, AZ 1.3/2, pp. 8每10. 

Franz Schwede-Coburg (1888每1966), Gauleiter and president of the province of Pom-merania, about 1938. 
enterprises. He took (or at least pretended to take) seriously Schwede-Coburg＊s claim that rationalization was necessary in the industry and that some of the smaller enterprises needed to be shut down or merged with other companies, but he insisted that the companies so designated should be given the opportunity to choose the placement of their portfolios or their new partners. Only if they re-fused to do so in a timely fashion should the RAA have the right to make these de-cisions. WhathewishedtopreventwasSchwede-Coburg＊suseofsuchshutdowns to transfer the portfolios to publicly chartered companies of his choosing.80 
All in all, this proved a formidable counteroffensive. Although Schwede-Coburg claimed he had the support of all the representatives of the Party in-stitutions in the Reich Insurance Committee, he was clearly opposed by the most 
80 Schmitt an Schwede-Coburg, 19. M.rz 1940 mit Anlagen, BAB, R 3104/11. 
important leaders in the private insurance business.81 There was no way these proposals were going to be implemented with any alacrity, especially since Hil-gard could count on Hans Thees in the Justice Ministry to raise all kinds of objections, and the continuing war made it more and more diffcult to interfere in the operations of the active reinsurance business. 
Nevertheless, Schwede-Coburg and his allies continued to use the committee for purposes of harassment and as a potential vehicle for a long-term restructur-ing of the industry. Thus, at the second meeting on May 28, 1940, Bothe began raising questions about whether German reinsurance contracts abroad were be-ing used for purposes of espionage by the enemy as well as costing Germany needed foreign exchange. That Hilgard, Alzheimer, and Edgar Schnell of Nord-stern had all consulted with the Army command about these matters and had made special provisions in no way mollifed Bothe, who stated that the behav-ior of the reinsurance economic group ※bordered on treason§ since they were indirectly helping British bombers to fnd their targets in Germany.82 
Needless to say, this was a canard, with an especially vicious and danger-ous undertone because of the regime running Germany. It is very important, however, to place the intense confict between Schwede-Coburg and his asso-ciated Nazi ideologues within a context beyond the rather simple politics of self-defense against socialist-minded Nazis that was so strongly emphasized by Hilgard, Alzheimer, and Schmitt after the war. The politics of the German insur-ance industry leaders was much more complex and had its own offensive thrust, especially at this point when the war was going so well for Germany. Thus, in June 1940 and fresh in the wake of German military victories in the West, Schmitt wrote to SS-Gruppenfrer Wolff requesting permission for himself and Alzheimer to travel 每 as soon as the military situation permitted 每 to Norway, Denmark, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Sweden in order to renew their busi-ness contacts at a time when those countries had been cut off from England and were fnding it diffcult to make contact with Switzerland 每 a time when Ger-many could rush in to fll the gap. The English insurers, with over a century of international experience behind them (especially in the feld of transport insur-ance but also in other branches) and with strong competitive advantages, had profted from the Allied victory in 1918 to establish a powerful position for them-selves in West European markets.83 This aggressive approach was also evinced by Alzheimer at the November 1940 meeting of the Reich Insurance Commit-tee, where he took the initiative and went into a lengthy argument that ※the 
81 Schwede-Coburg an den Reichswirtschaftsminister, Mai 1940, ibid. 
82 Alzheimer, ※Die deutsche Rkversicherung 1938每1945. Ein Rechenschaftsbericht§ (1948), MR, 
D/2,p. 13, and 2. Sitzung des Reichsversicherungsausschusses am 28.Mai 1940,SM, 1458/1/282, 
Bl. 79每82. 83 Schmitt an Wolff, 5. Juni 1940, BAB, ehem. BDC, SL 62. See also the useful discussion of the 
English insurance business by Martin Herzog, ※Beispielsammlung f die Kriegswirtschafts-
geschichte: Behandlung der englischen Versicherungsbest.nde in den von deutschen Truppen be-
setzten Gebiete,§ 18. Sept. 1941, GDV, Personenarchiv/Akte Martin Herzog. 
opportunity to now recapture the German position on the foreign market and to build it up must be exploited by every means.§84 At the same time, Schnell pointed out that the German transport insurance had successfully organized it-self to replace the English market, although he complained that IG Farben still made a practice of insuring its foreign trade abroad. 
Indeed, the view was widely held that the separation of the European insur-ance market from London provided an important opportunity for the German insurance industry,85 and Kurt Schmitt saw the situation as one particularly pro-pitious for reorganizing the entire European insurance market. In the late sum-mer of 1940, he and his colleagues at the Munich Re began discussing the idea of creating a reinsurance community to replace the role of Lloyd＊s of London and other British frms on the continent. It is important to note that this was no easy task, given the previous role played by the British, the vast increase of insurable risks on the continent during the war, and the inability of Germans alone to as-sume responsibility for them. One would have to mobilize the conquered and the neutrals to serve the needs of Europe＊s new masters. Furthermore, Schmitt and Alzheimer found independent enthusiasm for such a step among their Italian partners. Thus, when Alzheimer met with the RAS leaders Frigessi and Marche-sano in Venice in October 1940, Frigessi remarked that 
it should at the present time be the task of the German and Italian insurance companies to create an institution that can as far as possible take over the position of the English Lloyd＊s. In most areas, the continental reinsurers have understood how to replace the Eng-lish market, there having been certain diffculties only in transport insurance, excess loss and other exotic business. But even for these companies it is desirable to set up continen-tal coverage possibilities on the basis of a consolidation of a large number of insurance carriers in the form of a consortium in which groups of insurance carriers voluntarily sign up. The initiative for this should come from the Italian and German companies.86 
Alzheimer informed Frigessi that these ideas were already being discussed in Munich, but that one also wanted to bring in the Swiss along with the Italian and German markets. 
Schmitt himself held discussions with leaders of the other major Italian con-cern, Generali, as well as with the Swiss Re, and he seems to have won them over to his basic and rather novel conception by the end of 1940. This concep-tion was to create a community of all the insurance carriers on the continent for the purpose of covering those risks whose size and character were such that they could not be covered by existing mechanisms. He thought it important that the community be continental and not German每Italian, but he also felt that the management had to be centered in Germany, which was the largest and most 
84 3. Sitzung des Reichsversicherungsausschusses, 19.Nov. 1940,SM 1458/1/282, Bl. 88每91. 85 ※Loslungder europ.ischenVersicherungsm.rktevonLondon.DeutschlandsVersicherungswirt-
schaft vor neuen Aufgaben,§ Neumanns Zeitschrift f Versicherungswesen 63 (1940), pp. 517每18. 86 Aktennotiz, 2. Okt. 1940, MR, B 15/23. 
central power; he suggested that it be placed in Munich under von Reininghaus. The Association for the Coverage of Large Risks was only to deal with those risks that could not be dealt with under existing market conditions and not to take over risks that were uncovered because of the customer＊s refusal to pay an appropriate premium. Furthermore, the liability was to be shared in proportion to the contribution made by the individual members, and these were not to be fxed but to vary as the companies took stock of the situation and how much liability they were undertaking. Schmitt was anxious to clear the entire matter with the German government and also to use the founding of the association to prevent any formation of state reinsurance bodies or institutions specifcally for the purpose of replacing Lloyd＊s. Rather, he wanted to make sure his projected association would serve as an organization that all insurance companies could join and would function as a kind of clearing agency for specifc risks not other-wise coverable in any single market.87 
After a meeting was held among leading insurance companies in early 1941, Schmitt was able to announce the formation of the association formally in March and invited the various European insurance companies to participate. Schmitt, not surprisingly, was made chairman of the association, and its management was located in the Munich Re, but its presidium was to be representative of the leading continental European insurance companies. The announcement stressed the voluntary nature of the organization and the need to maintain a healthy in-surance market and to act only where conditions so required. Von Reininghaus was sent off to France and Belgium to recruit for the new association, fnding considerable interest in France but having some diffculties in Belgium, where several companies did not want to do anything that might suggest they accepted the ※new order.§88 By mid-May, Schmitt was able to announce a pecking order of companies who were to be favored in instances where insurance was required for great risks. At the top of the twelve German, Italian, and Swiss companies listed stood Munich Re and Swiss Re, each with 25% participation, followed by Knische Rk with 10% and Generali and RAS with 5% each; Frankona Rk followed with 10%. Should more help be needed, however, clients of the associ-ation could turn to large primary insurers like Allianz and Nordstern. The new organization did insure a storehouse flled with furs in Norway worth 600,000 Norwegian kroner as well as eleven Finnish electrical machines for the making of paper from wood (worth 5每58 million Finnish marks) 每 which were illustra-tions of the sort of ※large risks§ it was set up to handle 每 but it did not, in the end, do a signifcant amount of business.89 
87 Aktennote Schmitt, Zich and Milan, Nov. 15每21, 1940, ibid. It is interesting to note that Fri-
gessi would have preferred less identifcation with the Munich Re by locating the Association in 
Vienna or Hamburg. On the extent of the business done by the organization, see Herzog, ※Was 
Dokumente erz.hlen knen,§ Bd. 3, pp. 1219每22. 88 Aktennote von Reininghaus, 26. M.rz每8. April 1941, HMR, B 15/2. 89 Aktennote Schmitt, 12.Mai 1941, ibid. 
This European cartel for the management of great risks was a good illustration of how Munich Re (and, as will be shown later, Allianz) was taking the lead in the expansion of German insurance as Germany＊s armies advanced in all direc-tions. Those involved, however, continued to think in terms of an international economic order with Germany as the leading but not sole protagonist in the feld. It was precisely this liberal perception that Schwede-Coburg and the Party ideologues detested, and it was embodied in the German每Swiss connection, the strong participation of the Swiss in the German market, the German involve-ment in the Swiss market, and the agreements on the exclusion of reinsurance obligations from clearing requirements under foreign exchange decrees. These connections and arrangements had already been attacked from circles hostile to the German private insurance business before the war, but they had been beaten back with considerable success by arguments that the relationship was vital to German trade and commerce. With the coming of the war, however, there was a renewal of such hostility on both security and economic grounds, and the issue had become something of a centerpiece in the struggle over ※insurance reform.§ 
The leadership of the Swiss Re was well aware of these tendencies, especially owing to their large interest in Bayerische Rkversicherung AG; a report of May 1940 expressed concern about ※what is being cooked up in Berlin.§90 Rumor had it that Swiss Re was simply to be driven out of Germany but that Schmitt had intervened and urged that a less drastic approach be taken. The particular vulnerability of Swiss Re lay in charges from a subordinate offce of the mili-tary high command that secret information on German industry had fallen into enemy hands because of the Swiss Re. The military insisted not only that foreign reinsurers no longer be used but also that Hofrat Ernst Drumm, head of Bay-erische Rk, be thrown off all German supervisory boards because of his Swiss connection. As a compromise Hilgard, who was extremely concerned about the military pressure and the way it played back into the domestic debate with Schwede-Coburg, suggested that Swiss Re＊s German business be placed under trusteeship for the duration of the war. The Swiss were infuriated at the pro-posal, which they termed ※catastrophic and unacceptable,§91 and were resentful as well. They reminded Hilgard of all they had done for Germany during the First World War, the losses they had taken in the infation, the fact that they had left 12 million RM with German companies to help the foreign exchange situa-tion, and of their participation in the German war transport community and the German air transport pool, which was bound to bring losses but which they nev-ertheless joined in order to show solidarity with their German business partners. At the same time, Hilgard was warned that the Swiss government was bound to respond to such interference in Swiss operations in Germany with countermea-sures against German interests in Switzerland. Finally, the Swiss emphasized 
90 Report from Berlin on ※Deutsches Gesch.ft,§ 4.Mai 1940, SR, FA A7.3-03. 91 Report, May 1940, ibid. 
their close personal friendships with their German counterparts and the desir-ability of maintaining these relationships. 
It was not Hilgard, of course, who needed persuasion. Although the pres-sure on the Swiss insurance companies abated after May, a new issue arose in the late summer and early fall 每 namely, whether the Swiss companies doing business in Alsace and Lorraine, where they had been active before their return to France in 1918 and had remained prior to the German occupation in 1940, would be allowed to continue to do so. Schmitt discussed the danger of exclud-ing the Swiss from their old business with Reich Economics Minister Funk in late September, and the latter agreed with Schmitt that the Swiss should not be excluded; indeed, he could see no legal basis for excluding them.92 Neverthe-less, by early November Schwede-Coburg had used his infuence with Amend, Robert Wagner (the fanatical Gauleiter in Alsace), and Minister-President K-ler in Karlsruhe to withdraw not only the permission given to the Swiss but also the licenses accorded to six German insurance companies to do business in Alsace 每 among them Allianz, Karlsruher, and Victoria. Schwede-Coburg was anxious to gain control of the leading French company in the area, Rhein und Mosel, in order to shape the insurance business in Lorraine and Alsace. As General Director Kurt Hamann of Victoria explained to an alarmed Gen-eral Director Koenig of Schweizerische Rentenanstalt, spokesman for the Swiss insurance business, 
Schwede-Coburg ... is a strong party-political personality, who is unhampered by any tra-ditions and has as his highest goal the nationalization of insurance, namely, the creation of a great central institution divided into Gaue [districts] which takes care of everything. For this reason, he demanded that frst a publicly chartered company be granted a dom-inating position in Alsace and Lorraine and that the ※Rhein und Mosel§ provide the foundation for this purpose. The goal that is to be attained in Alsace is the speediest pos-sible mobilizing of the territory for National Socialism. For this reason also, no foreign life insurance ought to be in any way active in Alsace, for otherwise ※dissidents§ will be cultivated and supported and everyone will run to the foreigners.93 
Hamann also noted that Schwede-Coburg was furious at the anti-German tone of the Swiss press and wanted to make an example, but also that he was working hand-in-hand with his friend Hans Goebbels to undertake similar measures in Eupen-Malmedy. He doubted that all the Swiss frms would be licensed to op-erate in Lorraine and Alsace and that the Swiss should concentrate particularly on life insurance and on those companies that had been operating in the area before 1914. 
Clearly Hamann was trying to help the Swiss as much as possible, and Hil-gard was even more explicit about the reasons in his discussions with Koenig. As Koenig reported, Hilgard 
92 Aktennote Schmitt, 24. Sept. 1940, MR, A 1/7. 93 Vertrauliche Notiz Koenig, 5.Nov. 1940, SR, FA A7.3-03. 
assured me that the German insurance business has the greatest interest in not having the Swiss companies driven out of Lorraine and Alsace 每 which is the goal of certain Party agencies 每 for that is moving in the direction of autarky, which would be damaging to pri-vate insurance because it will lead to nationalization. For these reasons we can be sure to count on his support.94 
Schmitt was no less pointed in his discussion with Koenig, to whom he stressed that Munich Re stood behind the Swiss in Alsace and that Funk 每 as well as State Secretaries Landfried and Clodius in the RWM 每 were also opposed to the Party desires. Koenig reported Schmitt saying that ※the German private in-surance industry has the greatest interest that we Swiss corporations remain in Germany because we are the best bulwark against the nationalization of the in-surance business§95 and also urging the Swiss to take diplomatic steps to assert their rights where they had a historical foundation. At the same time, Allianz and Munich Re were expanding, and Schmitt had important plans for setting up a private insurance corporation in the Generalgouvernement in Poland and working with Swiss Re and other friendly companies on the formation of a rein-surance community on the continent. At a meeting with Directors Emil Bebler and Hlimann of Swiss Re in Zich on November 13, 1940, he found them very pessimistic. The Swiss insurance men felt that their friends in Germany were de-serting them under government pressure, and they were inclined to sell out their holdings despite Schmitt＊s warm words for this Swiss rival, his renewed advice to work with the right people in the RWM, and his stress on the need to pro-tect the private insurance business through the Association for the Coverage of Large Risks that he was proposing.96 
Bebler certainly appreciated Schmitt＊s good will and friendliness, but his expe-rience with RAA President Amend, with whom he had a ※discussion§ on January 16, 1941, was every bit as unpleasant as he had been led to anticipate. Amend let loose with complaints about the anti-German tone of the Swiss press. Bebler did not deny that certain portions of the Swiss press were not appropriately neu-tral in their attitude, but 每 in one of the few bright moments in this otherwise bleak history 每 he paid more heed to his role as a citizen than to his function as a businessman; his reported ※conversation§ with Amend deserves to be honored with extensive citation: 
Switzerland is the oldest Republic and a democracy of a special kind which cannot be compared with others. We are not National Socialists and do not want to be, but rather to remain what we are. Although Hitler has more than once declared that National So-cialism is no export product and that he does not want to impose it on other countries, we are compelled to defend our democracy. No one can prevent us from doing so. Hitler has declared in his speeches that a people that does not defend itself does not deserve to 
94 
Ibid. 
95 
Ibid. 96 Aktennote Schmitt, 13.Nov. 1940, MR, B 6/9. 

Hans Goebbels (1895每1947), general director of Provinzial Feuer-und Lebensversiche-rungsanstalten der Rheinprovinz, brother of Reich PropagandaMinister JosephGoebbels, about 1933. 
survive. 每 Herr Amend: ※We have done nothing to you, although it would have been a trival matter for us to take Switzerland.§ 每 I: ※We are grateful to fate that you have de-cided to leave us in peace. I must however say, Herr President, that Switzerland would not be so easy to take as the Netherlands, Belgium, and other nations. They who would attack us will meet up with a well-armed and trained army and a resolved people.§ ※To be sure,§ he replied, ※you have your mountains; but nothing can be done against our sol-diers, our Stukas, and our tanks.§ 每 I: ※You will permit me to have another opinion. In general, may God prevent that Switzerland is also drawn into the vortex.§ 每 Herr Amend: ※We do not have anything against Switzerland insofar as it accepts the circumstances as they have been created by our victory in Europe. The European economy will be newly ordered under German leadership. There will be a European economic block and a cen-tral clearing 每 Switzerland cannot exclude itself from it.§ 每 My answer: The position of Switzerland to the new ordering of the economy and to a European central clearing is a matter for our government to decide. I imagine in any case, that Switzerland cannot remain on the sidelines but must come to an arrangement with the new circumstances. A central clearing seems necessary to me if payments from country to country are to func-tion again.97 
After this exchange of ※pleasantries,§ Bebler reminded Amend of the many services of Swiss companies to Germany and urged that the old Alsatian compa-nies in which they had an interest be maintained. Amend then complained that Swiss Re did not have any Germans in its administrative council, to which Bebler responded that it was an international concern and needed to maintain its inde-pendence of any particular country. When Amend pointed out that there was a Swiss on the Munich Re supervisory council, Bebler diplomatically responded that Swiss Re worked with companies from many nations and could not give each a seat on its board, although what he would have liked to have said was that ※a Swiss on a German supervisory board could allow himself to be visible, but the reverse was not the case.§ 
Needless to say, the question of how to deal with the Swiss was a matter of German government policy and not simply a matter of Schmitt＊s plans for the European insurance business or Amend＊s xenophobia. At a meeting in the RWM attended by members of the Foreign Offce and by Amend, the issue of whether to encourage the Swiss to maintain their interests in the Reich or rather to pressure them to sell their holdings was seriously discussed. Amend, of course, was quite clear on the subject, arguing ※that in his view everything has to be done to repress the Swiss infuence. One has to consider that liberal infuences make themselves felt in German insurance through Swiss insurance interests ....§98 In the ensu-ing discussion, however, Amend stood alone; the Foreign Offce representatives emphasized the foreign exchange advantages provided by the Swiss and that credit business with the Swiss was of great value to the German war economy. It was thus important not to annoy the Swiss gratuitously. The Foreign Offce had nothing against the Swiss selling some of the German holdings, but warned against the employment of any pressure. Similarly, while they thought that the Swiss had accepted a measure of limitation on their engagement in Alsace and Lorraine, ※an irritation of the Swiss is undesired at the present time.§ Thus, in early January, Gauleiter Wagner in Alsace, Gauleiter Bckel in Lorraine, and Gauleiter Gustav Simon (head of the civil administration in Luxemburg) were instructed to pay due respect to old Swiss interests in their respective territories. There is no evidence that they were in any rush to do so, since State Secretary Landfried reported in early February that the matter still had not been decided. The Swiss knew that the prime reason was the power struggle in Berlin, and they had no expectation that all nineteen Swiss companies would be issued a license 每 especially since, in the fall of 1940, the RAA had allowed only a limited number 
97 Bebler, Besprechung mit dem Pr.sidenten des RAA, Herrn Amend, in Berlin am 16. Jan. 1941, 
SR,FAA7.3-03. 98 Vermerk, Besprechung vom 16.Nov. 1940,SM, 1458/11/53, Bl. 224每5. 
of German companies in the area and only two Italian companies. For example, Allianz was granted a license to conduct new business but not Neue Frankfurter, which was told to make no further applications.99 
However, what really triggered concern and alarm among the private insur-ance company leaders was the news that authorities in Lorraine had, with RWM authorization, created a publicly chartered property insurance institution to pre-side over compulsory building insurance and that there were plans to extend such insurance to the Alsace, the Saar, and Luxemburg. In short, Schwede-Coburg and his Gauleiter friends in the West were now extending as a fait accompli the system of compulsory building insurance already existing in various parts of Germany to the reconquered areas. The danger that this would serve as a wedge for expansion of the publicly chartered system into other areas and for the na-tionalization of insurance was obvious. Schwede-Coburg and his friends were obviously using the occupied areas to preempt future development of the insur-ance business therein, rather than placing any further faith in meetings of the Reich Insurance Committee that consistently evaded their control.100 
Where, then, to turn? As in the past, so now: Hilgard and Schmitt capitalized on their cultivation of Ging, which dated back to the days before the Nazis took power. Thus, on March 21, 1941, Hilgard responded to a birthday greeting from Ging by taking the liberty of expressing his cares to the Reichsmarschall, cares that refected the ※unlimited confdence§ that Hilgard had placed in him since their frst meeting in 1931. Hilgard reminded Ging that the latter had mandated peace in the insurance business in their meeting on December 10, 1938, and he and his colleagues in the private industry had followed the injunction. The same, however, did not hold for the publicly chartered companies, which in the past months had introduced compulsory building insurance and propagated the idea of a socialized building insurance. Neither the Reich Insurance Com-mittee and its deputy chairman Schmitt nor he, as head of the Reich Group, had been consulted. Hilgard had only learned of these actions in Lorraine and Al-sace through the newspaper. Furthermore, Schwede-Coburg had claimed that the Frer himself had ordered the nationalization of this type of insurance. Before the war, building fre insurance had been the exclusive province of the pri-vate companies in Lorraine and Alsace, ※and it would be for every just-thinking person self-evident, that it would receive restitution for the robbery it experi-enced which had been imposed upon it by the Treaty of Versailles.§101 Instead, this compensation was being taken by the publicly chartered insurance compa-nies through the use of their political infuence. Hilgard feared that this would 
99 Schreiben RWM, Jan. 1941, ibid., Bl. 226f.; Tagesbericht, 3.Feb. 1941,SM, 1458/1/693, Bl. 12; SR, Verband Konzessionierter Schweizerischer Versicherungsgesellschaften, Vorstandsprotokoll, 
4. M.rz 1941; RAA an Allianz, 14. Okt. 1940, BAK, B 280/12253, Bl. 288f.; RAA an Neue Frank-
furter, 22.Nov. 1940,BAK,B 280/13206, Bl. 166每7. 100 Tagesbericht, 3.Feb. 1941,SM, 1458/1/693, Bl. 12. 101 Hilgard an Ging, 21. M.rz 1941, FHA, S 17.5/76. 
then be extended to the Saar, with its substantial private industrial holdings, and also to the newly created Warthegau in what had once been a part of Poland. He undoubtedly knew whereof he spoke, since the Gauleiter of the Warthegau, Arthur Greiser, had written to Deputy Frer Rudolf He. on January 3, 1941, asking that Posensche Feuersoziet.t be given a fre insurance monopoly in the Warthegau, defending this position in a lengthy memorandum. He.＊s chief of staff Martin Bormann had backed Greiser in a letter to the Economics Minister on February 5. 102 Hence the danger was real that the private insurers would sim-ply be shut out of the fre insurance business for buildings in the newly annexed areas. Hilgard complained to Ging that the private insurers were never con-sulted about these measures and that they were now being deprived of the most lucrative insurance, which they needed if they were to play the role of creating German preeminence in the insurance feld internationally. Hilgard pointed out that he could easily just ask the Reich Economics Minister to accept his resigna-tion but did not feel entitled to do so, ※since the soldier in war cannot resign and since on the other side, even if I have been formally appointed by the Reich Eco-nomics Minister, I still feel myself appointed by you.§ Thus, so long as he had Ging＊s confdence, he would stay on the job, and the best demonstration of this would be if Ging would put an end to the development he had described. 
As was so often the case, this was a coordinated effort between Hilgard and Schmitt, and the former referred to a letter Schmitt had sent Ging on this subject that sought to spell out the dangers presented by the monopoly on com-pulsory fre insurance that had been granted to the publicly chartered companies in some of the occupied areas. Funk had informed Schmitt that the monopoly was the product of a basic decision of Hitler himself, but Schmitt felt it only proper 每 given his lifetime devotion to the insurance business 每 that he express his objections. Schmitt sought to frame his argument in the context of general national economic developments and especially the Anglo-German economic rivalry. He stressed the interaction between British insurance and its position in world trade, as well as the importance of England＊s capacity to compen-sate for the broad range of risks in its insurance business through its expanding commercial capacity and ability to spread its system worldwide. Germany had challenged Britain through the development of the reinsurance idea and its com-mercial power until the setback of the Great War, after which it had to struggle to regain something of its former position despite its political powerlessness. Schmitt emphasized the importance of the role of insurance as an ※invisible§ factor that enabled England to cover half its foreign trade defcit. 
Schmitt went on to stress what Germany＊s ※fnal victory§ would mean from the perspective of replacing England internationally as the leading insurer, as well as the signifcance of this combination of shipping, commerce, and insurance for Germany＊s balance of foreign trade and currency. Germany could establish for 
102 See Greiser an He., 3. Jan. 1941, and Bormann an den Reichswirtschaftsminister, 5.Feb. 1941, APP, Reichsstatthalter/2801, Bl. 18每42. 
itself the kind of world trading position that England had previously enjoyed in places like China. Furthermore, this was not only an economic vision but also a political one, since a large trading organization and network of representatives were excellent sources of both political and economic intelligence. These ben-efts, however, could only be provided by the merchant and private person, not by public agencies, and Schmitt pointed out how ineffective was the Soviet state insurance monopoly, which other countries did not trust and did not use. The victorious war now gave Germany the opportunity to take advantage of its po-sition, and Schmitt mapped out a clear strategy: 
We already see today during the war that it is not at all diffcult to orientate the insur-ance market completely toward Germany. German companies are licensed which work in competition with their domestic counterparts. German companies will acquire capital participation and practically turn the foreign enterprises into daughter companies and thereby to branches, and fnally the domestic insurance business in the various countries, which wisely should not be destroyed, will become accustomed to placing large portions of their business in Germany. Thus, without the use of force and naturally, the business of the countries under our infuence will fow naturally into a unity with a German cen-ter of gravity and, to be sure, all the more naturally, the less external pressure and force will be perceived and felt. 
In this connection, Schmitt pointed out that the recently created Association for the Coverage of Large Risks that included practically all the nations of Europe ※is the frst practical expression of the development described.§103 
All these advantages, however, were now threatened by the nationalization plans of Schwede-Coburg and his allies. Building insurance was the keystone of the insurance business because of the large premiums involved and the easy cal-culation of risk, and the provision and calculation of other forms of insurance provided by the private insurers depended on this building fre insurance market. Therefore, the insurance business would be severely weakened by nationaliza-tion and its general credit undermined; it would then be in no position to work effectively abroad. Indeed, it would be totally dependent on foreign insurers when working internationally. It would also encourage other countries to take similar measures and so lead to a policy of mutual exclusion in the international insurance market. Schmitt proposed that the publicly chartered companies in the feld of compulsory building insurance all be turned into a Reich corporation that would compete with the other insurance institutions offering building in-surance, that special provisions be made for inexpensive insurance for settlement construction projects, and that the entire business be treated like the compulsory hunting insurance, which required no bureaucratic structure and which offered insurance from a variety of sources at a reasonable price. (Schmitt pointed out that, as Reich Hunting Master, Ging seemed to be quite satisfed with the ar-rangement.) In Schmitt＊s view, however, the issue was actually a basic decision 
103 Schmitt an Ging, 22. M.rz 1941,FHA,S 17.5/76. 
as to whether or not Germany wanted to have an effective private insurance sys-tem that operated on international markets 每 that is, whether one wanted an insurance business run by public offcials or by businessmen. For Schmitt, at least, the proper National Socialist economic leadership for Germany and the world was one in which the economy was guided but not managed by the State, in which Germany would be prepared to assume a great role in the world with the coming of peace, and in which the German people were serviced by an effec-tive insurance system after the war had been won. He thus appealed to Ging to secure a basic decision from Hitler in this area. 
In fact, Ging had already issued an order (on March 3, 1941) banning for-mal discussion of nationalizing the insurance industry during the coming years and suggesting that the question be suppressed in order to avoid further con-fusion; this was offcially communicated on April 26, 1941. 104 The trouble was that individual actions in the occupied territories had implications for the fu-ture, and the polycratic nature of the regime meant that any number of policies could be pursued at the same time. For example, Schmitt in desperation turned to Himmler and sent him a copy of his letter to Ging, but Himmler refused to grant Schmitt an audience on this subject since he did not want to interfere in the insurance controversy.105 The most extensive response to Schmitt＊s letter, which was widely disseminated, came from Martin Bormann, who was any-thing but convinced by Schmitt＊s arguments. Bormann was clearly on the side of Schwede-Coburg and suggested that, if the private insurance business was so vulnerable that it needed fre insurance premiums on buildings in order to cover its more risky ventures, then it should be totally nationalized. Insofar as the in-ternational issue was concerned, Bormann argued that the insurance business gave out more in foreign exchange than it took in, that Germany＊s economic role in the world would ultimately depend on the political situation and not the status of the insurance business, that the insurance business suffered from an ex-cess of companies and of employees, and that the money it received would be better spent on damage prevention than on dividends.106 
What all this meant was a constant testing and sparring between the private in-surance leaders and Schwede-Coburg and his supporters. The latter continually tried toexpand the scope of compulsory building insurance in the occupied areas, while the private insurers hunted about for support from other leading Nazis. Because National Socialist economic doctrine was extremely opportunistic in practice, it was very hard to tell in what direction it was going. Ley, for exam-ple, thought his DAF had proven every bit as effective and effcient as Allianz: paying its directors a great deal less and needing only a 3.5% rather than a 4.5% interest rate. At the same time, the Schwede-Coburg position was incompatible 
104 Ging an RWM, usw., 3. M.rz 1941, ibid.; Gauleitung Hamburg an Staatssekret.r Landfried, 
26. April 1941,SM, 1458/1/94, Bl. 41. 105 Brandt an Kranefuss, 9. Juni 1941,BAB,NS 19/2220, Bl. 56. 106 Bormann an Schmitt, 25. April 1941,BAB,NS 6/328, Bl. 8每13. 
with that of the DAF and Ley＊s empire building. Funk and the RWM obviously were friendlier to private enterprise, and though Funk thought that some areas of insurance were best managed by the bureaucracy, he was convinced that the most important felds required free competition in order to achieve the highest level of performance. This heartened the advocates of private industry, as did the news that Ging was in favor of reprivatizing the aluminum industry and other enterprises under state control.107 Another major issue was the national-ization of hail insurance, a measure supported by Schwede-Coburg but strongly opposed by some agricultural interests, who felt they were better served by the private companies and feared that decisions would be made while the major ex-perts were serving in the military.108 
Offcially there was supposed to be a Burgfrieden 每 a truce of the fortress 每 between the two sides for the war＊s duration, but it was constantly violated in deed and word by Schwede-Coburg and his allies. Schwede-Coburg＊s response to Schmitt＊s letter to Ging, sent sometime in April 1941, was brutal and blunt. The Gauleiter, after all, also claimed a mandate from Ging 每 namely, the one given to him in December 1939 to chair the Reich Insurance Committee and re-form the insurance system. Originally, he had intended to do so by attacking what he conceived to be the most serious defciencies and only then turn to re-ordering the entire system, but Schmitt＊s memorandum now forced him to take a more basic position. In Schwede-Coburg＊s view, the purpose of insurance was to protect the German people against the consequences of accident, disaster, and other harms and to serve as the trustee of the premiums paid for this purpose 每 not to act as a gathering point of large amounts of capital. By collecting capital in the manner in which it had, insurance 
has completely alienated itself from its purposes and become a milking cow for large shareholders and a pile of directors and general directors. Well over 2,000 companies bus-tle about in the insurance feld today. The result is that insurance protection has gone into the background and unearned capital proft and big salary earnings have come into the foreground. The cancerous evil of this insurance system, however, is above all that in order to earn these sums an organization has to be built up that no longer stands in any relationship to the economic purpose of insurance.109 
Schwede-Coburg charged that even huge concerns like Allianz used half their premiums to cover administrative costs, while the liberal competitive system had multiplied the number of insurance agents and salesmen. All one really needed to deal with Germany＊s domestic insurance needs was about 15 or 20 regional mu-tual insurance companies that would treat the premiums they received as a trust 
107 See the revealing exchange between Ley and Funk, May 24, 1941 and June 3, 1941,FHA, S 
17.5/10, as well as Samwer an Hilgard, 26. Juli 1941, FHA, S 17.5/76. 108 Memorandum on ※Verstaatlichungsbestrebungen,§ Kn, 3.Mai 1941, ibid. 109 Stellungnahme des Gauleiters Schwede-Coburg zum Schreiben des Generaldirektors Reichsmi-
nister a.D. Dr. Schmitt vom 22. M.rz 1941 an den Reichsmarschall, betr. Neugestaltung des 
Versicherungswesens, SM, 1458/1/94, Bl. 291每5, quote on Bl. 291. 
and not a source of proft. At the same time, one could form a single Reich Insur-ance Corporation to cover risks abroad. Schwede-Coburg was totally opposed to the system of international insurance and reinsurance that Schmitt obviously wished to eternalize. The German economy, in Schwede-Coburg＊s view, had to be built on German labor and was not to serve as an object of ※capitalist ex-change.§ He claimed that the system proposed would truly spare labor and costs and would be less rather than more bureaucratic. Finally, he was very explicit about the next steps to be taken: the introduction of compulsory building in-surance in the non-Prussian areas and of compulsory hail and vehicle liability insurance along the lines he proposed. 
Schmitt, as might be imagined, was infuriated by Schwede-Coburg＊s response. In a reply sent to Ging＊s offce, Schmitt pointed out that Ging had as-signed Schwede-Coburg the task not of reconstructing the insurance business but rather of heading an advisory body, reducing conficts between private and publicly chartered insurers, and keeping the peace 每 since the Frer had or-dered a ten-year truce with respect to the question of nationalization. Naturally, Schmitt defended the private industry against Schwede-Coburg＊s charges that it was making undue profts without really taking any risks; he argued that most of the money made was given back to customers, that the industry had made great sacrifces to ensure that policyholders were paid when a company failed (as in the case of Favag), that the industry was contributing hugely to government loans, and that most of its shareholders came from the middle class. He contested Schwede-Coburg＊s claim that there were 2,000 insurance companies in the pri-vate market, pointing out that of the 3,114 private organizations in 1938每1939, most were small mutuals and local companies or specialized companies that ful-flled a valuable function in the market and that there were actually only some 300 true private insurance companies in the sense normally used. As always, he defended the importance of customers having a choice and the role of compe-tition, insisting that Schwede-Coburg was using false and arbitrary statistics to make the case of excessively high costs. Finally, he defended the signifcance of the insurance industry abroad and especially emphasized how much the indus-try had suffered from the last lost war and how much it had to gain from victory in the present one.110 
The position of the RWM lay somewhere between Schwede-Coburg＊s fero-ciously anticapitalist approach and the liberal position of Schmitt and Hilgard, which was (as usual) veiled in politically correct language. Thus, an internal memorandum of April 26, 1941, suggested that there was something to the charges that the industry needed rationalization and that reforms could be made in building, vehicle, and hail insurance 每 but it rejected nationalization in other areas owing to the dangers of bureaucratization.111 Whatever the case, the RWM 
110 Schmitt an den Perslichen Referenten Gings, 10.Mai 1941,FHA,S 17.5/76. 111 Regierungsrat Trepte, ※Verstaatlichung des Versicherungswesens,§ 26. April 1941,SM, 1458/1/ 
94, Bl. 325每32. 
was anxious to follow Ging＊s injunction and remove the entire discussion from thepublicforum. Thus,Schwede-Coburgwasinstructedtodevelopareformpro-gram and carefully prepare any reconstruction of the industry he might wish, but to use the Reich Insurance Committee toward this end. Hilgard was also instructed to avoid all public polemics. Schwede-Coburg complained regularly, even about the appearance of an article by an Old Fighter like Professor Hein-rich Hunke, who edited the journal Die nationalsozialistische Volkswirtschaft and who was to end up on the managing board of Deutsche Bank as part of that institution＊s effort to have more Nazis in high places. Hunke was every bit as much a supporter of a directed economy as Schwede-Coburg and, like him, had been graced with the Party＊s ※gold badge of honor§; thus the RWM did not feel it could censor so high and mighty an economic expert, especially since his article did not really deal with polemical issues. The reality was that Schwede-Coburg, backed by Bormann, simply did not want insurance discussed at all until he could come forth with a plan of his own, and then he wanted to make sure that any discussion or actions taken transpired on his own terms.112 
Apparently, he also decided that he needed to give that plan academic backing and to produce a carefully laid-out scientifc argument from his Reich Insurance Committee, as called for by the RWM. In May 1941, Schwede-Coburg asked the Reich Group to provide the committee with 50,000 RM for a study on the devel-opment of the insurance business, a request which Hilgard referred to the RWM and which the latter turned down on the grounds that the insurance business was already burdened enough without being additionally burdened for no com-pelling reason.113 Undaunted, Schwede-Coburg summoned the committee to its fourth meeting on June 17, 1941, and announced that, with the approval of the RWM, he was appointing Professor Klaus Wilhelm Rath of the insurance sem-inar at the University of Gtingen to join the Reich Insurance Committee and was charging him with the task of developing a full-scale memorandum deal-ing with this problem. He was to be aided by a subcommittee of practitioners in the feld from the Reich Insurance Committee: Director Bothe from the pub-licly chartered companies, Director Katochwill from the DAF, and someone (to be named by Hilgard) from the private sector.114 
The proposal enraged Hilgard, who had procured Rath＊s vita and found that Rath, who came from Anklam Pommerania, did indeed have a lengthy publica-tion list 每 but one that featured communal fnances (especially of Anklam), the elimination of Jewish infuences from economic life, and other general themes dealing with public fnance. His only publication on insurance was an article in Neumanns Zeitschrift of March 1940 on the reorganization of the study of the science of insurance. Hilgard considered Rath totally unqualifed to undertake 
112 For this correspondence, see ibid., Bl. 342每71, 402每4. On Hunke, see James, Deutsche Bank, 
pp. 343每4. 113 Reichsgruppe Versicherungen an Schwede-Coburg, 18. Juni 1941,GDV, 3-003/1. 114 Schwede-Coburg an Hilgard, 30 Juni 1941, ibid. 
the projected study and refused to send the subcommittee a representative of pri-vate industry; he also informed the RWM that he saw no purpose in appointing a ※complete novice§ to deal with the complexities of the insurance business.115 
Needless to say, Schwede-Coburg was not going to take such a reply lying down. In an angry response to Hilgard, he pointed out that the RWM had ap-proved Rath＊s appointment and the latter had been chosen in consultation with a Party agency dealing with academic qualifcations and appointments 每 namely, the Reichsdozentenfrer. He saw no excuse whatever for Hilgard to prejudge Rath＊s work before it had even been completed. Furthermore, personnel choices were not simply a matter of scholarly qualifcations: ※Decisive for the judgment of a person and his work are not his publications, but rather his will and ca-pacity as demonstrated by National Socialist deed.§ Schwede-Coburg could see no reason why a fnancial specialist could not do work on insurance, especially someone who was teaching insurance regularly, and he demanded of Hilgard ※comradely collaboration§ in the Reich Insurance Committee.116 Unhappily for Hilgard, the RWM supported Schwede-Coburg on this question, and Hilgard found himself not only naming Alzheimer to the subcommittee but also agree-ing that the private insurance industry would pay a ffth of the subcommittee＊s 
117
expenses. 
At the same time, Hilgard was no less upset by the actions taken by Schwede-Coburg＊s allies in the occupied areas. Luxemburg was a particular sore point because Gustav Simon, the head of the civil administration, issued a series of de-crees that totally changed the insurance situation in the former Grand Duchy. Initially, he had allowed some 40 German companies in the region and charged many of them with trusteeship over enemy companies. Now, all these conces-sions were suddenly withdrawn. As Hilgard complained to Ging on November 22, 1941, Simon had at the same time established publicly chartered companies in life and property insurance where they had never existed before and given them special monopoly privileges in various spheres. All the work done by the German frms, and especially the preparations they had made to take over Lux-emburgian companies, now seemed to have been for naught. Most important, from Hilgard＊s point of view, was that Simon＊s actions had implications that stood in direct contradiction to Ging＊s orders concerning cessation of the so-cialization debate of December 10, 1938, and its reiteration on March 3, 1941, since the Gauleiter had simply shifted the balance between the two types of in-surance companies by creating publicly chartered corporations and giving them 
115 Klaus Wilhelm Rath, ※Zur Neuordnung des versicherungswissenschaftlichen Studiums,§ Neu-
manns Zeitschrift f Versicherungswesen 63 (1940), pp. 151每4; Hilgard an Schwede-Coburg, 6. 
Juli 1941; Hilgard an Ministerialdirigent Klki, 6. Juli 1941,GDV, 3-003/1. For Rath＊s vita, see 
Notiz f Herrn Amtsgerichtsrat Schwartz, 21. Juli 1941, ibid. 116 Schwede-Coburg an Hilgard, 31. Juli 1941, ibid. 117 RWM (Landfried) an Hilgard, 20. Aug. 1941; Hilgard an Schwede-Coburg, 13. Sept. 1941; 
Schwede-Coburg an Hilgard, 21. Jan. 1942; Hilgard an Mandt, 15. April 1942, ibid. 
a special position. Furthermore, the actions in Luxemburg were not isolated, since similar actions were being taken in the Eastern areas. As Hilgard angrily (and accurately) concluded: 
What most outrages myself and the entire German private insurance business by all the events described is that, under the rule of the truce which you yourself have ordered re-peatedly between public and private insurance no opportunity has been passed up by the publicly chartered companies or their leaders to use the conditions created by the war to harm the interests of private insurance wherever this is possible and by surreptitious means to achieve what is the irreversible goal of the opponents of private insurance, namely the elimination of private insurance itself. And all this is taking place despite the fact that immediately after the end of the war and in general already now the insurance business faces enormous tasks to overcome that can only be solved by private insurance.118 
In the meantime 每 unhappily for Schmitt, Hilgard, and their colleagues 每 Rath was working away at improving his publication record in the feld of insurance. In early September 1942, Hilgard heard rumors that Rath was going to publish an article in Hunke＊s journal and was worried enough to write to Hunke, re-minding him that Ging had established a Burgfrieden and that, if Rath broke it with a published article, then the private insurance industry would have to respond. However, Hunke assured Hilgard that he had received no such arti-cle and did not intend to be an instrument for breaking the truce.119 Initially, Alzheimer was somewhat puzzled why there were no meetings of the subcom-mittee headed by Rath, who had initially consulted him about a few matters of detail but then had remained silent for almost a year. Hilgard was wary and asked Alzheimer to contact Rath, while also writing to Funk that he was con-stantly being asked what he thought of the Rath report but was in no position to answer, since he had not seen it even though he heard it had been sent to Ging, Ley, and Bormann. In the meantime, Rath replied to Alzheimer that he had been able to gather all the material on his own and did not want to burden the busy committee members.120 
They were burdened soon enough: not only did the Reich Insurance Commit-tee receive Rath＊s ※The Present Condition and Problems of German Insurance,§ but its basic ideas also appeared in the press 每 even though Schwede-Coburg, in the presence of Rath, read an instruction from Bormann that the document was to be treated as an internal one. Schmitt, who was in contact with Ging con-cerning various proposals on compulsory hunting insurance that had pleased Ging greatly, immediately turned to the Reichsmarschall. After reminding him that Hitler had decided that the insurance nationalization issue was sup-posed to be put off for at least a decade and that they were in the midst of a 
118 Hilgard an Ging, 22.Nov. 1941,FHA,S 17.5/76. 119 Hilgard an Hunke, 5. Sept. 1942, and Hunke an Hilgard, 7. Sept. 1942,GDV, 3-003/1. 120 Hilgard an Funk, 3.Nov. 1942, Alzheimer an Rath, 31. Okt. 1942, Rath an Alzheimer, 10.Nov. 
1942, Alzheimer an Hilgard, 3. Dez. 1942,FHA,S 17.5/10. 
war in which there were more important things to do (hunting insurance ques-tions apparently were among them, despite the military situation on the Eastern front!), Schmitt noted that Schwede-Coburg had nevertheless solicited the Rath report. Schmitt was quite blunt in stating what he thought of it: 
This opus is, as we certainly could not otherwise have expected, one-sided, incorrect, in-objective, and tendentious. There has been such criticism at all times. Experience is that it is quickly overturned. But it is much more diffcult to really present something better in its place. For good or for ill, now that the report lies before us, we must deal with it despite its superfuousness and our great shortage of labor.121 
Schmitt found it upsetting enough that the profession to which he had devoted his life was given such treatment, but the publication of the fndings and the dam-age to the reputation of private insurance gave him the sense that he was being led around by the nose. Schmitt felt that the time had come to enforce Hitler＊s order. He was quite willing to discuss reforms after a victorious war, ※but I do not want to be present if an industry of which I am proud to be a member, and whose members are today standing before the enemy or doing their work in silent fulflment of their duty, is to be destroyed through tactical and tendentious subterfuges.§ 
There is little point here in going over Rath＊s arguments for the replacement of the allegedly costly existing insurance system with a ※vkische System§ based on competition in performance rather than salesmanship. His analysis included such mental fights as comparing the cost of a person putting out a fre with the number of people and hours it took to process a claim on fre insurance. His basic goal was the replacement of private companies with publicly chartered mo-nopolies. What really exercised Hilgard was the notice that Rath＊s work received in such newspapers as the Hamburger Fremdenblatt and the Essener National-Zeitung as well as the distress it was causing the private insurers.122 He was convinced that the publication of Rath＊s ideas was designed as a trap to drag the private insurers into the fray, have the onus of breaking the Burgfrieden placed on private industry, and reopen the nationalization controversy. 
Hilgard＊s frst goal, therefore, was to use the infuential connections he had in the government to restore the ban on discussion of the issue. At the same time, he felt it important to rally his colleagues and get their support for his ap-proach, which he did at a meeting of the leading private insurance directors on December 17, 1942, held in the Berlin offces of Allianz. Some of the leaders were terribly concerned that they had no political friends in high places and that confdence in the industry was being undermined. General Director Hermann Hitzler of Hamburg-Mannheimer, for example, was outraged by the ※pseudo-scientifc nonsense§ used to put together the statistics but was impressed with the way in which evident problems of the industry were highlighted to create 
121 Schmitt an Ging, 16. Dez. 1942, ibid. For the Rath memorandum, see ibid. 122 Rath＊s various articles and writings are to be found in ibid. A good illustration is ※Eine neue 
Epoche der Versicherung,§ Hamburger Fremdenblatt, 11. Dez. 1942, ibid. 
the impression of a drastic need for reform among those who knew little about the business. Another director observed that most of the Party people had been brought up on the Party program, which was written at a time when Hitler did not have much by way of economic advice, and that the insurance industry had not done enough to infuence Party leaders on the regional and local level. Most of the Gauleiter, for example, simply supported socialist ideas intuitively, and this made it diffcult to convince them that Rath was spouting rubbish. Hilgard placed particular stock in proposals by General Director Adolf Samwer of Karls-ruher Leben, who agreed that they should not engage in polemics at this point but rather should do more to present industry achievements to the press and pre-pare the way for battles to come. They also had to pay attention to reforms that were needed, especially reducing the number of small companies 每 a position strongly seconded by Hilgard.123 
It was no easy matter to silence Schwede-Coburg and renew the gagging order on discussion of the nationalization issue. Schmitt actually wrote to State Sec-retary of the Reich Chancellory Hans Lammers asking for a personal interview with Hitler on the question. Schmitt emphasized that there was a great danger that the German insurance industry would be discredited and wanted at least for Lammers to urge that Hitler reaffrm that the discussion should be closed until after the war.124 Schmitt did not get an interview with Hitler but instead a letter from Ging on December 31, 1942, in which Ging promised to talk to Hitler about the matter but also warned Schmitt against misinterpreting Hitler＊s desire to have the subject not discussed during the war as some basic decision on na-tionalization. Here, Ging insisted, the issue remained open. The Frer had not decided. As for Ging himself, ※I am personally now as before of the opin-ion that this question should rest during the war in every respect, therefore also with respect to agitation. A new world will arise after the outcome of this mighty struggle about which no one can say today what kind of economic necessities will present themselves.§125 Nevertheless, both Schmitt and Hilgard had done everything possible to stay in Ging＊s good graces. In January 1941, for exam-ple, a statute of the Holy Hieronymus had been bought in Schmitt＊s name to be given as a birthday present to Ging from various corporations with which he was associated. It came from the private collection of Konsul Otto Bernheimer, a prominent Jewish businessman, and the proceeds of the sale went to pay his Reich Flight Tax and atonement tax.126 Ging appreciated personal as well as corporate giving, and there was a price to be paid for Hilgard＊s and Schmitt＊s 
123 For materials from this meeting of Dec. 17, 1942, see ibid. 124 Schmitt an Lammers, 22. Dez. 1941, ibid. 125 Ging an Schmitt, 31. Dez. 1941, ibid. 126 This was not the only item from the collection bought in Schmitt＊s name, since on March 13, 
1941, a Baroque fauteuil (armchair) was purchased for 2,500 RM. The Bernheimer family, which 
had fed to South America, sought restitution for the items, but Schmitt never really had them 
in his possession. See Sdeutsche Treuhand-Gesellschaft AG an die Wiedergutmachungsbe-
hde Oberbayern, 12. Juli 1949, and Schmitt an die Wiedergutmachungsbehde Oberbayern, 
24.Nov. 1949, FHA, NL 1/108. 
taking advantage of their invitation to Ging＊s fftieth birthday party (on Janu-ary 12, 1943) to press their cause. Ging＊s aide Gritzbach had already suggested to Schmitt that, if the latter was uncertain what to give, then Ging would ap-preciate a valuable statue that had caught his eye. Schmitt thus ※properly§ made the requisite contribution, as did the other business leaders invited.127 
It had thus been a good opportunity to appeal to Ging＊ sensibilities. A few days later, Hilgard reminded Ging of their brief conversation about the in-surance problem and sent him the copy of a letter from a colonel and regiment commander on the Eastern front named Wrengler who worked in the insurance feld and expressed great distress at the assault on their profession in the middle of the war, when so many insurance people were facing the enemy. This was one of a number of such letters, and Director Kurt Pomplitz of Nordstern Lebensver-sicherung had written directly to Hilgard to point out that ※it is just our soldiers in the East who have been able to form their own view of the socialization of the economy. If they learn that similar plans are being seriously considered in the homeland, then many will ask: why am I actually fghting, when one at home is propagating the introduction of insurance collectives?§128 
Such evidence that the debate launched by Schwede-Coburg and Rath was de-moralizing to troops expecting to return home to their insurance profession was certainly a shrewd form of propaganda for halting the debate, but Hilgard still had a hard time getting a consistent policy from the authorities. Thus, on the same day (January 2, 1943), Bormann sent a note to Hilgard declaring that pub-lications and discussion of the reform of insurance were undesirable and should be avoided as well as a note to Schmitt declaring that one could not deny Rath, in his capacity as a university professor, the right to discuss insurance questions scientifcally 每 provided that such publications did not engage in a debate about Rath＊s report.129 Hilgard found the entire situation maddening. When the arti-cles of Rath came out, he was successful in having the RWM issue a ban on further press discussion. Schwede-Coburg, however, used the Reich Propaganda Ministry to lift the ban on the grounds that Rath was a professor. Then there were the contradictory instructions of Bormann. It was hard to know where one stood, but what seemed clear was that ※despite the war and despite the order of the Party chancellory the enemies of private insurance think their hour has come and do not want to let go.§130 
The leaders of the private insurance business realized that they had only mini-malprotection against Schwede-Coburgand Rathand thus, asearly asDecember 18, 1942, decided to hire an expert of their own: Professor Jens Jessen of the Uni-versity of Berlin, who had joined the Party in 1930 and was a highly regarded 
127 Gaertringer (ed.), Hassell-Tagebher, p. 346 (22. Jan. 1943). 128 Kurt Pomplitz an Hilgard, 22. Dez. 1942, Hilgard an Ging, 16. Jan. 1943, Wrengler an Hil-
gard, 8. Jan. 1943, Paul Schmitz (Vorstand Karlsruher Leben) an Hilgard, 27. Jan. 1943,FHA,S 
17.5/10. 129 Bormann an Hilgard und Bormann an Schmitt, 2. Jan. 1943, ibid. 130 Hilgard an Ernst Wter, Donau-Concordia Allgemeine Versicherungs-AG, Budapest, 11. Jan. 
1943, ibid. 
and respected (if somewhat controversial) national economist. Jessen was asked to draw up a reply to Rath, and the leading insurers agreed to provide the nec-essary information. Jessen, to be sure, demanded a stiff price for his work, but apparently he had the name and reputation they wanted and so they agreed to pay 50,000 RM as a retainer and another 50,000 RM when the work was done. The frst payment was made by Victoria (7,500 RM), Munich Re (10,000 RM), Gerling (7,500 RM), Allianz (10,000 RM), Colonia (12,500 RM), and Albingia (2,500 RM).131 
During the ensuing months, Jessen was to generate an incomplete but impor-tant report with a massive amount of material of great interest on the German insurance business, and the battle over publications by Rath 每 who believed that the private insurance system was more or less an invention of the English Jew-ish banking house of Rothschild 每 was to continue well into 1944. 132 All this, however, became increasingly of academic rather than practical interest, as the tide of war turned against Germany and the problems of the insurance indus-try became more and more a function of the general economic and manpower situation of Nazi Germany in its prolonged demise. Clearly, the battle over the future of the German insurance system was ultimately a struggle between the radical wing of NSDAP 每 who thought themselves social reformers and wished to realize antiliberal as well as various eugenic and racial programs 每 and the businessmen who had come to terms with the regime but usually had an entirely different vision of the world and continued to hope that the regime could be bent to their purposes, or at least be made more rational. 
Schwede-Coburg understood this very well. In an angry letter to Schmitt of March 5, 1943, he expressed his deep resentment at the way in which the private insurers were seeking to silence Rath and himself and to denigrate the schol-arly credentials of Rath. He was struck by the similarity between the techniques used against himself and Rath and those used in England by the ※plutocratic in-surance corporations§ against the plans of Lord Beveridge for a reform of the English insurance system. He really was not interested in Schmitt＊s judgment of Rath＊s scholarly qualifcations, since Schmitt had collaborated in the insurance dictionary published by emigr谷 Professor Alfred Manes in 1930 and thus had contributed to the propagation of ※Jewish-capitalist make-believe science.§ Old Fighters like himself understood how people could change their views, but they did not intend to be told what was real science and what was not.133 
131 Ibid., and interrogation of Hilgard, 16. July 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /57/6每8. 132 See the report on Rath＊s speech in Posen on Jan. 21, 1944, FHA, S 17.5/10. 133 Schwede-Coburg an Schmitt, 5. M.rz 1943, ibid. The work in question was Alfred Manes (ed.), 
Versicherungslexikon. Ein Nachschlagewerk f alle Wissensgebiete der gesamten Individual-
und Sozial-Versicherung, 3. Auf. (Berlin, 1930). The list of collaborators on the front page, 
which was conveniently sent by Schwede-Coburg to the SS, was a ※who＊s who§ of the German 
insurance feld and, as the underlining showed, contained almost twenty Jews. See Schwede-
Coburg an Himmler, 5. M.rz 1943, along with the page in question, BAB, ehem. BDC, SL 62. 
SS-Frer Beinzger, also an insurance man, was on the title page, and Schwede-Coburg made 
sure to mention him as well. 
Schmitt properly refused to dignify this charge with a response, but some of the leading lights of scholarship in the insurance feld 每 like Manes, who was then teaching at the University of Indiana 每 were Jews, and Schmitt had once upon a time been proud to have his name appear among the collaborators in a leading publication in his feld. Times had changed, but Schmitt had enough character to refuse to abjure his involvement in the publication. Nevertheless, he contin-ued to worry about his standing in the SS and, in the spring of 1942, asked the head of the Circle of Friends, SS-Oberfrer Fritz Kranefuss, whether his lack of promotion from SS-Brigadefrer since 1934 refected some kind of criticism of his behavior by Himmler or a snub. Kranefuss tried to reassure him that he did not believe this to be the case and that the next rank, SS-Gruppenfrer, was re-served for persons in active government service involving regular work with the SS. Schmitt seemed relieved, as Kranefuss reported to SS-Obersturmbannfrer Rudolf Brandt of Himmler＊s staff. Brandt did discuss the matter with Himm-ler, however, and the Reichsfrer made it clear that Schmitt had to understand that one could not receive endless promotions and that rank was related to real activities on behalf of the SS.134 
Schmitt was, in fact, something of a problem for the SS. As chairman of the su-pervisory board of Deutsche Continental-Gas-Gesellschaft, Schmitt backed the efforts of its general director (Eduard Schalfejew, who had worked with Schmitt as an RWM offcial before leaving in 1935) to retain Count Rudolf Westarp, who was considered a ※non-Aryan,§ on the managing board of one of the company＊s larger works. Westarp was kept on until the end of 1942, when the danger be-came too great and Schalfejew sent him to Hungary to represent the company. All this led to attacks from the Party, and Westarp fnally was arrested by the Gestapo in Budapest and sent to the concentration camp at Matthausen, which he managed to survive. Schalfejew was obviously in bad odor with the Party, and when Schmitt included him in efforts to secure a contribution for the Circle of Friends and some charity supported by Himmler, the Reichsfrer found the matter embarrassing and ※painful.§ He had sent a letter of thanks to Schalfe-jew before learning about the latter＊s position on Westarp. Himmler returned the money, and Schmitt was told never again to use his membership in the Circle for business purposes.135 
Kranefuss had more problems concerning Schmitt at the beginning of 1943, when Wilhelm Keppler tried to mobilize higher SS leaders 每 among them the leading economic fgure in the SS, Oswald Pohl 每 to promote Schmitt. Krane-fuss was able to ward this off by speaking to Keppler about the problem.136 At the same time, Schmitt also asked for an interview with Himmler about ※acute questions of the insurance business§ when the Reichsfrer was next in Berlin, to 
134 Kranefuss an Brandt, 2. Juni 1942; Brandt an Kranefuss, 14. Juni 1942, ibid. 135 See the correspondence between Brandt and Kranefuss, Nov.每Dec. 1942, ibid. See also the state-
ment by Schalfejew of Feb. 7, 1946, in connection with Schmitt＊s denazifcation, FHA, NL 1/74. 136 Kranefuss an Brandt, 15. Jan. 1943, BAB, ehem. BDC, SL 62. 
which Himmler formally agreed but, as his staff noted, on the assumption that ※this will not be the case in the forseeable future.§137 The attack of Schwede-Coburg, therefore, simply compounded an already existing problem with re-spect to Schmitt＊s SS position, but it also demonstrated both the advantages that Schmitt＊s pandering to Himmler brought and his profound miscalculation of where he really stood with the SS. The advantage, quite simply, was that Himm-ler was not going to feed Schmitt to Schwede-Coburg. On March 15, 1943, Himmler thanked him for the information on Schmitt and then went on: ※You know that in your struggle which you lead in the matter of insurance, I stand ab-solutely on your side. But I will ask you, insofar as is possible, to avoid personal attacks on Party comrade Schmitt, who belongs to the SS and whose son fell for us as an SS-Untersturmfrer.§138 
Obersturmbannfrer Brandt asked Kranefuss to convey this information to Schmitt and try to get the two combatants to calm the debate down. Krane-fuss agreed that Schmitt deserved their respect and consideration as the father of a splendid young man who had died heroically for the SS. At the same time, Kranefuss made it clear that he had no illusions about Schmitt and what he really represented. He pointed out that Schmitt had achieved his prominence through his role in the Favag affair, which Kranefuss in fact thought deserving of criticism, and through his close contacts with Ging, who was responsible for Schmitt be-coming economics minister. It was this that led to his being invited into the SS. Kranefuss himself, however, bluntly told Brandt that ※I have never considered Dr. Schmitt a National Socialist and I also do not today.§ Kranefuss classifed Schmitt as one of a number of economic leaders who had developed powerful contacts in the regime but who deserved an even less favorable judgment than Schmitt himself. Manifestly, Kranefuss was suggesting that this was built into the compromise the Nazi leadership had made with the business world. These, however, were worlds apart: 
When one as a National Socialist and an SS-man discusses economic and political ques-tions, then one has the feeling that one is living on two separate planets. In human terms, such conversations are always very nice and polite but in the last analysis they are com-pletely unsatisfying with respect to world view. He has often demonstrated how he thinks and feels .... Probably he will never understand why we have such a basic difference of opinion than he, and one actually cannot hold it against him that he does not under-stand us.139 
Kranefuss thought it pointless to try to reconcile Schmitt and Schwede-Coburg andwasquitecriticalofthelatterforthewayhedealtwiththeinsuranceproblem. At the same time, there was no way Schwede-Coburg could understand the men-tality of a businessman like Schmitt or even care about Schmitt＊s personal loss. 
137 Vermerk, 30. Dez. 1941, ibid. 138 Himmler an Schwede-Coburg, 15. M.rz 1943, ibid. 139 Kranefuss an Brandt, 18. M.rz 1943, ibid. 
This indeed was true, and it is well worth noting that Schmitt＊s and Hilgard＊s opponents in the insurance battle were truly dangerous people. Schwede-Coburg was a killer who pushed forward a highly effective euthanasia program in Pom-merania and who had no qualms about eliminating his political enemies in the most brutal fashion. Similarly, the ever-troublesome DAF man Lencer was to be found in Minsk in 1943 heading a liaison agency between economic authorities and the SS and police, where he was responsible for combing Jews and others out of production plants and for reducing the population＊s food supply.140 
It is signifcant that the man chosen to respond to Rath and provide the weapons to fght Schwede-Coburg was Jens Jessen, a person with National Socialist credentials who was nevertheless already involved in the Resistance. Jessen, who would be executed in connection with the July 20, 1944, attempt to kill Hitler, was in fact a member of the Goerdeler Circle of conservative opponents of the Nazi regime who were drawing up plans for an alternative government. He was also a member of the ※Wednesday Society§ (Mittwochs-Gesellschaft), aBerlin discussion group of intellectuals, government offcials, and military leaders to which many of the leading conspirators 每 of whom General Ludwig Beck was one of the most noteworthy 每 belonged.141 In their conver-sations on the Jessen project, Hilgard discovered not only that Jessen was an opponent of the system but also, in July 1943, that Jessen was involved in a plot to overthrow Hitler with Minister Johannes Popitz. Jessen asked that Allianz make a contribution of 100,000 RM without explaining exactly how the money would be used. Hilgard did discuss the matter with Alzheimer at Schmitt＊s estate Tiefenbrunn in the summer of 1943 but not with Schmitt himself, ※because he is known to be a man who cannot keep a secret.§ According to Alzheimer, who was interrogated by Allied authorities in July 1947, Hilgard specifcally stated that ※Jessen required the RM 100,000 for the preparation of an attempt on Hitler＊s life.§ Hilgard and Alzheimer agreed, however, that the danger of making such a contribution was too great and Hilgard told Jessen that Allianz could not take the risk. Apparently, Jessen then suggested that the second installment on the book be paid shortly; Hilgard and Alzheimer (who discussed the matter again 
140 On Lencer, see Christian Gerlach, Kalkulierte Morde. Die deutsche Wirtschafts-und Vernich-tungspolitik in Wei.ru.land 1941 bis 1944 (Hamburg, 1999), p. 149 mit Anm. 135, pp. 315, 318每19, 444, 485. About Schwede-Coburg＊s role in the context of euthanasia see e.g. Ernst Klee, ※Euthanasie§ im NS-Staat. Die ※Vernichtung lebensunwerten Lebens§ (Frankfurt a.M., 1985), p. 95, Heike Bernhardt, Anstaltspsychiatrie und ※Euthanasie§ inPommern 1933每1945. Die Krankenmorde an Kindern und Erwachsenen am Beispiel der Landesheilanstalt Ueckermde (Frankfurt a.M., 1994), and Heinz Faulstich, Hungersterben in der Psychiatrie 1914每1949. Mit einer Topographie der NS-Psychiatrie (Freiburg i.Br., 1998), esp. pp. 455每63. 
141 Jessen worked closely with Johannes Popitz, Ulrich von Hassell, and Carl Goerdele. For this group and Jessen＊s place in it, see Hans Mommsen, ※Gesellschaftsbild und Verfassungspl.ne des deutschen Widerstandes,§ in Hans Mommsen, Alternative zu Hitler. Studien zur Geschichte des deutschen Widerstandes (Munich, 2000), pp. 53每158. On the Mittwochs-Gesellschaft, see Klaus Scholder (ed.), Die Mittwochs-Gesellschaft: Protokolle aus dem geistigen Deutschland 1932 bis 1944 (Berlin, 1982). 
in Berlin a few weeks later) agreed, and Jessen was given a check in early August 1943 by Allianz, recorded as the second payment for the work Jessen was writing. Alzheimer agreed that Munich Re should pay half the cost, although Alzheimer could not say whether it did so in his 1947 interrogation. Hilgard never con-sulted with or charged the other companies involved, and Jessen never asked for any further funds. After the war, Jessen＊s widow, K.the, claimed not only that Hilgard was a political ally of her husband who was among those believing it necessary to assassinate Hitler but also that ※Hilgard promised my husband every needed fnancial support for the conspirators and was made privy to all the plans by my husband.§ In his denazifcation proceedings after the war, Hil-gard claimed, on the basis of this letter and a statement of Alzheimer, that he promised and delivered money for the Resistance cause and that his intentions were matched by deeds. Although Alzheimer＊s statement of February 1947 and Hilgard＊s own testimony make no reference to giving the Resistance any money it might need, Alzheimer＊s interrogation in July 1947 does explicitly speak of a plot to kill Hitler. Both Hilgard and Alzheimer made no claim to doing more than giving Jessen half of what he requested 每 and that in the form of an added advance for his study, with the cost booked to Allianz. Strictly speaking, there was no payment for the Resistance cause and no evidence about why Jessen, who was on the margins of the actual conspiracy, needed the money and to what use it was put. Hilgard never claimed to have detailed knowledge about the conspir-acy, although he obviously knew of its existence and may indeed have wished it well without becoming personally involved. And he never actually claimed that Allianz was contributing to the Resistance, even if he implied a connection be-tween his knowledge of Jessen＊s views and the prepayment of the honorarium.142 
The struggle between Schmitt and Hilgard, on the one hand, and Schwede-Coburg and his allies, on the other, is not a story of resistance to National So-cialism but rather of conficting elements within the National Socialist system. It was a confict that had to be suspended because of the war, and even Gauleiter Greiser had to give up 每 albeit with great reluctance and not until August 1943 每 on pursuing compulsory building insurance in the Warthegau because it would have cost manpower. He took the view that the question would have to be reg-ulated for the entire Reich and believed ※that in the area of insurance a certain socialization will take place and that the introduction of compulsory insurance will certainly be easier to introduce in this context.§143 Having to fght this battle 
142 Interrogation of Hilgard, July 16, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /57/6每8, and Hilgard, 
※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7, pp. 140每4, which contains statements by Frau Jessen on June 23, 1946, 
by Alzheimer on Feb. 23, 1947, and by the chief bookkeeper of Allianz, Ernst Rausche, on April 
24, 1946. Interrogation of Alois Alzheimer, July 17, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /56/1. 143 Vermerk Siegmund (Perslicher Refernt Greiser), 13. Aug. 1943, APP, Reichsstatthalter/2801, Bl. 210. Until this time, he tried to hold out against powerful agencies anxious to see the dis-cussion terminated for the duration of the war. See the complaining letter to the RWM and to Greiser from Finance Minister Schwerin von Krosigk of April 7, 1943, and the rejection of the plan by Kner of Ging＊s Four-Year Plan offce, ibid., Bl. 141每3, 162每4. 
was one of the prices Allianz and the insurance industry 每 represented so effec-tively by Schmitt and Hilgard 每 had to pay for their involvement with the regime, and important weapons in this struggle (or at least so they thought) were their connections with Ging, Himmler, Funk, and other major Nazi leaders. They had to present the private insurance business and its leadership as a better al-ternative to that being proposed and supported by Nazi Party radicals, and this meant becoming increasingly implicated in National Socialist imperialism and the crimes that attended it. 
8 

Allianz and Munich Re in the Second World War 
The term ※community of danger§ belonged to the language of the politically correct in German insurance circles, but that National Socialist Germany itself was a ※community of danger§ in a quite literal sense was not lost upon those leading the industry. The greater the drift toward war, the more obvious this be-came. Although Hitler＊s willingness and ability to take great risks and revise the Treaty of Versailles ※peacefully§ until 1939 每 and then move on to yet further tri-umphs in 1939每1941 每 may have been viewed with admiration and satisfaction, those involved in the management of the German insurance industry, as was the very nature of their enterprise, remained anxious to minimize risk but also to maximize opportunity. This meant constant assessment of the situation, and the two goals were inextricably related to one another. Risk reduction was an im-perative when Germany faced war before 1939 and when Germany faced defeat after 1942, while opportunity maximization was of greatest importance during the period when it appeared that Germany might be victorious. Nevertheless, it was the very nature of the regime to insist that peace was being maintained while it was driving toward war and to speak of fnal victory while facing total defeat. Thus for only a brief period was there some correspondence between claims and reality. Especially after 1942, those who managed to maintain their capacity for rational perception inevitably faced an increasing tension between their engage-ment with the regime and their effort to continue ※doing business,§ on the one hand, and such measures as they could take to deal with the manifest disaster they were confronting, on the other. 
expansionist efforts and business opportunities in war 
The Lessons of Spain, War Risks, and Wartime Business 
Ironically, one of the developments that made German insurers particularly aware of war risks was the Spanish Civil War, where Germany and Italy had stood on the side of Franco＊s successful insurrection against the Republic but where the war action of 1936每1939 and Franco＊s victory produced a host of dis-agreeable and costly problems for all foreign companies who had sold insurance 
345 
in Spain or acted as reinsurers. Spanish policies covered civil unrest and a few actually went so far as to mention civil war, although this was rare. Foreign com-panies, including the Germans (who, as shown in connection with the November Pogrom, tended to refuse such coverage) agreed to include civil unrest coverage in Spain in order to compete against or provide reinsurance to the indigenous companies. The problems involved were especially relevant to Allianz, which controlled Plus Ultra (one of Spain＊s major companies) and Munich Re, which was a partner of Allianz in such ventures and handled a considerable amount of reinsurance. The Germans were thrown out of Madrid in August 1936 and so the managers in question were then handling Plus Ultra affairs from the for-eign section of Allianz in Berlin.1 By 1937 there was already much discussion in the international insurance community of how to defne the liability of the companies 每 that is, how to distinguish between damage caused by tumult or public disturbance and the damage caused by the Civil War. The entire problem was the subject of international conferences, and an international committee of jurists had actually been set up to defne (which it did, quite narrowly) what con-stituted a public disturbance. 
The Germans, friendly as they might be to Franco, had nevertheless an ob-vious interest in not losing more money than necessary in Spain. As Franco increased his sway in 1938, there was good reason to worry that he would play the dictator also in the insurance feld and simply decree what the obligations of insurers working in Spain were to be. Directors Meuschel and Alzheimer of the Munich Re were particuarly alarmed that some companies and reinsurers, especially the Swiss, were making premature concessions that Franco could use to increase demands, and the Germans were anxious to work closely with the English and French to create some solidarity in dealing with the problem.2 The Franco regime, however, was less interested in disputing legal defnitions than in having the foreign insurance companies make a solid contribution to reconstruc-tion of the destroyed areas. It referred to the events since 1936 as a ※war§ when doing so was useful for taxation purposes without worrying in the least about the implications for insurance claims; ultimately, the regime was after as much as it could collect in taxes and in ※contributions§ from the insurance companies for national reconstruction. Franco was not only in desperate need of recon-struction aid, he was also short of foreign exchange and was thus particularly interested in what he might extract from reinsurers.3 Schmitt naturally worked closely with the German Foreign Offce to try to moderate the potential claims and demands of the new Spanish regime, and in the spring of 1939 he prevailed on Ulrich von Hassell to go to Spain and deal with their insurance organizations 
1 See the Rundschreiben der Organisations-Abteilung der Allianz of Aug. 19, 1936,FHA,AZ 5.1/4. 2 Aktennote Meuschel, 1. April 1938, MR, G 1/14. This fle contains a wealth of information on 
the evolution of the issue and the problems of defning civil unrest and riot. 3 Aktennote Alzheimer, 24. Okt. 1938, MR, G 1/14; Pablo Philipp y Stadler, General Direktor Plus 
Ultra an Allianz, 3.Mai 1939, MR, G 1/11. 
and public authorities. Von Hassell was also asked to report on the dangers of nationalization, which seems to have been on the agenda of the Spanish Fascist Party, the Falange. Von Hassell, however, did not think this much of a problem and also was able to report that the Spanish were moving toward a settlement that would introduce predictability to the entire insurance compensation sce-nario.4 Still, there were plenty of indications in the various negotiations taking place that the Spanish were thinking in terms that could only be plausible if they were expecting to get the money they wanted from abroad. Allianz was anxious for Plus Ultra to use its connections with the Spanish government to moder-ate its demands. Matters were further complicated when the French and British withdrew from their collaboration with the Germans because of the outbreak of war.5 Thus, by April 1940, Plus Ultra was reporting to Allianz an estimate of 150 to 180 million pesetas in damages to be asked of the insurers, an amount con-sidered alarmingly high.6 Finally, after much tedious negotiation, an agreement was reached in the spring of 1941 on a global insurance amount of 100 million pesetas to be paid in installments by the insurance companies involved as a con-sortium, 40% immediately in June 1941, 30% in October, 20% in December, and 10% by the reinsurers when fnal obligations had been calculated for them. It was a substantial payment, especially since it had to be paid in pesetas. In the case of Allianz, however, it could call on Plus Ultra to pay 10 million.7 
It should thus come as no surprise that the Spanish Civil War served as a warning bell for European insurers to think more systematically about their obligations in the event of a European war. An important indication of this ef-fort to deal with the war danger was the decision of the British Fire Offcers＊ Committee in early 1937 that its members would issue no more policies that might even imply coverage of civil war and war risks. The Reich Group, fol-lowing their lead, instructed that all its members refuse any further coverage of civil war damages because they were scarcely distinguishable from covering an actual war. At the same time, it was deemed in the public interest to continue the insuring of war correspondents, personnel and ships operating in Portuguese harbors and in Spanish harbors under control of Franco＊s forces, and personnel working for German enterprises in areas controlled by Franco＊s forces.8 What worried Hilgard most, however, was that Germany did not seem to be follow-ing the British lead in cancelling all war risk obligations, a policy to which the 
4 Schmitt an Philipp, 15. April 1939, ibid.; Aktennote von Hassell, 19.Mai 1939, MR, G 1/14. 5 Bericht Grieshaber, 23.Feb. 1940; Allianz an Mchener Rk, 22. Aug. 1939, MR, G 1/12. 6 Allianz an Mcher Rk, 25. April 1940, MR, G 1/11. 7 Alzheimer an die interessierten Gesellschaften, 8. Aug. 1941,GDV, RS/48; Alzheimer an die 
Wirtschaftsgruppe Rk-und Kreditversicherung, 18. Jan. 1941 und 12.Mai 1941,GDV, RS/17; 
Bericht an die Mitglieder des Aufsichtsrats, 12. Dez. 1941,BAB, 80 Ba 2 /P 5781. 8 See the Rundschreiben der Organisationsabteilung der Allianz of April 19 and June 28, 1937, FHA, AZ 5.1/5, the Rundschreiben des Deutschen Aufruhrversicherungs-Verbandes, 24. M.rz 1937, and Anlagen, the Rundschreiben der Wirtschaftsgruppe Privatversicherung, 15. April 1937 und 16. June 1937,GDV, 2每108/1. 
German ministries were opposed on the grounds that it would make it appear as if Germany thought war imminent. Hilgard was reproached for his attitude when he pointed out that this left German insurers with an intolerable level of exposure in the event of war.9 
Nevertheless, the need to do something became increasingly obvious, and the form this took was the creation of a German war clause for transport insurance in 1938 and the subsequent establishment of the German War Insurance Com-munity in July 1939. The former was an addendum to all transport insurance contracts that provided, in return for a special premium, coverage for all goods damaged, destroyed, or seized by acts of war between the time they were loaded aboard ship and unloaded. The clause was extended at the beginning of the war to shipments by Lufthansa and by other forms of transportation. The Ger-man War Insurance Community was an association composed initially of some 48 direct transportation insurance companies and a dozen reinsurance compa-nies that functioned as a pool covering such war risks. In addition to the special premiums charged customers, the transportation insurers involved agreed also to increase their coverage capacity by providing a fund of 10 million RM, to which would be added another 10 million from the entire private insurance in-dustry. Finally, should these resources be used up, the German government then agreed to undertake full liability for remaining costs. Hilgard formally headed the new organization, which was managed (very effectively, it seems) by his Di-rector Ludwig Neumler of the Allianz transport division. The tasks it faced were certainly complicated, involving different premiums for various areas de-pending on their relative dangers and taking into account Germany＊s borders and areas of control as they expanded and then contracted.10 
In contrast to the somewhat conficted and short prehistory of the War Insur-ance Community, there seems not to have been any question on the part of the government or the insurers that life insurance would continue at existing levels and that war-related deaths would be covered. At the same time, it was obvious that the life insurers would need some protection against the consequences of the increased death rate, and the RAA therefore mandated a ※risk supplement§ on premiums of 20% on the frst 3,000 RM, 30% on the next 17,000 RM, and at least 30% on amounts exceeding 20,000 RM.11 With recent memories of the First World War and its enormous death rate, the insurers naturally faced the situation with some trepidation, but they seemed reasonably confdent that a combination of the supplements and an assessment among the various compa-nies would cover their needs. The primary thing, as Hilgard and Schloe.mann 
9 Hilgard, ※Die Allianz im 2. Weltkrieg,§ FHA, AZ 1.3/2, pp. 24每5. 10 Ibid.; for the Kriegsklausel and the constitution of the Kriegsversicherungsgemeinschaft, see SM, 
1458/34/66, Bl. 78每9, 227每35; for the meetings and procedures and policies see this entire volume 
and the Beiratssitzungen der Wirtschaftsgruppe Rk-und Kreditversicherung, SM, 1458/1/27 
and 88. On the complexities of some of this trade see the interesting material on Allianz＊s insur-
ance business in Iran, SM, 1458/1/87. 11 Rundschreiben RAA, 1. Sept. 1939,SM, 1458/1/157. 

Calendar for students edited by Allianz Leben, 1940/1941. 
argued, was ※that the German life insurance should have so complete a capac-ity at the end of the war as if the consequences of the war had remained without any infuence.§12 In the heady days of victory, however, the consequence of the war was a considerable reduction in the number of persons taking out life in-surance because ※there is no inclination among the insured to pay increased war surcharges in view of the soon to be expected peace.§13 The public noted the low death rate and the reduced number of those drafted and also looked for-ward to Ley＊s plans for an old-age pension system for the entire German people. 
12 Vermerk, 14. Sept. 1939, ibid. 13 Lagebericht, 4. Sept. 1940, ibid. 
By 1941每1942, however, the situation had changed dramatically. At the begin-ning of April 1942, Allianz Leben reported to the RAA that 9,629 of its insured had died and 25.1 million RM had been paid out for 1941 and that the weekly death rate was 415 in March 1942. Under the circumstances, the capacity to serve policyholders required an increased war supplement and the levying of an assessment on the insurance frms.14 The ravages of war made themselves felt even more strongly between January and November 1942, when 17,537 Allianz Leben insured died, resulting in claims amounting to 40.3 million RM.15 The Battle of Stalingrad was, of course, to prove particularly disastrous, and by April 1943 the number of wartime deaths had increased to 37,000 for a total sum of insurance of 90 million RM. Oddly enough, however, the life insurance compa-nies did well 每 thanks to increases in premium supplements allowed by the RAA and to the general assessment made on all companies for ensuring that those with old policies were not unjustly deprived of their dividends because of the in-creased deaths of those who took out insurance later. The number of large life insurance policies increased by 55,410 in 1941,by 63,689 in 1942, and by 34,535 in 1943, so that, after deducting policies that ended or were terminated, the total number of such policyholders rose from 629,009 policies at the end of 1940 to 728,428 at the end of 1943. The number of insured with small life and group policies increased by 435,391 persons in 1941,by 432,073 in 1942, and by 519,144 in 1943, so that the total number of such insured rose from 3,194,606 at the end of 1940 to 4,803,333 at the end of 1943. Between 56% and 58% of the total value of these policies were group policies.16 The effect of the increased number of in-sured and the higher premiums meant, on the one hand, that survivors could be paid off rapidly and, on the other, that a considerable reserve was building up for investment. Naturally, the concern would have done better without a war: the gross profts of Allianz at the end of August 1942 were 26.4 million instead of the 60 million they might have been had peacetime and normal interest rates prevailed.17 
During the early stages of the war, the attitude toward liability for property damage caused by the war was relatively casual. The insurance companies were not liable for property damage caused directly in the course of military op-erations, but it was diffcult to determine liability for indirect war damage and sometimes to distinguish between damage that was normal and damage that was war-related. The RWM and the Reich Group urged companies to be generous and liberal in their attitudes and 每 so long as things were going well, as they were in 1939每1940 每 to cover indirect war damage. The economic groups for property insurance in the Reich Group set up special commissions to adjudicate individual 
14 Allianz Leben an RAA, 8. April 1942, BAK, B 280/1490, Bl. 80. 15 Schreiben Allianz Leben, 25.Nov. 1942, ibid., Bl. 96. 16 Gesch.ftsberichte Allianz Leben, 1941/1943, FHA, p. 8. 17 Schloe.mann an von Finck, 26. Aug. 1941, FHA, B 1.3.1/9; Schloe.mann an von Finck, 21. April 
1943, FHA, B1.3.1/4.; Hilgard, ※Die Allianz im 2. Weltkrieg,§ FHA, AZ 1.3/2,p. 26. 
cases. There seemed to be a consensus, for example, that damages incurred dur-ing blackouts were not to be considered war damages whereas damages incurred in defense against enemy air attacks were war damages. Needless to say, these issues were to become much more complicated as the war progressed.18 
Nevertheless, Allianz increased its intake of premiums substantially during the war, above all in fre insurance on industrial facilities and transport. Although private vehicle insurance decreased sharply in the frst year of the war, there was growth in premiums paid for vehicle transport after December 1941, thanks to the high volume of transport in the occupied areas and in Southeastern Europe. Only thereafter did collection of premiums slow down, because construction of military production facilities had reached its limits and nonessential plants were being shut down. As the fortunes of war began to turn, premium increases re-fected the higher amounts for which industrial and other assets were assessed for insurance purposes (because of the increased danger) and also general infa-tionary tendencies but were ultimately overshadowed by losses incurred through bombing and the shrinking of areas under German control.19 
Nevertheless, the war effort had offered plenty of business over a wide geo-graphical area. An important type of insurance provided by Allianz during the war was construction insurance. This form of insurance was frst introduced in 1934 and announced with considerable fanfare to the RWM as coming ※at the beginning of the second working year of the National Socialist Government§ and refecting the renewed interest in construction and the promise of further work creation. Because it had a large organization and trained technical person-nel, Allianz was in a position to offer insurance against construction mishaps by sparing the builder from having to calculate them itself and then also pro-viding the customer with cash security against them. Thanks to its engineering bureau and experience in machine insurance, Allianz would do the job and let the builder concentrate on what he was really supposed to do. In providing such insurance, Allianz proudly claimed it was providing ※a building block for the re-construction of the economy.§20 
During the war, of course, there was more than enough ※work creation§ going on, and the need for construction insurance increased substantially. Premiums from this form of insurance had tripled between 1938 and 1942, and in 1942 Al-lianz was insuring 750 million marks worth of construction and 30 million marks worth of construction equipment. The Organisation Todt, which was respon-sible for much of the construction work in the war effort, made almost exclusive use of Allianz and praised it for turning risks into fxed costs. Albert Speer＊s min-istry also supported working with Allianz and taking out this form of insurance, 
18 See the Organisations-Rundschreiben of Allianz of Dec. 28, 1939, Jan. 15 and 23,Feb. 26,March 
4, April 6, 16, and 29, 1940, FHA, AZ 5.1/5. 19 The reports to the Aufsichtsrat in BAB, 80 Ba 2 /P 5781, chart the ebb and fow of premiums dur-
ing the war. 20 Allianz an RWM, 2.Mai 1934,BAB,R 3101/17078. 
as did the Air Ministry. Indeed, Allianz construction insurance had as its feld of operations 
collaboration in the drawing up of government and industrial construction contracts, eval-uation of construction work done, supervision of construction sites, handling of damages, at present only for building sites important and decisive for the war effort in the Reich, the occupied western and eastern areas, in friendly nations abroad, such as coastal protection, U-boat bases and plants, airfelds, road and bridge constructions, steel shipbuilding, air defense, armaments and energy development (raw materials production, hydrogenation, Buna, and munitions works, weapons plants, water and steam power works) 每 utilization of building equipment.21 
Therefore, in thinking about Allianz＊s wartime activity, it is important to dis-tinguish between its short-term activities for the war effort throughout Europe, which were very substantial, and its longer-term ambitions. In Norway, for ex-ample, Allianz was denied the right to sell various types of insurance (fre, theft, accident, auto, etc.) because the market was viewed as overcrowded, but it was allowed to sell machine and construction insurance. In Denmark, Allianz was permitted to reestablish connections with a Danish agent it had used before to handle its general business and was also permitted to sell machine and con-struction insurance. The machine and construction insurance business in the occupied areas obviously was closely connected to the war effort, but Allianz was no less anxious to participate ※in step with the expansion of German in-surance interests in the occupied foreign area§ by renewing its ties to the frm of Axel L. Bramsen & Co. in Copenhagen. It is to this second type of wartime activity that we now turn. 

The Drive to Expand 
How much Allianz, its chief partner Munich Re, and the German insurance business in general participated in Germany＊s expansion 每 and the character and quality of their engagement 每 are complicated questions, and it is important to deal with them in a realistic context. Some insurance leaders were more inter-ested than others in external expansion. One of the differences between Kurt Schmitt and Hans He., for example, was that the former was enthusiastic about Allianz＊s international development whereas the latter was opposed to signif-cant development of the concern abroad.22 The coming of the war put a limit on such personal predilections, though it helps explain why Schmitt (in contrast to He.) was often so visibly active on behalf of Allianz interests in the occu-pied areas. A decision to be totally uninvolved and to ※stay home§ would be tantamount to going out of business, and it would be unrealistic for the histo-rian to expect such behavior. The service of insurers was a required part of the 
21 Bericht an das RAA vom 27. Apr. 1943, Anlage 6 vom 27. April 1943,FHA,S 17.4 /6. 22 E. J. Ruperti an Federico Morway, 31. M.rz 1948,MR, D/7. 
war effort, especially in areas where British insurance and reinsurance had been of great importance, and it was by no means unusual to place British and other enemy insurance branches in conquered territories under the trusteeship of Ger-man frms.23 The more serious question concerned the intentions of German insurers toward the insurance businesses themselves in the occupied countries and toward the future shape of the European insurance business. Thus, as Hil-gard noted correctly after the war, a good deal more than occupation measures and necessities of the moment were involved, since ※it was in the nature of the German political leadership at that time that it was ready to seize this economic booty with ruthless brutality.§24 Hilgard claimed that he (and those of his col-leagues with any insight) realized this approach could only damage the future reputation and interests of the German insurance industry, which depended on functioning in an international market, and that it was his goal 每 especially in the western occupied countries 每 to minimize the infuence of the Nazi-dominated RAA and, with the support of the RWM, to create mechanisms through which German insurers would work with their counterparts in the occupied countries as partners rather than dictating victors. 
We will show that these claims should not be dismissed entirely out of hand, yet some well-informed persons viewed the matter less favorably. For example, the well-known writer Ludwig Arps, who taught insurance at the University of Munich and authored the 75th anniversary history of Allianz, spoke bluntly in correspondence with Director Walther Meuschel of Munich Re in 1948 of the ※imposed participation of German insurance in foreign corporations.§ He had apparently intended to make this comment especially with respect to the DAF insurance companies in an article but then decided to drop the issue. However, as he told Meuschel, 
[t]hose participations were in fact imposed, in southeastern Europe, in France, in Poland, in what was then the Protectorate, in the Netherlands; and that not only by the DAF group, also not from reinsurers alone, but also from primary insurers in various branches. Who would want to maintain that all the businessmen in German contractual insurance were angels or even politically persecuted? Is it useful to the German insurance business when one suppresses or even maintains that the German insurance business was guiltless or harmless with respect to all the economic sins of the Third Reich? I believe much more that one is better served by candid expression and criticism of such excesses.25 
Meuschel was not very taken with this criticism and, while expressing a will-ingness to face real evidence, claimed that he and Hilgard had always behaved 
23 Martin Herzog, ※Beispielsammlung f die Kriegswirtschaftsgeschichte: Behandlung der englis-
chen Versicherungsbest.nde in den von deutschen Truppen besetzten Gebieten,§ 18. Sept. 1941, 
GDV, Personenarchiv, Akte Martin Herzog. 24 Hilgard, ※Allianz im 2. Weltkrieg,§ FHA, AZ 1.3/2,p. 30. 25 See Arps an Meuschel, 5. Jan. 1948, MR, E 4 /15. It cannot be said that Arps＊s account of the Nazi 
period in Wechselvolle Zeiten followed this injunction in any respect or was much more than a 
standard Festschrift. 
correctly and that this had been confrmed by the foreign insurers.26 However, the real problem was that it was diffcult for Meuschel (or Hilgard, or Schmitt) to recapture the sense of opportunity and ambition one felt in 1938每1941 amidst the wreckage and immense task of reconstruction one faced 1945每1948. Thus, at a meeting in Vienna in October 1940, He. and Schmitt met with Schmidt-Polex to discuss the affairs of Wiener Allianz 每 a company, it should be recalled, that Allianz and Munich Re had taken over by forcing both the Italian and the Aus-trian shareholders out. The frst item on the agenda was the future activity of Wiener Allianz abroad: ※It was made basically clear that Wiener Allianz is the given corporation for the cultivation of the narrower eastern region (Balkans) and that as a consequence Allianz will operate not from Berlin but rather from Vienna in Hungary, Yugoslavia, Slovakia, Romania and Greece, initially also the Protectorate.§27 A few weeks later, on November 11, 1940, Munich Re and Al-lianz held the frst meeting of the joint council of directors, with Schmitt serving as the frst rotating chairman. The directors present then reported on ※expan-sion of business carried out and introduced until now in the occupied areas by their corporations.§28 They reported on considerable activity in France, Bel-gium, and the Netherlands, although they found the possibilities in Norway and Denmark more limited. At the second meeting, on May 9, 1941, there was further discussion of expanded activity in France, and Schmidt-Polex had a chance to report on his search for concessions in southeastern Europe and his other plans.29 All this made neither devils nor angels of the executives running these concerns, but it did demonstrate that the war seemed to give them op-portunity and power and that they intended to use them for the beneft of their enterprises. It also made them participants in the generally accepted proposi-tion that, in the event of a German victory, Berlin would replace London as the center of European commerce. Schmitt＊s Association for Large Risks had this explicit goal at the time of its founding, and he 每 as was most of the Ger-man business world 每 was engaging in economic warfare on behalf of the Third Reich. Howsoever they may have interpreted their actions then and later, the Allies understood their behavior to have such a purpose and monitored their activities with as close a watch as was possible under wartime circumstances. This does not mean that Allied observers always got the details straight, and the historian today is obviously more advantaged. As is well known, German rule varied in different parts of Europe and in different countries, being more ※civilized§ in the West and barbaric in the East, and it was also affected by differing conditions in the various areas and countries to be considered. Fi-nally, the questions of whether one was dealing with a satellite or an enemy 
26 Meuschel an Arps, 6.Feb. 1948, MR, E 4/15. 27 Aktennote Schmitt, 18. Okt. 1940, MR, A 1/30. 28 Niederschrift er die erste Sitzung des gemeinsamen Vorstandsrats am 11.Nov. 1940,FHA, S 
17.2 /73. 29 2. Sitzung am 9.Mai 1941, ibid. 
(these categories became rather fuid in the later part of the war) and of the type of German administration imposed on conquered areas were both relevant in defning the behavior of the insurance business outside Germany. Therefore, in understanding the actions of Allianz, Munich Re, and the insurance busi-ness in Europe, it is important to take these geographical and other factors into account.30 
Frustration in Southeastern Europe 
In the case of southeastern Europe, the situation in the region was the source of a considerable and surprising amount of disappointment, despite some lucrative if rather temporary opportunities. The disappointment was particularly evident in the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia and in the puppet state of Slovakia. In the former, there was basic agreement among the German authorities in charge, above all the ※Reich Protector§ Reinhard Heydrich, that the basic economic structure of the area should not be changed insofar as military requirements did not dictate otherwise: ※All other decisions, along with all those pertaining to in-surance, should be set aside until after the war when the Frer decides what the political future of the Protectorate shall be.§31 What this meant was that, despite Schmidt-Polex＊s protestations that Wiener Allianz should be allowed to return to those areas in which it had been active in the old Austro-Hungarian Empire (before the rude interruption created by the establishment of the Czech state), Wiener Allianz was denied a license. German, Austrian, and Sudetenland com-panies like Victoria, Agrippina, Donau-Concordia, Internationale Unfall-und Schadensversicherungs-Gesellschaft, Sudetendeutsche Union Versicherungs-AG, and Sudetendeutsche Volksfsorge, which were already established in the area (along with the Italian Generali and RAS and with the Swiss Helvetia, Schweizer National, and Basler), were permitted to continue doing business alongside a 
30 See the important essay by Richard J. Overy, ※The Economy of the German ＆New Order＊,§ and Dietrich Eichholtz, ※Institutionen und Praxis der deutschen Wirtschaftspolitik im NS-besetzten Europa,§ in Richard J. Overy, Gerhard Otto, & Johannes Houwink ten Cate (eds.), Die ※Neuord-nung§ Europas. NS-Wirtschaftspolitik in den besetzten Gebieten (Berlin, 1997), pp. 11每28, 29每 
62. More generally, see Dietrich Eichholtz (ed.), Krieg und Wirtschaft. Studien zur deutschen Wirtschaftsgeschichte 1939每1945 (Berlin, 1999), Wolfgang Benz, Johannes Houwink ten Cate, & Gerhard Otto (eds.), Die Bokratie der Okkupation. Strukturen der Herrschaft und Verwal-tung im besezten Europa (Berlin, 1998), and Johannes Houwink ten Cate & Gerhard Otto (eds.), Das Organisierte Chaos. ※.mterdarwinismus§ und ※Gesinnungsethik.§ Determinanten natio-nalsozialistischer Besatzungsherrschaft (Berlin, 1999). For an important illustration of American efforts to understand what the German insurance business was up to, see ※Axis Penetration of European Insurance,§ Board of Economic Warfare, Economy Branch, June 15, 1943,NA, RG 60, 230/31/1/6. The U.S. government also tapped the knowledge and experience of Alfred Manes, who produced a memorandum on reinsurance on July 31, 1942,NA, RG 60, 230/32 /1/4. 
31 Aktennote, 8. Dez. 1941, MR,A 1/23. Ongeneralpolicymatters,seeAliceTeichova, ※Instruments of Economic Control and Exploitation: The German Occupation of Bohemia and Moravia,§ in Overy, ※Neuordnung§ Europas, pp. 83每108. 
host of Czech companies.32 Naturally, these companies were subject to the usual racial measures. Thus, a ban on the further payment and employment of Jews in insurance was instituted immediately, a matter that proved very ※painful§ for a company like Internationale Unfall, which had a majority participation by RAS and had extremely able Jewish leadership that had to be let go.33 The companies licensed to operate in the Protectorate were also affected by the particularly rig-orous and systematic seizure of Jewish insurance assets, so that by July 1942 the Prague Gestapo was able to report 54.4 million Czech crowns in confscated re-purchase values, the bulk of whichcame from theportfolios of Generali(20.1 mil-lion), Victoria (13.8 million), RAS (5.9 million), and Star-Versicherungsanstalt 
(4.6 million). The Allianz portfolio was not affected in this case because of its exclusion from the Protectorate, and although 2.1 million Czech crowns in Jew-ish insurance assets had been taken from Slavia, this was presumably from the non-Sudetenland portfolio and thus did not involve Allianz either.34 Jewish poli-cies with a value of 2.1 million Czech crowns were confscated from Slavia, but these were exclusively policies from the Protectorate. The entire portfolio of Slavia in the Sudetenland was transferred to Allianz companies after the annex-ation. Allianz was not licensed to operate in the Protectorate. 
German authorities in the Protectorate had two goals regarding the insur-ance business there. First, they wished to capture Czech business for German companies and increase German infuence. Since Czechs preferred to buy their insurance from Czech companies, they sought to veil the role actually being played by German companies. Second, there was general agreement that the Czechs had too many small mutual insurance companies and that concentra-tion and rationalization were essential. Thus, Schwede-Coburg, in his capacity as chairman of the Reich Insurance Committee and with an eye toward extend-ing the role of the publicly chartered companies, opposed giving the insurance business in the Protectorate any organizational autonomy, telling the RWM in 1940 that ※I would consider it far more correct to place the insurance business in the Protectorate under far-reaching German infuence and to put the supervisory authority in a position to carry out the concentration of insurance, especially in the question of the consolidation of enterprises and the setting aside of the unjustifed number of premium schedules.§35 Fundamentally, Schwede-Coburg wanted to coordinate the business organizations of the Protectorate with those of the Reich, whereas the authorities in the Protectorate chose to maintain ex-isting Czech insurance organizations and ensure German infuence through the 
32 Robert Rosenkranz, Die Versicherungswirtschaft im Protektorat Bmen und M.hren, im Su-
detenland und in der Slowakischen Republik (Prague, 1941), pp. 33f. 33 R. Weydenhammer an Marchesano, 8. M.rz 1939, BCI, NL Frigessi, cart. 108, fasc. 4. 34 See Tomas Jelinek, ※Insurance in the Nazi Occupied Czech Lands,§ Table 2: The Transfer of 
Czechoslovak Insurance Activities in the Sudetenland, to be found at the website http://www. hrad.cz/kpr/holocaust/pojistky uk.html ,p. 5. 35 Schwede-Coburg an RWM, 11. Okt. 1940,SM, 1458/1/282, Bl. 83. 
appointment of the German Robert Rosenkranz as chief agent of the Reich Pro-tectorate to oversee developments in the insurance feld.36 
Rosenkranz＊sbasic attitude toward the Czechinsurance businesswas notmuch different from that of Schwede-Coburg, though it was much friendlier to private enterprise. He thought the industry overpopulated and wished to set aside the multiple system of premiums designed to preserve small companies. Thus, in a meeting in January 1941 with Protectorate insurers, he advised them that their protection against competition from Old Reich companies could not last forever and that there was no room for 40 companies. If the insurance companies did not consolidate on their own then it would be done for them; he bluntly added that 
the insurance business is not to be viewed as a productive occupation, that is, the off-cials in it do not perform productive work. It is the intention of the economy, however, to transfer people from unproductive enterprises to productive enterprises and to retrain them accordingly. No consideration can be given in the concentration of the insurance enterprises if a few hundred or thousand offcials are eliminated and retrained, for that is in the interest of the economy.37 
This did not sit at all well with the Italian insurers, and Riunione sent a re-port on the meeting to Director Alzheimer of the Munich Re, pointing out that this was a matter of mutual concern (because of agreements they had reached about their roles in the Protectorate) and stressing that certainly Munich Re had a particular interest in the matter since it was the largest reinsurer in the Protec-torate and so desired an orderly rationalization of conditions there.38 Indeed, whereas neither Wiener Allianz nor Allianz itself was active in the Protectorate, Munich Re 每 which had so many common and overlapping interests with the Allianz concern 每 played a signifcant role in the Protectorate＊s insurance affairs. 
These affairs had a rather Byzantine character, as was amply demonstrated by the remarkable involvement of Munich Re with the Prague-based Volks-Versicherungs-Anstalt ’
Cechoslavia AG. This company was founded in 1919 as one intended to service persons of modest means; it was a creation of the Czech consumer cooperatives and, to a lesser extent, the trade unions. The Munich Re had served as their reinsurer and as a signifcant shareholder since the early 1920s, and a good deal of mutual confdence had developed between the two sides. On the one hand, it was unusual for a Czech frm to develop so intimate a relationship with a German reinsurer, given the diffculties between the two countries. On the other, Munich Re had great confdence in the management ofthe ’
Cechoslavia. Shortly after the German invasion, Directors Mattfeld and Alzheimer approached their counterparts at the ’
Cechoslavia (Directors Nejedland Svoboda) and urged that Munich Re be allowed to secure a 51% majority, 
36 Reichsprotektor an RWM, 15. Jan. 1941, ibid., Bl. 85. 37 Report to Frigessi, 21. Jan. 1941, BCI, NL Frigessi, cart. 108, fasc. 3. 38 Frigessi an Alzheimer, 3. Jan. 1941, ibid., cart. 62, fasz. 4. 
promising to maintain the Czech character of the company and to avoid un-warranted interference in its operations. In late July, Mattfeld pressed the case, pointing out that there were other interested parties. He had spoken to one of the directors of Bmische Eskomptebank, which was under the control of the Dresdner Bank, who strongly suggested that ’
Cechoslavia was a logical prospect for takeover by Deutscher Ring. Mattfeld asked that the bank not pursue the matter (since Munich Re controlled a large share of ’
Cechoslavia＊s stock) and warned the chairman of the supervisory board, Frantisek Vesely, that he was not sure how long he could ward off such attempts from the DAF quarter. Thus the 
39
situation remained between the summer of 1940 and the frst months of 1941. 
It radically changed when Chairman Vesely and his deputy chairman (Ko-meda), who were possibly engaged in resistance activities, were arrested in May and executed as ※enemies of the State§ in late October 1941. This information was conveyed to Schmitt by Rosenkranz on November 1, who indicated that ※those responsible for the security of this area are of the view that thereby a new situation has been created that the enterprise has to take into account ....§40 This was certainly the case with respect to shareholding in the ’
Cechoslavia be-cause the victims held shares (belonging to other shareholders) that they had apparently used to block Munich Re, which held 38% of the shares, from gain-ing majority control. As Rosenkranz informed Schmitt, those Czechs now hold-ing the shares were prepared to sell them in order to give Munich Re a majority. Whatever Schmitt and Mattfeld thought of the manner in which these shares had been made ※available,§ they leapt at the opportunity to gain the majority. Time was indeed of the essence, because Volksfsorge was also after the shares in question and argued that they belonged to the consumer cooperative and thus should properly go to DAF, which also was the proper agency to run a popular insurance organization. Apparently, DAF offcials thought this argument would be particularly appealing to the Gestapo for political and social reasons and that security interests could be combined with an appeal to anticapitalist sentiments in attempting to promote the DAF cause. Munich Re, however, claimed that it had a prior option, an argument that Rosenkranz was prepared to accept since the crucial issue was placing control of ’
Cechoslavia in German hands. Never-theless, as Mattfeld reported, Rosenkranz 每 obviously well aware of anti每big business sentiment among the more radical Nazis 每 did remark that Munich Re ※as a plutocratic-democratic and liberal corporation is not exactly popular in many quarters.§41 It was typical of the National Socialists to defne Western capitalist enterprises as ※plutocratic§ and to confate plutocracy with democ-racy and liberalism. It is only fair to note, however, that the relations between 
39 See especially the Aktennote of 17. April 1939, 21./22. Juli 1939, and 17./19. Juni 1940, and the 
exchange between Mattfeld and Pokorn, June 25 and July 6, 1940, as well as other related cor-
respondence in MR, A 1/5. 40 Rosenkranz an Kurt Schmitt, 1.Nov. 1941, ibid. 41 Aktennote, 27.Nov. 1941; Schmitt an Rosenkranz, 4.Nov. 1941; Aktennote, 25.Nov. 1941, ibid. 
the two corporations seem to have been quite cordial and that Munich Re ap-parently struggled to maintain the Czech character of the company. Thus, when the Reich Protector＊s offce sought to force a change of the company＊s name in late 1942, Munich Re resisted the idea, remarking that they had 55% control by this time and that ※it therefore lies in our German interest that the transforma-tion and further work of the company is made easier and to be sure just within its Czech circle of customers in order to bring them along indirectly into the Ger-
’
man sphere of Infuence.§42 As a compromise, they proposed that ※Cechoslavia§ be changed to ※Cechoslavia.§ This compromise seemed to win some approval, but in January 1944 ※Cechoslavia§ was changed to ※Bohemoslavia.§43 After the war, Director Meuschel of the Munich Re credited his company with showing ※strong resistance§ on behalf of its old business partner and ※saving the insur-ance company of the Czech Social Democratic Party.§44 Certainly Munich Re showed prudence and as much decency as the situation allowed, but if it saved 
’
Cechoslavia from anything it was from Volksfsorge, and that was very much in Munich Re＊s interest. 
Munich Re also had close reinsurance relations and shares in other important Czech insurance frms, particularly Slavia and Corona-Slovanska, and the con-solidation of these frms extended Munich Re＊s holdings in 1942. Here again, Munich Re＊s continuing interest in Slavia holdings seemed much appreciated since 每 as Director von Reininghaus reported in August 1944 每 the general di-rector of the company (V芍clav Pe’ca) praised Schmitt for rescuing Slavia and remarked that ※he and his institution will never forget it, for one learns who one＊s friends are in one＊s distress.§45 Munich Re＊s big problem in the region was the ambition of Volksfsorge and the proposals of its General Director Poll-mann that his company and Munich Re enter into joint control of the leading Czech companies, which would continue to be cloaked as Czech frms but in reality be Germanized.46 The goal was ultimately to make Volksfsorge the leading company in a consortium of German frms controlling a concentrated Czech insurance system, and while it was undoubtedly the course of the war that frustrated the pursuit of these efforts, Munich Re＊s and Schmitt＊s watchfulness, interventions, and wire pulling certainly played an important role in making it much more diffcult for Volksfsorge to achieve its goals. Needless to say, this is not to be interpreted as an effort to block Germanization of the Czech insur-ance business but rather to have it take place under private auspices that would be less brutal in dealing with Czech interests. 
42 Mchener Rk an den Reichsprotektor, 31. Okt. 1942, ibid. 43 Aktennote, 14. Jan. 1944, ibid. 44 Walther Meuschel, ※Die deutsche Rkversicherung 1938每1945§(1948), p. 6,MR, D/6. 45 Aktennote von Reininghaus, 21./26. Aug. 1944, MR, A 1/23, which also contains an Aktennote 
of 15.Mai 1942 and the relevant agreements with the Slavia. 46 Aktennote, 3.Feb. 1943, 8.每10.Feb. 1943, MR, A 2.21/130. See the discussion in Ble, ※Die 
Volksfsorge Lebensversicherungs-AG im ＆Dritten Reich＊,§ pp. 132每5. 
None of this, however, changed the exclusion of Wiener Allianz from the Pro-tectorate, and neither a personal letter by Schmitt to the Reich Protector Kon-stantin von Neurath in 1940 nor attempts by Mattfeld and Schmidt-Polex to gain the ear of other infuential persons had any effect. Schmidt-Polex suffered similar frustration in his attempts to infuence Slovakian authorities.47 Thus, on July 30, 1940, Wiener Allianz applied for a concession to engage in transport, machine, and aviation insurance in Slovakia on the grounds that they held a decades-long interest in Danubian rivertransport and thatBratislavawas akey city in that busi-ness. Similarly, they had interests in the industrialization of the area (especially since German companies could be expected to move in) as well as an established role in aviation insurance. These concessions had been lost in 1932 when the Czech government forced them to turn their Slovakian portfolio over to a Czech company, and they now asked that their position be restored. Nevertheless, on August 19, the RAA turned down this request on the grounds that an agreement had already been reached between the German and Slovakian authorities as to which German companies could do business in Slovakia, and Wiener Allianz was not one of them.48 This was indeed the case, and an agreement had been worked out under German pressure to consolidate the overcrowded Slovakian insurance industry. Thus, a consolidated Slovakian group was established, and some of the more important Protectorate companies were also licensed to do business in Slovakia. At the same time, fve German companies were granted concessions: Allgemeine Elementar, Der Anker, Donau-Concordia (for both property and life insurance), Sudetendeutsche Union, and Victoria. Only Victoria had its base in Berlin. Finally, Generali and RAS were also allowed to do business in Slovakia.49 
However, the complexities of organizing the insurance business in what was once Czechoslovakia were as nothing when compared with the situation in Yu-goslavia following the coup that brought down the pro-German government in April 1941 and led to the Axis conquest of the country. The country was divided into no fewer than nine parts, with northern Slovenia being annexed by Ger-many, Italy taking central and south Slovenia as well as portions of the Adriatic coast, and Hungary, Bulgaria, and Albania taking over areas adjacent to their territories. At the same time, Montenegro was made independent, and a state of Croatia was set up under a brutal Ustasha regime. What was left of Serbia was placed under German military administration along with the Banat, whose fate remained undecided.50 Prior to its conquest, Yugoslavia enjoyed a reasonably 
47 Aktennote Schmitt, 18. Okt. 1940, MR, A 1/30. 
48 
Wiener Allianz an RAA, 30. Juli 1940; RAA an Wiener Allianz, 19. Aug. 1940, .StA-AdR, BMF, 
VA, Karton 269, Akte 35/A, A2. 49 The negotiations and agreements of 1940 are to be found in BAB, R 3101/20306. See also 
Rosenkranz, ※Versicherungswirtschaft,§ p. 295. 50 For a valuable general account, see Holm Sundhausen, ※Improvisierte Ausbeutung 每 der Balkan 
unter deutscher Okkupation,§ in Houwink ten Cate, Das Organisierte Chaos, pp. 55每76. There 
is a good report on the division and resources of the former Yugoslavia by the Volkswirtschaft-
liche Abteilung of the Dresdner Bank of June 30, 1941, which is to be found in SM, 1458/9/215, 
Bl. 2每8. 
well-developedinsurancesystemconstructedalongliberallines. Forobviousrea-sons, the bigItaliancompanies were the most important foreigninfuence, but the Germans (especially Munich Re) played a respectable role as well, along with the Hungarians. Munich Re had interests in three Yugoslav companies. Most impor-tant was Ujedinjeno Osiguravajuce Dionicarsko Drustvo, which was centered in Belgrade and Agram (Zagreb) and in which Munich Re held 31.3% of all shares in May 1931 with an option to purchase another 30%. (The two other interested foreign concerns were Scandia in Stockholm and Erste Ungarische Allgemeine Assecuranz-Gesellschaft in Budapest.) The second company was the Jugosla-vija in Belgrade, a family enterprise for which Munich Re had served as rein-surer since the end of the Great War. The third was the Europ.ische Ger-und Reisegep.ck-Versicherungs-AG in Belgrade, where the Munich concern owned 86% of the shares. Naturally, Munich Re sought to watch out for its interests as soon as the situation permitted. Once again it broke a lance for Wiener Allianz, arguing that it was only fair that it receive what had been taken from it when the Austro-Hungarian Empire broke up and the successor states took over its portfo-lios. Thus, Munich Re argued that portfolios of Ujedinjeno and Jugoslavija in the areas annexed to Germany be turned over to Wiener Allianz. At the same time, it suggested that the three companies continue to function, with Ujedinjeno per-haps centering its activities in Croatia and using Agram (Zagreb) as its base and withJugoslavijaoperatingin Belgrade.51 Indeed, Mattfeldhadbeenhardat work laying the groundwork for such arrangements once he had heard from the very pro-German general director of Jugoslavija, D. J. Majalkovitsch, who blamed the entire disaster on Serbian offcers, Jews, and especially successful English propa-ganda. Mattfeld suggested that Majalkovitsch＊s interests would be best served if he authorized Munich Re to sell the portions of its portfolio in the German and Hungarian parts of Yugoslavia to Wiener Allianz, its portfolio in Laibach to the Pace company in Milan (in which Munich Re had a substantial interest), the Bulgarian portion to the Orel company in Sofa, and the Croatian portion to Ujedinjeno in Agram (Zagreb). Majalkovitsch readily followed this advice.52 
The Ujedinjeno became a purely Croatian frm headed by Oskar Maurer, an old Nazi who had worked for the company for some 15 years. Although he, along with Munich Re, worked hard to transfer portfolios to Wiener Allianz, this did not meet with much success, and in November 1942 Wiener Allianz it-self was denied a license to do business in Croatia.53 All in all, the insurance business in the region for Germany was a disaster. On the one hand, unrest in the area (the combination of partisan warfare and ethnic violence) made it a dif-fcult place to do business. On the other hand, the Italians remained a potent 
51 Mchener Rk an RWM, 3.Mai 1941, MR, A 2.11/36. 52 Mattfeld an Majalkovitsch, 5. und 6.Mai 1941; Majalkovitsch an Mattfeld, 9.Mai 1941; Matt-
feld an Majalkovitsch, 13.Mai 1941, ibid. 
53 
RAA an Wiener Allianz, 9.Nov. 1942, .StA-AdR, BMF, VA, Karton 269, Akte 35A, A2. See also the documents in MR, A 2.11/38, especially DeutscheVereinigte Versicherungs-Aktiengesellschaft an RWM, 30. Juni 1941. 
force until they left the war, and by then further Germanization had little point. Hilgard, who visited the region in the fall of 1942, was told by his German col-leagues that the Croatians had killed a half million Serbs and that, of 30,000 Serb partisans in a camp, only 1,800 remained because the rest had been allowed to starve. He thought Belgrade a city of ※criminals§ and Croatia an ※unbeliev-ably unconsolidated land§ that ※justifed the greatest anger.§ This certainly was no paean to Axis policy, and Hilgard did not think things could remain as they were in the Balkans. Manifestly, he was not very sanguine about business oppor-tunities.54 Insofar as the insurance business itself was concerned, the German authorities thought themselves hampered by the strong Italian infuence, and it was only after ※Italy＊s treason§ that plans were laid for a consolidation of the in-surance business in the region as well as for dealing with war damages without the obstruction of the Italians, who tended to neglect ※economic necessities.§ As the fnal report of the German economic authorities ruefully noted, however, ※because of the political developments the frst measures promising success were made illusory§55 每 that is, German rule collapsed and those who worked for the German effort, like General Director Maurer of Ujedinjeno, retreated with the German forces or were left to their fate. 
Comparedwith theformerYugloslavia, Greeceappearedto be a land ofat least some possibilities because of its important commercial and transportation activ-ities. The Greek government had irritated not only the German and Italian insur-ance companies but also the English by passing a law creating a state reinsurance company that compelled all primary fre insurers to reinsure at a level of 50% of their policies with the government company, for which the insurance frms re-ceived a low commission; the state company then reinsured with Lloyd＊s of Lon-don and an Argentinian company but charged a much higher commission for it-self, thus pocketing the difference between the commission it paid to the primary insurers and received from the reinsurers. Fundamentally, the state reinsurance monopoly provided no services at all beyond collecting money for the govern-ment while excluding foreign reinsurers, who could do the job more cheaply, and so increasing the costs of insurance in Greece for all concerned. The matter par-ticularly galled the Germans and Italians, who were constantly fghting against critics of the reinsurance business at home and were anxious to eliminate all for-eign models. Thus, one of the frst things Alzheimer did after surveying the situ-ation in Greece was to prevail upon the RWM to put pressure on the Greek gov-ernment to eliminate the reinsurance monopoly, an effort that was successful.56 
At the time of the Axis takeover in April 1941, seven German companies were operating in the country 每 among them Allianz and Wiener Allianz, so that here 
54 Stenographische Notizen er die Beiratssitzung der Reichsgruppe Versicherungen am 6.Nov. 
1942,GDV, RS/28. See also the earlier very pessimistic report by Mattfeld of Nov. 26 and 27, 
1941, MR, C 2/10. 55 Abschlu.bericht der Gruppe Wi I A 4. Banken und Versicherungen, undated but clearly from late 
1944,SM, 1458/9/222, Bl. 10f. 56 Alzheimer an Daniel (RWM), 16. Juni 1941,MRC 2 /9. 
at least licensing was not a problem 每 as well as the leading two Italian insurers, Generali and Riunione. In this respect, Alzheimer urged the RWM to bar any further insurance companies from entering the country, since this would serve to limit the Italian competition as well. The most important question, however, was what to do about the 60% of Greek fre insurance in the hands of English companies. The Germans and Italians had 15%每20% of the business, while the Greek companies had the remainder. An agreement was reached between the Italian and German companies to divide the English portfolios among the Germans, Italians, and Greeks on the basis of a 40 : 40 : 20 split. However, this scheme proved diffcult to implement, owing to the confused administrative situ-ation in Greece, which was allowed to retain a government with the appearance of sovereignty and which was in the process of changing its occupation regime from a German to an Italian one. As a result, the English companies had not been placed under trusteeship, and there was a danger that the English portfo-lio would end up in the hands of the Greek companies because there would be no authority to prevent this. Furthermore, the Greeks were constantly found-ing small new insurance companies, a fairly easy task because the infationary situation and monetary ※overhang§ made it possible to meet the minimal cash requirements of starting a new company. Yet another problem was that no sur-vey existed of the actual English portfolios and their value, a task turned over by the German authorities to the Allianz representative in Athens, Director Sieg-mund. In September 1941, the Germans and Italians came to an agreement in Venice to place the English companies under Italian and German trusteeship and to use the reinsurance of their portfolios as a mechanism for eventually tak-ing them over. Nevertheless, the technical diffculties of assessing the portfolios dragged on to the point where Alzheimer and his German colleagues met with their Italian counterparts in Venice at the end of April 1942 and indicated that the passage of time had made any further effort to implement the agreement use-less and had the potential of ※causing moral damage for the insurance businesses of both countries§ among the Greek insurers, since the Italo-German efforts to deal with the question were obviously having no results.57 
The biggest problem of doing business in Greece, however, was the infa-tion, which reminded the Germans of their own experiences in 1923 and which meant that the insured were inevitably underinsured because they were unable to keep up with rising premiums.58 A report of October 1942 argued that the founding of new companies, some of them of ※microscopic size,§ was reaching ※epidemic§ proportions, that both domestic and foreign insurers were primarily inspired by the prospect of commissions, and that these companies would disap-pear under normal circumstances. For the moment, fre insurance business was 
57 Report on meeting of April 29, 1942, and Aktennote, 7.Mai 1942, as well as other relevant doc-
umentation in ibid. 58 On the incredibly chaotic economic conditions in Greece, see Gabriella Etmektsoglou, ※Changes 
in the Civilian Economy as a Factor in the Radicalization of Popular Opposition in Greece, 1941每 
1944,§ in Overy, Die ※Neuordnung§ Europas, pp. 193每240. 
good, but there was concern that sabotage and English commando and under-cover units would undermine the business. Although transportation insurance was also doing well, the war damage premiums were no longer really covering the dangers involved; some of the insured were not bothering to take out the war damage premiums on the theory that if the ship and its entire crew were lost then one could not demonstrate war damage anyway. The infation was ruining life insurance, while the unreliability of the police made it impossible to offer break-in and theft insurance, and the amount of automobile insurance required of drivers was set too low to cover accidents. The most positive news was that the German insurers had gained a good reputation for themselves and were becom-ing as highly regarded as the English and more highly regarded than the Italians. Nevertheless, the basic problems remained the infation, the fact that the Greeks could not pay the high occupation costs, and the unwillingness of the Greeks to accept the lira as their new currency because they saw this as complete subju-gation to the Italians.59 By April 1944, of course, the Italians were out of the picture, while Greece was in the throes of a nascent civil war, anarchy, and hy-perinfation. The founding of new insurance enterprises had been banned, but normal coverage and business had become impossible, and Munich Re sought to save what it could by transferring its business to the Union Rkversicherungs-Gesellschaft in Zich.60 
Obviously, the promise of business in the Balkans was limited, even before the Germans were driven out. Hilgard, in his trip through the area in the fall of 1942, was certainly sober about the prospects. Regarding Bulgaria, for ex-ample, he found the opportunities quite limited. Sofa was a pleasant enough place, but the country was too small for 22 insurance companies whose exis-tence mainly depended on wartime insurance business. Hilgard advised Wiener Allianz, which had already applied for permission to operate in Bulgaria in No-vember 1940 but had still not received a reply from the Bulgarian authorities by March 1942, to refrain from trying to join the competition and advised Amend to allow no more German companies into the area. As Wiener Allianz reported to the RAA in March, Allianz and Munich Re had not yet come to a determi-nation about the matter. Given Hilgard＊s attitude following his Balkan journey later that year, the matter was obviously going nowhere.61 
Hilgard was much more sanguine about business prospects in Romania and Hungary 每 especially the former, which he thought had great economic potential, although he did fnd the insurance business more consolidated and disciplined in the latter. He was well received in both countries, although their hatred of one another over territorial issues was quite intense. Hilgard noted that the Romanian business class was oriented toward the West and felt forced into the 
59 Report by Hz, Oct. 7, 1942, ibid. 60 Report by Hz, April 25每May 2, 1942, and an excerpt from his memoirs ※1948,§ ibid. 61 Stenographische Notizen er die Beiratssitzung der Reichsgruppe Versicherungen am 6.Nov. 
1942,GDV RS/28; Wiener Allianz an RAA, 20.Nov. 1940, Wiener Allianz an RAA, 14. M.rz 
1942, .StA-AdR, BMF, VA, Karton 269, Akte 35/A, A2. 
alliance with Germany. Nevertheless, despite these and other problems, the fu-ture promise was such that ※here one must frst gain a position and try to make things better after the war.§62 Gaining such a position, however, was no easy matter. On the one hand, there was the problem of the Volksdeutsche 每 that is, the ethnic German minority 每 and the competition between their insurance or-ganizations and the other German companies licensed to operate in Romania, among them Wiener Allianz. On the other hand, German efforts were threatened by the strong nationalist ※romanizing§ tendencies of the Romanian governments. 
The Romanian Volksdeutsche in Transsylvania and the Banat were among a number of such minorities in Europe (similar problems had been created for the insurance business in Croatia) who were organized through the Ethnic German Liaison Offce, which coordinated all activities pertaining to Germans abroad with the object of promoting German racial and settlement policies.63 In June 1941, for example, the liaison offce complained that the Romanian government, which was notoriously and murderously anti-Semitic but made exceptions for Jews of a certain class and service to the State, was not doing enough to pro-mote Aryanization and, in an effort to promote Romanization, was hindering the takeover of Jewish assets by the ethnic Germans.64 All of this greatly com-plicated matters for the German insurance companies operating in Romania and elsewhere, since the ethnic Germans had a strong tendency to set up their own insurance organizations and, in Transsylvania, had actually created two companies, Transsylvania Allgemeine Versicherungs-AG and Landwirte Allge-meine Versicherungs-AG (※Agronomul§). RAA President Amend had a number of meetings with the ethnic German and German insurance company represen-tatives in Vienna in an effort to fnd a way of dealing with the two goals being pursued. On the one hand, one needed to satisfy the special needs and desires of the ethnic Germans. On the other, one wanted to penetrate into the Romanian insurance business itself in competition with the native and other foreign insur-ance companies. While some of the ethnic Germans proposed creating a single ethnic German insurance company for all of Europe, the regular German insur-ance companies warned that this would be viewed as a political construction and would defeat efforts to sell insurance to the native populations. Insofar as cre-ation of individual ethnic German companies for the various countries of south-eastern Europe was concerned, the only viable ones would be those in Trans-sylvania. It seemed most logical, therefore, to consolidate some of the business of the regular German insurers and the ethnic German companies while com-bining Transsylvania and Agronomul and creating committees for the different countries that would likewise combine the ethnic German and regular German insurers. However, it proved diffcult to prevent competition between German 
62 Stenographische Notizen er die Beiratssitzung der Reichsgruppe Versicherungen am 6.Nov. 
1942,GDV,RS/28. 63 See Valdis O. Lumans, Himmler＊s Auxiliaries. The Volksdeutsche Mittelstelle and the German 
National Minorities of Europe, 1933每1945 (Chapel Hill & London, 1993). 64 Volksdeutsche Mittelstelle an RWM, 6. Juni 1941,SM, 1458/14 /61, Bl. 1每7. 
and ethnic German companies, and in September 1942 a decision was taken to leave the ethnic German customers in Romania to their own companies, at least in Romania. The reality was that the liaison offce viewed those companies as part of an ideological effort ※in the fght for order against Jewry, Bolshevism, and capitalism§65 who were not at all interested in selling insurance to the Ro-manians themselves. 
Those who were interested in that market, however, were having a diffcult time. In the frst phase of the war, the native Romanian companies had sought to compete with the British by forming a cartel that underbid British premiums; when the British left, they pursued the same policy toward the Germans. The Germans eventually pressed for a more rational organization of the entire insur-ance business and formed a fre insurance cartel along with the Romanians 每 a matter of particular importance to Wiener Allianz, which held a signifcant por-tion of the fre insurance market.66 By 1942, Schmidt-Polex complained bitterly about the infationary conditions in Romania and Hungary. Although high pre-miums for war risk were being demanded, especially in the most important feld of transportation insurance, there was great diffculty procuring the foreign ex-change needed to pay off on damages. Alzheimer was particularly disturbed by the introduction of a high tax on reinsurance, which made the entire operation unproftable despite the promising fre insurance business.67 
Yet another important aspect of the peculiarities of doing business in Ro-mania was that there was considerable foreign participation in the Romanian insurance 每 especially in the most important of the Romanian companies, Dacia-Romania 每 yet an increasingly ambivalent attitude toward such foreign invest-ment. In 1939每1941 Generali was a large shareholder, controlling 40%, while Munich Re played a major role as a reinsurer but also began to gain shares with the support of the company, which hoped to prevent Generali from gaining a controlling interest. At the same time, Munich Re, which had a friendly relation-ship with Generali, did not wish to appear as a competitor and suggested that the Dresdner Bank buy up shares using a Romanian front, a proposal supported by Economics Minister Funk. In the spring of 1942, however, the Romanian Government 每 which was striving to distance itself from Germany in any case 每 suddenly decided to treat every company with more than 50% foreign participa-tion as a foreign company. Since Generali would not surrender any of its shares and since Munich Re was anxious to continue having Dacia treated as a Roma-nian company, it worked closely with the General Director Romalo, who had once served as Romanian Ambassador in Berlin, to transfer shares to the Banka Romaniaska. In the process, contrary to Munich Re＊s original intention, this 
65 Protokoll er die Abschlu.besprechung er Sachversicherungsfragen am 29. April 1943; see 
also the Besprechung im RAA Wien, 30. Jan. 1942, and Besprechung des Rum.nien-Ausschusses 
in Wien, 22. Sept. 1941, .StA-AdR, BMF, VA, Karton 323, Akte 61. 66 Aktennote Alzheimer, 23./28. Aug. 1940; Protokoll er die in Wien am 13. und 14.Nov. 1941 
abgehaltenen Sitzungen, MR, C 2 /16. 67 Niederschrift er die Beiratssitzung der Reichsgruppe Versicherungen am 6. M.rz 1942,GDV, 
RS/28, pp. 9每12. 
came to involve the consolidation of some of the leading Romanian companies. The creation of a substantial Romanian national insurance enterprise, Alzheimer noted to his chagrin, ※would make the psychological position of the foreign com-panies more diffcult,§68 especially given Romanian xenophobia. As it turned out, the Romanians were not suffciently organized to realize this possibility. 
Their true problem, in any case, was not creating a competitive insurance com-pany but rather the impossible task of escaping the consequences of their alliance with Germany. By the summer of 1944, the country was suffering from severe war damage, and the government came up with the idea of creating a ※Federation for the Support of the Bombed-Out§ and requiring that the six leading insurance companies contribute 115 million lei to the cause in fve installments. The quota for Transsylvania & Agronomul and for Victoria was 30 million lei each, while Wiener Allianz was to be charged 10 million lei. The sums in question amounted to more than their capital holdings in the country, and they asked the German government to protest the Romanian action.69 As Josef Mayrhofer (now general director of Wiener Elementar and a major fgure in the negotiations with the eth-nic Germans and in Balkan insurance affairs) reported to the Reich Economics Ministry in May 1944, the German insurance companies in Bucharest, includ-ing the Wiener Allianz, had themselves suffered bomb damage. Thanks to the English raids, Bucharest itself was partially paralyzed, while the occupation of various portions of Romania by the enemy had led to a loss of premiums. Dam-ages during the frst four months of 1944 were less than in 1943, to be sure, but the loss of premium income could be expected to have ※unfavorable consequences.§ Mayrhoferwas quitecriticalofthedisorganizationandhelplessnessoftheRoma-nian authorities in the face of the bombing; in his view, it was important for the insurance companies to maintain discipline, especially since both the Romanian and the German companies had signed on. As he concluded, with studied obliv-iousness to Romania＊s impending fate: ※The German insurance business will suffer heavily from all of these conditions in Romania. It is therefore essential that the German insurance companies operating in Romania, but also the Roma-nian institutions, keep to the rate agreements concluded in February 1944 under all circumstances.§70 At the end of August 1944, the Romanian government was overthrown and then joined the Allied side. There is no record as to whether they maintained the insurance rates that Mayrhofer thought so important. 
The last country in southeastern Central Europe in which German insurance ambitions went awry 每 along with German political and military ambitions 每 was Hungary.71 The country was a linchpin in Schmidt-Polex＊s plan, which he considered more or less realized by April 1941, to have an area of operations 
68 Aktennote Alzheimer, 12./13. April 1943, and other relevant correspondence on the Dacia in MR, 
A 1/7. 69 Eingabe an die Deutsche Gesandtschaft Bukarest, 26. Juli 1944,SM, 1458/14/42, Bl. 107f. 70 Mayrhofer an Ministerialdirektor Riehle, 11.Mai 1944, MR, C 2 /16. 71 See P谷ter Sipos, ※Hungary in the German Sphere of Interest,§ in Overy, Die ※Neuordnung§ Eu-
ropas, pp. 241每56. 
for Wiener Allianz stretching from Lake Constance to the Black Sea. Here, as elsewhere, the strategy was for Wiener Allianz to play successor to the defunct Phix concern. This was no easy task in the Hungary of 1940, for two rea-sons. First, the old Phix company continued to exist there, albeit in the form of a company in liquidation. Second, the Hungarians had banned all further foreign concessions. Thus, while Amend and the German authorities supported a concession for Wiener Allianz, the barriers were substantial. The saga of how Schmidt-Polex managed to gain such a concession by the spring of 1941 每 too long and complicated to recount here, but which he reported with considerable pride to Kurt Schmitt 每 speaks well for his tenacity and negotiating skills. Suf-fce it to say that he began by transforming Phix in liquidation into Wiener Allianz in liquidation and then used the available legal mechanisms to take it out of liquidation. At the same time, between September 1940 and May 1941 he cultivated every conceivable connection in the Hungarian offcialdom, nobility, and insurance world. The culmination was a breakfast of the high and mighty at the Grand Hotel in Budapest on April 3, 1941, whereafter he was assured that Wiener Allianz would receive a concession.72 
Matters did not move quite that quickly, however, because Schmidt-Polex and the home offces of Allianz apparently had larger ambitions: they wanted to offer not only property and accident insurance in Hungary but also life insur-ance. The idea was that Wiener Allianz would sell the life insurance directly but be 100% reinsured by Allianz Leben. This was, in fact, a very odd pro-posal, since the liability would still rest with Wiener Allianz and the proposal violated the RAA principle that life and property insurance might coexist in the same concern but not in the same corporate entity. When the RAA inquired of Goudefroy what Allianz had in mind, Goudefroy claimed that there was a good market for foreign companies in Hungary, as demonstrated by Victoria and the Italian insurers operating there, and that German corporations would be par-ticularly welcome because of all that Germany had done to rectify the dictated peace of Trianon. Furthermore, there were potential customers among the many Germans in the regions of Romania and Yugoslavia that had been given to Hun-gary. Goudefroy concluded that ※we believe therefore that Wiener Allianz can build up a larger life insurance portfolio in Hungary than we have until now been able to do in countries that are not as politically close to us as, for exam-ple, Greece and Egypt.§73 The RAA, however, was not at all convinced. They did not think that the Hungarians would consider it legitimate for Wiener Al-lianz to sell life insurance when its business had been property insurance and, more importantly, they did not believe that the market was there since the insur-ance feld was already too overcrowded in the old and new territories both.74 In the end, Wiener Allianz received its concession in late November 1941, but only 
72 For Schmidt-Polex＊s extraordinary account, see his dramatic report to Kurt Schmitt of 22. April 1941, MR, A 1/30. 
73 
Allianz an RAA, 29. Juli 1941, .StA-AdR, BMF, VA, Karton 269, Akte 35A, A2, Bl. 59. 74 Schreiben 4. Aug. 1941 und 3. Sept. 1941, ibid., Bl. 56每8. 
for property insurance and not life insurance.75 As noted earlier, Schmidt-Polex was soon complaining about infationary conditions in the country, which were indeed already the subject of complaint and worry in late 1941. 76 
As might be expected, conditions in Hungary increasingly refected the dev-astating effects of integration into the German war economy and war effort, but one of the country＊s great peculiarities was that the Jewish community remained more or less intact in 1942每1943 and 每 despite discriminatory measures against them 每 continued to play a signifcant (though diminishing, because of the quo-tas)roleinareaslikeinsurance. Onefactorthatmadepossibletheemploymentof Jews in Hungary was that the laws defning who was a Jew were much less rigidly racial than in Germany, so that even German companies employed persons who would have been ※Jews§ in Germany but were not in Hungary. The leaders of Munich Re, especially Meuschel and Alzheimer, seemed to have no diffculty in dealing with Jewish directors and insurance personnel in Hungarian enterprises nor even in breaking a lance for them with respect to their continued employ-ment. This was especially the case with Director Emmerich Balaban, the earlier general director of Erste Ungarische Allgemeine Assecuranz-Gesellschaft, and Josef Szyi, a director at Europ.ische Ger-und Reisegep.ck Versicherungs-Aktiengesellschaft.77 However, the German occupation of Budapest in March 1944 and the establishment of a new Hungarian regime under De Sztay led to a sudden and utterly brutal series of measures against the Jews by the new regime, despite the crucial role they continued to play in the economy. The situ-ation was described in a deplorably cynical and inhumane report from Budapest by the itinerant Mayrhofer to the RWM on May 11, 1944, just at the time when he had also reported on the situation in Bucharest: 
At the moment the situation is dominated by the dejewifcation of Hungary＊s political and economic life. This makes it noticeable in that the largest portion of the capital city＊s businesses, which as is well known were in Jewish hands, are locked up. Only very few shops, whose owners are national Hungarians, are open. There is lively activity on the streets; the yellow of the sun fowers on the clothing of the Jews is dominant. But one also sees on the streets as a result of the closing of the businesses, the coffee houses, etc. un-employed employees, waiters, etc. In a word, there is dejewifcation but no work is being done. This strikes one immediately as a businessman, and I think that the leading circles should be reminded that nothing is accomplished by dejewifcation alone.78 
As Mayrhofer noted, the new legislation (which included adopting the Ger-man racial defnitions) was having a profound effect on the insurance business 
75 See Wiener Allianz an RAA, 26. M.rz 1942, and other relevant documents, in ibid. 76 See the report by Hz of Oct. 16/20, 1941, MR, C 2 /23. 77 Interestingly, both Alzheimer and Karl K of the Hungarian Fonci豕re company (in which Mu-
nich Re and RAS had an interest) corresponded with Frigessi about protecting Balaban and others. 
See K an Frigessi, 11. M.rz 1939 and Alzheimer an Frigessi, 17. M.rz 1939, MR, C 2 /23.The 
claims made in a 1945 expos谷 on the Munich Re in MR, B 22 /35, Anlage 1,p. 3, would tend to 
be confrmed by this evidence. 78 Mayrhofer an Riehle, 11.Mai 1944, MR, C 2 /23. There is an excellent account of the Hungarian situation and development in Hilberg, Vernichtung, 2, pp. 859每926. 
at a variety of levels. Not only were many employees now being let go, but the companies were no longer collecting premiums from Jews 每 an important part of their business 每 because the government had seized their assets, ceased to pay pensions, and so forth. In short, a host of issues had been created for the entire Hungarian insurance business that needed to be settled by all members of the industry, and Mayrhofer proposed that Hilgard, Alzheimer, and Herzog (who dealt with foreign questions for the Reich Group) come to Hungary to talk ※busi-ness to business§ and fnd a solution to these new problems. 
Hilgard apparently was unable to make the trip, but Mayrhofer, Alzheimer, and Herzog went to Hungary in mid-July 1944 and reported back to the RWM on the situation. They cynically criticized the Hungarians for thinking, in con-trast to the Germans and Austrians, that one ※had to solve the Jewish problem in Hungary with one blow.§79 This was apparently a mistake because of the eco-nomic consequences, as the Germans were indifferent to the human losses that transpired. Thus, the effect of the driving out of the Jews was to cause an ini-tial phase of serious economic stagnation; this was understandable in a city like Budapest, where 250,000 of the 1.2 million inhabitants were Jews. The personnel consquences were also serious for the insurance industry, especially with respect to the importance of Jewish adjusters, who were specialists in areas like textiles and leather. The loss of premiums from 18,000 Jewish businesses was also re-grettable because it was hard to say when non-Jews could replace them, since so many Hungarian men were now being called up by the military. The only relief was that new owners were not allowed to change insurers, thus sparing adminis-trative costs. Nevertheless, ※constructive plans§ were devised for the future. One was reducing the size of the insurance business and concentrating the industry in a manner more suitable for the population of 13 million non-Jews who were potential customers. Insurance business was satisfactory in fre (but becoming more problematic owing to sabotage), stagnating in life insurance, and increas-ingly costly overall because of the calling up of men to the front. Costs were also increased because the Hungarians were legally required to continue to pay com-missions to their Jewish agents, and it was to be hoped that they would soon be freed from this obligation with the support of German agencies. Finally, the three German insurance leaders noted that the Hungarian insurance organiza-tion had leadership problems and that the companies themselves were suffering from severe staffng diffculties because the Hungarian government＊s military draft did not leave even a minimum of personnel. The situation was thus too much in ※fux for intervention with general decrees from the German side.§ As is well known, the only ※success§ the Germans could boast in their fnal spurt of activity in Hungary was the murder of the vast majority of Hungary＊s Jews. They were, of course, despoiled to the extent that conditions allowed, but the evidence suggests that time was not available to confscate their insurance assets 
79 The discussion that follows is based on ※Bericht er die gegenw.rtige Lage der Versicherungs-wirtschaft in Ungarn,§ 12. Juli 1944,SM, 1458/18/104, Bl. 3每7. 
(as had been done, for example, in Czechoslovakia). Yet Wiener Allianz was never allowed to sell life insurance in the country and so would not have been subject to such regulations 每 not that Jews would likely have purchased their life insurance from the company in any case.80 
Taken as a whole, the German insurance industry (and the Allianz concern in particular) had rather limited success in Southeastern Europe, even in the early period of the war, because of the less developed nature of the countries in-volved and the rather chaotic political and military conditions. There was, to be sure, some big business for German insurers 每 the Rumanian oil felds, for ex-ample, and the military production facilities outside the Reich 每 but immediate and long-term prospects were much greater in the occupied countries of West-ern Europe that already had well-developed insurance industries serving more advanced economies. 
Expansion in the West between Force and Conciliation 
Both Allianz and Munich Re had long-standing interests and relationships in France, Belgium, and the Netherlands. Allianz＊s license to do business in France 每 the most important of these countries from the perspective of insurance and the one that will receive most attention in the ensuing discussion 每 was periodically renewed since 1926 (it had frst been licensed to do business there in 1905) and had close contact with one of the leading insurers connected with the Minerve company, B谷raud-Villars. As for Munich Re, it was not only an active reinsurer in France but also had signifcant shareholdings in La Cit谷-Vie, La Cit谷-Accidents, and Les R谷assurances in Paris. Also, as Hilgard frankly noted, the fact that he was in charge of the most important negotiations meant that Allianz was ※in-terested to a special degree§ in these developments; since Alzheimer worked so closely with Hilgard, this meant that Allianz and Munich Re as a whole were in the forefront of the German insurance industry involvement in occupied West-ern Europe.81 
Once France succumbed to German arms in June 1940, Hilgard was immedi-ately active in trying to infuence the RWM to create the most advantageous situa-tion possible. On the one hand, it was necessary to eliminate French measures of economic warfare against Germany: the French ban on trade with Germany, of course, but especially the blacklisting 每 that is, the refusal to deal with companies that did business with German-owned or -controlled frms in Switzerland like Union Rkversicherungs-Gesellschaft in Zurich and Schweizerische National-Versicherungs-Gesellschaft in Basel. These companies were closely connected 
80 See Tam芍s Fdi, ※Insurance Claims in a Historical Context with Special Regard to the Holo-
caust in Hungary,§ in J. D. Bindenagel (ed.), Washington Conference on Holocaust-Era Assets. 
November 30每December 3, 1998. Proceedings (Washington, D.C., 1999), pp. 629每48. 81 Hilgard, ※Die Allianz im 2. Weltkrieg,§ FHA, AZ 1.3/2, pp. 31每2. On the licensing of Allianz in 
France, see BAK, B 280/12253, Bl. 51每3, 111每13; on Munich Re＊s participations, see Aufsichtsrats-
sitzung, 3.Nov. 1936, MR, A 3.15/29. 
to Allianz and Munich Re and had suffered policy cancellations because of the blacklist. On the other hand, the role of English reinsurers had been extremely important in France, as they had been in the Netherlands, and the German victory created something of a reinsurance emergency for the direct French in-surance companies. As Hilgard pointed out, ※there is in and of itself a great chance for the German companies if it is exploited quickly.§ But time was of the essence, since otherwise the Swiss companies, which had close relations with the French anyway, would be ※the lone exploiters of this chance.§ Insurance was a special feld in that both the insured and the insurers were loath to allow the slightest vacuum in their coverage.82 
Naturally, the German military authorities decreed an end to the French mea-sures about which Hilgard complained. Hilgard was, of course, most anxious to take advantage of the situation thus created and requested permission on July 19, 1940, to go with Alzheimer to France and Belgium in order to reestablish con-nections with the insurance businesses in those countries and to replace English with German reinsurance before the Swiss and American reinsurers got there frst. The RWM agreed that the idea was a good one and that the matter was urgent, but nothing happened for over a month and Hilgard felt compelled to write again on August 21, forwarding a letter from a German insurance colleague serving as a staff offcer in France that emphasized the importance of the French insurance business, the powerful infuence of the English, and the failure of the military authorities 每 who were engaging other areas of French economic life 每 to have staff knowledgeable about insurance matters. Hilgard also reported that Alzheimer had seen signs for the Deutsche and Dresdner banks all over Stras-bourgbutnosignsforGermaninsurancecompanies. AsHilgardgloomilynoted, ※my company constantly receives piles of inquiries, requests, and cries for help from the occupied areas, to which we cannot respond other than in a consoling manner, with the probable result that the companies and representatives, etc. in question turn to Switzerland or Italy where, as I know, they are rubbing their hands over German inactivity.§83 
When Hilgard fnally began his trip to Paris on September 16, there had al-ready been signifcant contact with some of his colleagues who were in uniform and had been assigned tasks in the occupied areas by the Wehrmacht. One of these was Gerd Mler, a member of the Allianz board of management, who was serving as a military administrative councilor in Paris and who actually drove Hilgard to Paris from Saarbrken in his military auto. Although assigned other duties, Mler had looked after insurance matters on the side and had been ad-vising Hilgard about the situation, as had Director Meuschel of Munich Re and 
82 Hilgard an Ministerialrat Daniel, 26. Juni 1940,SM, 1458/5/271, Bl. 217每18; for the French de-
crees, see ibid., Bl. 229每35. 83 Hilgard an Riehle, 21. Aug. 1940, ibid., Bl. 244. See also Aktennote, 19. Juli 1940, ibid., Bl. 236每7, 
and Wolfgang Bauerreiss (Vorstandsmitglied der Wechselseitigen Versicherungsanstalt Smark) 
an Hilgard, 4. Aug. 1940, ibid., Bl. 245每7. 
Rudolf Audebert, also a manager at Munich Re. The latter was a German cit-izen (and now an offcer on Ging＊s staff) who had been born in Metz and had played a role in the development of the Cit谷 automobile insurance frm in Toulouse until the war. Rumor had it that Audebert had saved Toulouse from bombing, a happy fate not shared by Marseilles, and this added to his popular-ity at the company.84 
Both men were concerned about the confusion in Paris and France. Meuschel reported that the French insurers were upset by being cut off from their British reinsurers but were not certain they could take out reinsurance with the Ger-mans. He was trying to get his staff, above all the director at Les R谷assurances, to offer reinsurance in place of the British. At the same time, the French were seeking to maintain as much independence as possible, with the French supervi-sory offce, for example, asking that the R谷assurances continue to maintain its French majority, something Meuschel would not guarantee. Actually, Les R谷as-surances had not had a real French majority for some time. Munich Re owned 70.4% of the shares in 1929 (when it participated in the company＊s reorganiza-tion) and 71.9%in 1939. In April 1940, as part of a cloaking operation designed to veil the German control of Les R谷assurances prior to the German military victory, the French frm of Demachy & Cie. acquired 30,045 shares of Les R谷as-surances from Munich Re through the Schweizerische Bankgesellschaft and then sold back 24,395 shares to Munich Re in December 1940每January 1941. 85 
Nevertheless, since the French were not being deprived of their sovereignty, Meuschel was concerned about possible nationalization efforts and felt it im-portant to be as reassuring as possible that one could do business with the Germans: 
In this connection, there is anxiety in Paris about the forthcoming visit of Hilgard, because one fears that he will dictate something that will inhibit the freedom in the management of business. I was able to have a strong calming effect here and used the opportunity to say that it is a matter for the companies to convince us through their own measures that there is a will to loyal collaboration.86 
Meuschel thought it extremely important that Director Mler work behind the scenes to look after German insurance interests and that Hilgard make contact with the French insurance authorities as soon as possible. Meuschel was some-what ambivalent about what he expected from the French. On the one hand, he praised the French businessman in charge of the R谷assurances, Eug谷ne Poide-bard, for maintaining a dignifed posture and refusing to accept an invitation to 
84 Meuschel an Mchener Rk, 10. Aug. 1940, MR, B 12 /19. 85 Interestingly enough, Demachy & Cie claimed after the war that the sale to Munich Re had been 
made under duress and French courts nullifed the sale. What was involved, however, was not 
duress but rather a cloaking operation in which Demachy violated French law in April 1940. See 
Melvin Fagen of the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency, Brussels to Debergh, Offce des Sequestres, 
Brussels, Sept. 12, 1949,MdF,EN.17.136. 86 Meuschel an Mchener Rk, 10. Aug. 1940, MR, B 12 /19. 
dine with the German military until a peace had been signed. On the other, he noted very positively that Poidebard was anxious to do business and, as head of what had been an Anglo-French maritime shipping company in Le Havre that he had allowed to be destroyed before the German arrival, he was now ready to consider a partnership with the Germans once the facilities had been recon-structed. What was important to both the German and the French businessmen was that these things be done privately and not dictated, and Meuschel was very anxious to have a civilian suit brought to him in Paris so that he did not have to appear in uniform when conducting such business. The Germans, to be sure, did not want to be too genteel about protecting their interests, and in August Meuschel urged that the French government be persuaded to simply ban further French contact with English reinsurers and that everything be done to prevent the French authorities from setting up pools or offcial (or semioffcial) reinsur-ance funds instead of turning to the Germans.87 
A similar ambivalence was to be found in the report of Audebert, who met with B谷raud in early September and found ※that he apparently suffers very severely under the development of the existing circumstances and avoids every general conversation.§88 Like Poidebard, however, B谷raud was willing and anxious to do business, especially to take over English portfolios for Minerve. When Hilgard fnally met with his friend B谷raud at the beginning of his September trip to Paris, the two men found the experience quite shattering. As Hilgard remembered: ※In B谷raud-Villars there seemed to me to be the embodiment of beaten France that stood uncomprehending before the ruins of his national self-consciousness.§89 Apparently, however, friendship and the necessities of the moment made it pos-sible for them to work together and, thanks to B谷raud, Hilgard was able to come into rapid contact with the head of the French Insurance Supervisory Board, Gabriel Ch谷neaux de Leyritz, and with his own counterpart, the president of the French insurers organization, Jacques Gu谷rard.90 Hilgard was evidently able to develop considerable rapport with the two men, which ※demonstrated itself also to be very promotive for the building up of Allianz interests in France.§ B谷raud also introduced Hilgard to Emile Jouvet, who had represented a variety of Eng-lish insurers in Paris and who now decided to place his experience at Allianz＊s disposal and who (along with his secretary, Mme. Martin) remained faithful through all the ※storms and dangers§ of the coming years. 
Hilgard＊s by no means atypical exercise in postwar nostalgia for the harmony of the early German occupation tended, of course, to bypass some of the hard politics of his journey to Paris. Just as he planned to build up Allianz in France, 
87 Schreiben Meuschel, 21. Aug. 1940, ibid. 88 Aktennote Audebert, 3. und 14. Sept. 1940, MR, A 2.6/16. 89 Hilgard, ※Allianz im 2. Weltkrieg,§ FHA, AZ 1.3/2,p. 34. 90 On these two men and the French insurance industry under the occupation in general, see Philippe 
Burrin, France under the Germans. Collaboration and Compromise (New York, 1996), pp. 238每43. 
so his colleague Kurt Schmitt was working hard in the same cause back in Berlin, where he met with Amend on September 25. Amend had just returned from France and Alsace and informed Schmitt that, in agreement with the French su-pervisory authority, he planned to license some ffteen German insurance com-panies to operate in France. Among these would most certainly be Allianz and Victoria, which ※would be given assigned trusteeship in the administration of the English portfolios with the intention of turning them over to them defnitively as soon possible.§91 Amend was uncertain regarding the status of the German companies in the unoccupied areas of France, and he pointed out that the Ger-man companies would have to charge French rates but that the standard bond (i.e., the amount of money deposited as security for insurance companies operat-ing in France) could be made by bank guarantee rather than in cash. He worried that the French would set up some kind of pool rather than allow free commerce in insurance and feared that the French supervisory board was behind the idea. Insurance companies operating in Lorraine and Alsace 每 which still formally be-longed to France but would be reintegrated into the Reich 每 would be subject to special restrictions due to the special wishes and plans of the Gauleiter. Amend promised in any case that Karlsruher Leben and Badische Pferdeversicherungs-Anstalt AG, both part of the Allianz concern, would be licensed in Lorraine and Alsace, and that Karlsruher Leben would be given trusteeship over the frm of Rhein und Mosel 每 that is, placed in control of its operations and assets on behalf of the German government. Indeed, he promised that Allianz would have the most signifcant English and French portfolios in the area, while the publicly chartered companies would gain trusteeship of the Elsa.-Lothringen Versicherungs-Gesellschaft. Schmitt protested on the grounds that Allianz had such large shares of the latter frm; Amend held fast on the question of property insurance, but he was prepared to concede Allianz trusteeship of the company＊s life insurance portfolio. Finally, Schmitt pointed out that the interest of German insurers in the occupied countries stemmed from the fact that one could an-ticipate growing German industrial and commercial activity in these areas that needed insurance, but he thought it important that indigenous insurance com-panies be maintained to deal with normal business and that the German role be that of reinsurers rather than direct insurers. Here, too, there seemed to be basic harmony of views between Amend and Schmitt. 
This was extraordinary enough, but what is particularly striking is the com-plete identifcation of Allianz and Munich Re interests refected by the conver-sation and the extent to which Allianz was being given a most favored position with regard to the English portfolios. This was no trivial matter, since the British held half of France＊s insurance portfolios in 1939, which amounted to 90 billion francs.92 Indeed, in Alsace and Lorraine alone, Allianz received a dozen English 
91 Aktennote Schmitt, Berlin, 25. Sept. 1940, MR, C 2/8. 92 ※Axis Penetration of European Insurance,§ Board of Economic Warfare, Economy Branch, June 
15, 1943,NA, RG 60, 230/31/1/6, pp. 33每4. 
and French portfolios 每 and this does not include the portfolios turned over to Kraft and Karlsruher Leben.93 Thus, when Hilgard held a number of meetings with Ch谷neaux de Leyritz, he was defending Allianz interestsinrepresentingGer-man interests. Ch谷neaux＊s plans to set up a reinsurance pool had been justifed by his obligation to provide coverage for French industry, and he was prepared to drop the idea if the Germans would guarantee their capacity to cover French needs 每 an assurance that Hilgard gave, thereby burying the plan. He was less accommodating when it came to recent French legislation setting up a state rein-surance fund for transport insurance, which he claimed was insisted on by the French naval authorities in order to cover war risk. Hilgard pointed out that the German authorities had the right to review all such laws in the occupied zone, although rejecting the legislation would solve only part of the problem, and Ch谷neaux seemed to suggest that the implementation of the law (which was limited to eight months) might be such as to obviate this question as well. There was also some discussion concerning the appointment of trustees for the Eng-lish frms operating in France, with Ch谷neaux arguing that there was no need for German trustees and that many of the English frms had moved their offces and documentation into the unoccupied area of France. Hilgard recognized that the German companies could hardly provide the personnel to administer the hun-dred English frms in France (doing so would require each German corporation licensed for business in France to administer seven English companies), but he was insistent that Germans have trustees of their own appointed for general over-sight while the French did most of the actual administrative work.94 
Actually, the Germans were already doing a bit more than that, and Hilgard intended to act upon the points of difference between himself and Ch谷neaux in ways that would determine the outcomes in Germany＊s favor. Thus, on Oc-tober 3, 1940, he expressed outrage to the RWM about the French law setting up a transport reinsurance fund; he viewed it as a backhanded way of exclud-ing the Germans and undermining already existing contracts with the French for the transport of valuables and items worth more than 500,000 RM. Hil-gard suggested that using various mechanisms to monopolize all shipments of goods in the occupied areas would give the French something to think about, but he also urged that the matter be handled offcially in the Armistice Commis-sion.95 Nor was Hilgard prepared to accept French domination in the trusteeship question. The RAA not only licensed Allianz to do business in France on Oc-tober 4, it acceded moreover to Hilgard＊s request that Director Mler be made trustee for the portfolio of the Commercial Union Assurance Company Ltd. He was to work under Oberregierungsrat Hebel, who had been initially assigned as 
93 Anordnung er die treuh.nderische Verwaltung der im Elsass frei gewordenen Versicherungs-
best.nde vom 7.Nov. 1940, MR, A 2.6/12. See also Rundschreiben der Organisationsabteilung 
of Allianz of Feb. 15, 1941, FHA, AZ 5.1/5. 94 Aktennote Hilgard, 9. Okt. 1940, MR, C 2 /8. 95 Hilgard an Daniel, 3. Okt. 1940,GDV, 3-234 /1. 
general administrator by the RWM. Sometime in the fall, Hebel was replaced by Director Karl Autenrieth, who was general agent of Berlinischen Feuerver-sicherungsanstalt in Stuttgart and head of the branch group of insurance agents within the Reich Group. His experience as an insurance agent was especially useful because of the important role played by local agents for the English com-panies.96 There were other pre-emptive actions as well. Deutscher Luftpool, which was headquartered and managed at Allianz, was anxious to take over the English role in aviation insurance. When the Armistice was signed, the Luft-pool was approached by French aviation insurers asking for German reinsurance, which had taken over 90% of the risk of Air France in the occupied areas and was assuming reinsurance risk for the major airplane companies in the occupied areas. Although French airplane production was now under German supervi-sion, it was a French risk for which the Luftpool received permission from the RWM. Not only did the RWM and Luftpool consider the replacement of the British in this feld to be in the German national economic and security interest, but the Luftpool also asked the German government to bar Italian competition from Consorzio Italiano di Assicurazioni Aeronautiche in Rome.97 
Allianz had considerable ambitions in France, and it went to work almost im-mediately building up both its business and presence there. Director Ernst-Justus Ruperti 每 who had extensive experience abroad and knowledge of languages and had headed the foreign division of Allianz until 1935 before becoming deputy director of the Dresden branch 每 was summoned to oversee the work of Emile Jouvet, the French insurance man who (as previously mentioned) had left his English clients to work for Allianz. Ruperti had considerable rapport with the French agents who dominated the Parisian business, and Allianz soon outgrew its initial relatively modest but well-located quarters in the Place de Trinit谷; within two years it had to fnd larger and more elegant offces at 2 Rue Blanche. Ruperti was summoned for military duty in 1943, but he had already been replaced by Di-rector Karl-Friedrich von Schlayer, who apparently had artistic tastes and hired one of the best architects in Paris to renovate the new quarters. It was a mea-sure of how well established and respected Allianz had become that the grand opening of the new offces was attended by all the leading French insurers.98 
Furthermore, Allianz intended not only to establish its own presence but also to play the role of a ※French§ insurer. Here the old interests of Munich Re in Minerve and the Cit谷 frms came into play; in a discussion with B谷raud in De-cember 1940, Schmitt suggested that, after the conclusion of peace, ※we offer Allianz the Cit谷 as a French corporation alongside its direct representation.§99 Allianz had not yet been consulted about this idea, but by May 1941, Hilgard 
96 RAA an Allianz und RAA an Hilgard, 4. Okt. 1940,BAK, B 280/12253, Bl. 276每7. For Auten-
rieth＊s career and qualifcations, see BAB, R 3101/92781, Bl. 164每6. 97 Deutscher Luftpool an RWM, 5.Nov. 1940,SM, 1458/5/271, Bl. 164每6. 98 Hilgard, ※Allianz im 2. Weltkrieg,§ FHA, AZ 1.3/2, pp. 34f. 99 Aktennote Schmitt, Paris, 5. Dez. 1940, MR, A 2.6/16. 

Joint meeting of Allianz and Munich Re directors, including Kurt Schmitt (standing) and, facing him(startingleft), GerdMler, AloisAlzheimer, and Hans Goudefroy, about 1940. 
and Alzheimer presented a full-blown plan to the joint directors meeting of Allianz and Munich Re under which the English fre insurance portfolios given to Allianz would be turned over to Minerve, which would then fuse with Cit谷-Accidents; another French frm (Pr谷servatrice) with long-standing reinsurance connections to Munich Re would have a minority share in the new company.100 It was viewed as important to give the company the appearance of being French, so Munich Re and Allianz would control only 38%ofthe 15 million francs in shares, which might be increased to 45% if they acquired the portfolios of the British Victory Insurance Co. Although this would be the upper limit, the Ger-man concerns were granted veto power over the acquisition of the French shares by any single company, and Munich Re was to assume 60% of the Minerve-Cit谷 fre business.101 The RAA approved the arrangement 每 the merger taking place in September 1941 每 although it thought it ※unusual that the portfolio of English companies, that is, enemy property, should be transferred to an enemy corpo-ration without the German corporation being given a majority and thereby a dominating infuence.§102 Allianz argued, apparently persuasively, that this was the most that could be attained and that they could undoubtedly dominate in any case because the actual German control was cloaked: 10,000 shares of the 
100 Niederschrift er die zweite Sitzung des gemeinsamen Vorstandsrats am 9.Mai 1941,FHA, S 
17.2 /73. 101 Aktennote Alzheimer, 7.Mai 1941, MR, A 2.6/16. 102 Allianz an Mchener Rk, 4.Nov. 1941, ibid.; for the fusion agreement, see MR, A 1/16. 
new company were owned in the name of Pr谷servatrice, but three ffths of these were really the property of Allianz and merely held in trust by Pr谷servatrice. This caused something of a problem in the fall of 1942, when B谷raud feared the actual situation would have to be revealed at the Pr谷servatrice shareholders meeting. They were doing such good business that the competition would then be in a po-sition to take advantage of the revelation and claim that Minerve was nothing but a ※disguised German institution.§ B谷raud suggested this could be avoided if the Allianz shares were placed under the trusteeship of a French bank, so that Pr谷servatrice would not have to reveal the true nature of the shares and the bank could be presented as yet another French shareholder. Eberhard von Reining-haus of Munich Re, who was involved in these discussions, strongly supported B谷raud, as apparently did von Schlayer.103 
Indeed, B谷raud had long overcome the shock of France＊s defeat, and his ap-petite for the portfolios of Germany＊s enemy had grown with the eating. After the United States entered the war, B谷raud, who administered the Hartford In-surance Company portfolio, was anxious to take it over as quietly and quickly as possible by offering the customers in question three months of free insurance. Ruperti was quite willing to help out in this 6-million-franc operation, and both Gu谷rard of the French association and Ch谷neaux de Leyritz were willing to look the other way while B谷raud and Ruperti skipped an offcial transfer of the port-folio to Minerve and engaged in ※self-help.§ Ruperti and his German colleagues appreciated the cooperation of what he referred to as ※our French friends,§ and when Gu谷rard and Ch谷neaux visited Berlin in December 1941, Ruperti took the time to show them the impressive sights of Potsdam. The Frenchmen seemed very pleased by their reception, but they also wanted reciprocity in their business relations and were anxious to see one or two French insurance companies al-lowed to do business in Germany. Ruperti wished that he could send them home with something to show their colleagues but could only console them with the prospect that this would come later. As he told Alzheimer, ※I would consider this 每 which is nothing much more than a gesture on our part 每 indispensable for the entire German每French work in our feld.§104 
These French businessmen, of course, had a good deal in common with their German counterparts. They were collaborators, and just as Hilgard defended his role as one of saving his industry by taking a responsible position and work-ing with the government, so he appreciated the efforts of his French colleagues to save the interests of their industry as best they could and to seek reciprocity. Indeed, Ch谷neaux de Leyritz explained his role using language very similar to that of Hilgard; the former claimed that he was out to save his industry while at the same time ※maintaining courteous relations with German insurance§105 and 
103 Von Reininghaus an Schneider, 14. Sept. 1942, MR, A 2.6/16. 104 Ruperti an Alzheimer, 19. Dez. 1941, ibid. 105 Quoted in Annie Lecroix-Riz, Industriels et Banquiers sous L＊Occupation. La Collaboration 
谷conomique avec le Reich et Vichy (Paris, 1999), p. 33. 
that he wished to continue doing so regardless of how the war ended. Hilgard thus thought it deplorable after the war that, ※instead of receiving the thanks of their country, they were burdened with the blot of ＆collaboration.＊ §106 Assuming they did not wish to join de Gaulle, which was the case with most Frenchmen in prominent positions, they did have short-term interests to defend. Their German colleagues certainly intended to take advantage of the situation to make a proft. Schmitt statedthe position very clearlyindiscussionsattheRWMinAugust 1940: 
... in my view it is very important that, on the German side, everything be done in the countries that must work with us to employ our infuence so that the insurance business is not built up under conditions that bring a loss either to the German direct insurer or to the reinsurer, even if, as for example in the French accident and also fre insurance the working conditions there were previously unfavorable or that through the appearance of German companies in the new countries the market is ruined for competitive reasons on the German side.107 
In short, Schmitt (like Hilgard) wanted to use the authority of the RAA and the RWM 每 and especially the self-administration of the industry in the Reich Group 每 to create favorable conditions for German insurers to work proftably. 
One of the most pressing matters in this respect was raising premiums, espe-cially in fre insurance, which was in a chaotic and insuffciently proftable state. The British insurers had apparently undermined the high premiums existing in the industrial regions of France before the First World War by coming in after postwar reconstruction of devastated regions and offering lower premiums ap-propriate to the modernized facilities. Furthermore, the lower premiums were not, as originally intended, limited to northern France but rather spread to the rest of the country, so that the French companies were as anxious as the German to raise the level of premiums. Nevertheless, the German insurers suffered from rather contradictory feelings about this program of reconstructing the premium system to make it appropriately proftable. In the Franco-German commission that met in Paris between March 6 and March 12, 1941, there was general agree-ment on the need for ※disciplining§ the system; the Germans wanted to go as high as a 50% increase but the French did not think their supervisory author-ity would accept such a level, though Ch谷neaux de Leyritz himself was willing to go up to 30%. On the other hand, the Germans also demanded special con-sideration for themselves because they were well aware that they were uninvited newcomers on the French insurance scene and were at a competitive disadvan-tage in France owing to the reluctance in some quarters to do business with them and to the fact that high-risk customers disproportionately turned to the Ger-mans. Thus, while the French accepted a 25% price increase for themselves in the end, they also gave the Germans a three-year period in which they could charge only 15% more than the old rates and only 10% more in the case of the English 
106 Hilgard, ※Allianz im 2. Weltkrieg,§ FHA, AZ 1.3/2,p. 31. 107 Aktennote Schmitt, 28. Aug. 1940, MR, C 2/8. 
portfolios. The Germans were caught in a contradictory situation. On the one hand, they believed premiums needed to be raised substantially and wanted to force the French in this direction. On the other hand, they were anxious to secure French business by offering lower premiums themselves and thus had to accept lower premium increases than were economically desirable.108 
When they met on March 14, however, the German insurers wondered if this was enough, since the agents who actually sold the insurance were rather un-certain as to whether they could win over French customers even with so low a premium. Hilgard admitted this was true, but he defended the commission＊s work on ※higher§ grounds: 
The commission in its negotiations in Paris did not only carry on its negotiations with present business in view, but rather had especially the future of the greater European space in mind. The commission takes the position that where a chance is offered to re-construct industrial business, it should do so, and to be sure even if in French circles it is said of the German companies that it was they who demanded the increase of premiums. 
It was up to the German insurers, in Hilgard＊s view, to prove that they really had something to offer, especially in the generous and speedy regulation of dam-age claims. In general, ※[t]he German companies must demonstrate that they are better than the English. One has to keep in mind and understand that one is deal-ing with an industrious predecessor and that things can only move forward with the most extreme effort.§ The chief task was to build up solid portfolios, and 
it is impossible for the task of the German companies to employ German money in an exaggerated way in favor of French large insurers. It is much more correct at frst to ob-serve how things develop and impose measures of holding back. There will certainly be a general improvement of the French market when the reconstructive measures once have taken effect.109 
Allianz was a strong supporter of binding premium arrangements in France, Belgium, and the Netherlands, whether in industrial fre insurance or in machine insurance, which felds they subsequently sought to enter in France as well.110 Nevertheless, making the increased premiums effective was something of a prob-lem, and by the end of 1942 most of the discipline was on the French rather than the German side. The unexpectedly high claims in 1942, which were to in-crease in subsequent years, made the French insurance companies anxious to raise their premiums. Insofar as the German companies were co-insurers with their French counterparts, they went along with the increases, while the German 
108 Hilgard an alle in Frankreich zugelassenen deutschen Versicherungsunternehmungen, 14. M.rz 
1941,GDV,RS/17. 109 Niederschrift er die Sitzung der in Frankreich zugelassenen deutschen Versicherungsgesell-
schaften am 27. M.rz 1941, GDV, ibid. 110 Bericht er die Reise nach Frankreich von Direktor Gerboth (Alte Leipziger), Sept. 1942, FHA, 
H-4-II/44, Bl. 74. 
companies kept their low premiums in order to increase business. Alzheimer promised that the Reich Group would support the French insurers＊ position, but nothing was actually done.111 Even more telling was the paralysis with respect to the English portfolios. These had been guaranteed by the German compa-nies who held them in trust through reinsurance, but the initial plan and hope was to consolidate the entire collection of English insurance holdings, so that one could not differentiate among them, and thus basically wipe out the English presence as insurers in France. The French were supposed to pass a law mak-ing this possible, according to an agreement with the Germans concluded in the spring of 1941. Two years later, however, the law still had not been issued, and it was quite clear that it would not be issued. The reason, as Director Heinz Gerboth (of Leipziger Feuer-Versicherungs-Anstalt) stated in May 1943,was ※the change in the military situation.§112 Director Gustav Hartig of Gladbacher Feuerversicherungs-AG was even more explicit about French motives following remarks by the French negotiator Joseph Ripert, who admitted that the projected transfer law was dead. He made a new proposal that the German companies formally remain the trustees for the British and American portfolios but turn their administration of Anglo-American portfolios over to the French compa-nies with which the Anglo-American companies were associated. These French companies would then have the responsibility of negotiating a settlement with the British and American companies for the portfolios. The true motives for this French proposal were quite transparent to Hartig. The Germans had wanted title to these portfolios; Ripert was willing to give it to them, but at the same time he wanted to leave the fnal settlement of the status of the portfolios until after the conclusion of peace. Hartig believed that the French were ※calculating that Germany will lose the war, so that the portfolios will have to be given up or at least negotiated about with the English or Americans,§ thereby showing ※that the French government had protected the interests of the English or American insurance companies in the best possible way.§113 
What is interesting, however, is that the Germans themselves were prepared to accept this French proposal. As Gerboth reported concerning a meeting on the subject: ※The representative of the military administration as well as the gentle-men from the Reich Supervisory Offce as well as the German insurance directors had the view, as came out clearly enough, that one would one day have to give an account to the English insurance companies ....§114 There were numerous practical and technical reasons for not pressing the issue at this point, especially given the attitude of the French, but the German tone had clearly changed from 
111 
Bericht des Herrn Direktor Gerboth er die Reise nach Frankreich in der Zeit vom 19.每24.Mai 
1943, ibid., Bl. 32每4. 112 Ibid., Bl. 38. 113 Harting, ※Betrachtungen zum Transfergesetz in Frankreich,§ 15. M.rz每2. April 1943,AN, AJ 
40/836, Bl. 111每21, Zitat Bl. 114. 114 Bericht Gerboth, 19.每24.Mai 1943, FHA, H-4-II/44, Bl. 38. 
one of confdence and insistence with respect to the English portfolios to one that was considerably more hesitant. 
Indeed, the German insurers dealing with their French counterparts refected not only the extent but also the increasing limits of French collaboration and their own uncertainty regarding how to respond. In December 1941, for exam-ple, Gerboth noted 
that the idea of collaboration has gradually lost out, that is, the unconditional going to-gether with Germany even in the circles which are dependent on economic cooperation with us and who carry this through now as before in a correct and loyal manner, and also in their personal attitude show the same friendliness. One has the impression that the idea of attentisme increasingly gains ground.115 
The unexpected prolongation of the war, the food diffculties, and the growing discomfort over subordination to Germany and the uncertainty of German in-tentions were all taking their toll. While the French were willing to accept the loss of Alsace, they chafed at the loss of Lorraine. At the same time, Gerboth, who appears to have been a true believer, did note a positive attitude toward the war against the Soviet Union in bourgeois circles and the extent to which ※the movement against the Jews appears to have gained ground very strongly in the course of the year.§116 
Set over against such grim ※progress,§ however, was the increasing tendency of French insurers to hold back in their cooperation with the Germans, about which Gerboth had already complained. At a March 1942 meeting of the advi-sory council of the Reich Group, for example, General Director Heinrich Bothe complained that the French had reinsured the American portfolios in their con-trol exclusively with the Basler frm in Switzerland. He considered this an ※un-friendly act§ and did not fnd the behavior of the French to be ※nice.§ Yet sim-ilar behavior had been observed in the Netherlands and Belgium, and Hilgard decided to remind his colleagues that it was only ※natural§ for people whose country was occupied to respond in this way: 
He reminded them of the occupation of the Palatinate after the World War. At that time one also did everything possible to prevent a French company from getting a German insurance policy. Why should it now be different there? If we at that time had the possi-bility, we would have also given everything to the Swiss. We will be having illusions if we thought that it would be done otherwise on the other side. That is why the work in the occupied territories is so diffcult. We live from hand to mouth in these areas. The de-velopment of the general political situation is of great signifcance here. The attitude in the occupied territories is to a certain extent a barometer from which one can read how things are on the Eastern front. It will remain thus until the conclusion of peace. One must simply have to see how to do as good business as possible there.117 
115 Bericht Gerboth, 8. Dez. 1941, ibid., Bl. 179. 116 Ibid., Bl. 284. In general, see Burrin, France under the Germans, Pt. II. 117 Stenografsche Notizen er die Beiratssitzung der Reichsgruppe Versicherungen am 6. M.rz 
1942,GDV,RS/28. 
Telling words indeed 每 which provide evidence that even under the Nazi regime one did not have to lose all sense of reality and that businessmen could (and did) speak more frankly about the military and political situation than might be sup-posed. At the same time, Hilgard＊s words were wisely subjected to heavy editing in the offcial minutes to omit all references to his comparison of German and French behavior and to the Eastern front.118 
As we have shown, the situation a year later (i.e., after further deterioration of the German position on the Eastern front due to the defeat at Stalingrad) made the French even more skeptical of German military chances, to which must be added that the occupation of the entire country 每 and the growing hardships and German impositions 每 increased French hostility and the tendency of French in-surers to drag their feet in meeting German demands. If the French no longer believed in German victory, the ※reasonable portion of the French bourgeoisie§ (according to Gerboth, echoing the Nazi line) worried about German defeat and viewed the German Reich as defending not only Germany but also ※European culture against Bolshevism.§ As Gerboth noted, however, neither these French-men nor the Belgians with whom he had contact were convinced that Russian victory over the Germans would mean the victory of Bolshevism in Europe, be-cause ※England and America would prevent such a development.§119 Given such expectations, the gingerly handling of Anglo-American portfolios discussed ear-lier was indeed the better part of wisdom! 
Thus, as Hilgard repeatedly stressed, doing business in France was no easy matter. At the same time, there was considerable pressure to maintain high per-formance. This was emphasized strongly by Autenrieth, who (on September 1, 1941) was made military administrative councilor to the military commander in France charged with insurance questions. Autenrieth had excellent Nazi creden-tials, having joined the Party as member no. 384,626 on December 1, 1930.He held a variety of Party positions and was also connected with the DAF, but he nevertheless appeared to be a friend of the private insurance industry, seemed to have worked well with Hilgard, and was made chief business manager of the Reich Group in May 1943. 120 Therefore, Autenrieth strongly urged the German companies to provide, as required, precise information on their premiums to the military commander＊s offce in Paris and to do so on time. Since the military commander sent in periodic reports that were passed on to Hitler himself, Au-tenrieth was anxious to have the insurance sector appear in the reports since ※it is absolutely necessary that the Frer also hears something about the in-surance companies in the working report from France.§ In Autenrieth＊s view, this was important to the insurance industry for long-term reasons: ※At a later 
118 See Niederschrift er die Beiratssitzung der Reichsgruppe Versicherungen am 6. M.rz 1942, 
ibid., p. 6. 119 Bericht Gerboth, 19.每21.Mai 1943,AN, AJ 40/836, Bl. 30. 120 For Autenrieth＊s vita and appointment to the Reich Group, see Hilgard an RWM, 17.Mai 1943, 
BAB, R 3101/9728, Bl. 123每4. 
time, when the nationalization idea will come up again from some source, the Frer will recollect these reports on the work of the private insurance in France and the work of the private insurance industry that was performed and cap-tured in reports will without doubt be taken into account by the Frer in later decisions.§121 
Whether the Frer paid any attention or not, the reports demonstrated a nominal increase in premiums between 1941 and 1942:from 456.7 million francs to 701.9 million francs. This included reinsurance, which amounted to 50.7%of the total in 1942. As was its wont, Allianz led the pack of 25 German companies with 64.5 million francs in premiums, followed by Nordstern with 51.6 million and Victoria with 18.5 million in premiums. Allianz did 6.5 million francs in fre insurance, as compared to 10.3 million for Berlinische Feuer and 8.8 million for Gladbacher; its chief sources of income came from transport insurance (16 million francs for the fourth quarter of 1942 alone) and reinsurance, with a pre-mium income of 5 million for the same period. The German companies scarcely did any business in life insurance, although Allianz Leben was one of a number of companies petitioning for the right to sell such insurance in March 1942. 122 They did, however, do an increasing amount of business in the unoccupied area of France, because the English companies were no longer operating there inde-pendently and because French companies did not have the resources to cover some of the large risks 每 such as the docks and port facilities of Marseilles and the Galeries Lafayettes.123 
One did not, to be sure, want the Frer or his potential advisers in the in-surance question to see everything, as became evident when German insurance companies licensed to operate in France were confronted with the French re-quirements that they publicize their balances yearly by July 15 and supplement their reserves to meet the required percentage of claims. The latter requirement did not have to be met until the following June 30, but there was great pressure to have the reserves in place at the time the balances were published because the defcit would clearly be noticed and might adversely affect the status of the frms in question. Because of the rising number of claims, however, this imposed a drain on foreign exchange and even required special permission from the Ger-man authorities. When the Wttembergische Feuerversicherung AG proposed at the end of 1942 that the Reich Group seek an exemption from the require-ment owing to the abnormal fuctations in the number of claims under wartime conditions, Hilgard turned the request down on the grounds that such special favoring of the German insurers and lack of openness would damage the im-age and competitive capacity of the German companies. Autenrieth agreed with 
121 Bericht er die Reise des General-Inspektor Mler nach Frankreich und Belgien vom 9. April 
bis 26. April 1942, FHA, H-4-II/44, Bl. 127每8. 122 Milit.rbefehlshaber in Frankreich an die Reichsgruppe, 15. April 1943,GDV, 3-234/1;Le Di-
recteur des Assurances an Allianz, 13. M.rz 1942,AN, AJ 40/835, Bl. 243. 123 Reichsgruppe Versicherungen an den Milit.rbefehlshaber, 20. April 1942, ibid., Bl. 33每6. 
Hilgard, although he was suffciently worried to at least suggest negotiations with the French authorities 每 for the same internal German domestic political reasons that had made him so anxious to bring the German industry＊s accom-plishments to Hitler＊s attention. In this case, he feared that ※perhaps the often raised criticism that the German private insurance is not a source of foreign ex-change but rather requires substantial supplements of foreign exchange could be repeated.§124 
These were goodillustrations ofhowtheshadowof Schwede-CoburgandRath hung over the private insurers as they tried to establish a permanent foothold in France, but there were increasingly more immediate and practical concerns plaguing these efforts in 1942每1944. These were exhibited in considerable plen-titude by La Minerve, when Munich Re had one of its offcials take a close look at the sum-up lists 每 that is, the lists of reported claims and damages that direct insurers provide to their reinsurers 每 at the end of 1943. While the offcial in ques-tion thought that Minerve＊s exposure was excessive in comparison to the other insurance companies involved in some of the cases in question, the real prob-lem was that 90% of the company＊s portfolio was industrial business, where the damages were extremely high and where the cause was in general ※unknown§ 每 primarilybecauseitwasdiffcult to demonstrate sabotage except inspecifc cases. Nevertheless, sabotage was regularly suspected. In the frst nine months of 1943, Minerve had collected 10.6 million francs and was reporting 12.8 million francs in claims. Needless to say, this put a considerable strain on Minerve＊s reinsurers, and in March 1944 Munich Re was asking for a revision of the terms of its agree-ment with Minerve so as to reduce its loss.125 In the fnal phase of the occupation, the question of insuring and covering sabotage costs became a much-discussed subject among the German and French insurers as well as with the German mil-itary authorities in France. Insofar as the insurance companies were concerned, neither the Germans nor the French were keen on introducing sabotage risk into their policies, since the question of defning sabotage and demonstrating that it had taken place was not always easy. To make matters still more complicated, the big French companies were not averse to covering sabotage damages because they thought the costs would destroy some of the small mutuals. What ulti-mately seemed to force some action, however, was the growing number of cases and the possibility that companies would contest the demands of the insured in court on the grounds that sabotage risk was the equivalent of war risk. Since the French government was in no position to pay the costs, the burden had to fall on the French insurers, and a law was planned to go into effect in April 1944 under which sabotage damages would be covered by a special fund derivedfrom a tax on French insurance companies. Given that discussion of this question dated back to 1942, itisratherremarkablethatittookuntilearly1944 forasolutiontobefound. One insurance industry leader explained this by the diffculties of negotiating 
124 Autenrieth an Hilgard, 11. Dez. 1942, and related correspondence, in ibid., Bl. 7每11. 125 Bericht, 15. Dez. 1943, and Mchener Rk an Minerve, 24. M.rz 1944, MR, A 1/16. 
with the French authorities and by the fact that German insurers tended to con-centrate on the affairs of their own companies when they came to Paris.126 
Whatever the case, there was obviously a great deal of give and take between the German insurers and their French counterparts as well as a clear unwilling-ness on the part of the former to press their advantages to the point where they behaved like conquerers. This was far less true in Lorraine and Alsace, which were intended for incorporation into the Reich. Somewhere between two thirds and three quarters of the area＊s insurance business was in French or English hands, and from the very outset of German control of the area Alzheimer con-sidered the goal to be ※to bring these portfolios into the hands of Reich-German enterprises.§ At the same time, he thought it important to protect the vener-able two purely Alsatian companies 每 Rhein und Mosel and Elsa.-Lothringen Versicherungs-Gesellschaft 每 both of which had always been oriented toward Germany and had close reinsurance relations with the Munich Re. Indeed, with the exception of Rhein und Mosel General Director Andr谷 Mouchard, who was French, the personnel of the companies was purely Alsatian. Thus, for both busi-ness and political reasons, Alzheimer thought it important to transfer the French shares in these companies to German companies and to reorient their reinsur-ance from the Swiss to the Germans but to maintain their integrity.127 This, however, was not to be, since Amend and the Gauleiter in the region were intent on transferring the property insurance part of Elsa.-Lothringen to the publicly chartered companies, while Gauleiter Robert Wagner and Minister-President Walter Kler in Baden were intent on having Baden proft from the situation by transferring Rhein und Mosel to Karlsruher Leben, which was of course in the Allianz group. 
Nevertheless, the Alsatian frms caused considerable tension between the Ger-man and French members of the standing Armistice Commission, since the French had moved the reserves and part of the administration to France itself. The basic goal of the French appears to have been to hold out for a fnal settlement until peace came, while the Germans were anxious to have everything centered in Strasbourg.128 It would appear, however, that General Director Samwer of Karlsruher Leben was most impatient of all. A prot谷g谷 of General Director He. and widely respected for his skills and abilities, Samwer was also ferociously am-bitious and had cultivated Wagner and Kler, who had not only recommended Karlsruher as a ※model plant§ but had also made Samwer the commissarial ad-ministrator over Rhein und Mosel. Samwer＊s colleagues at Allianz and Munich Re were extremely unhappy about Samwer＊s obvious interest in the job and in 
126 For a revealing discussion of the sabotage question, see Bericht er Reise nach Frankfurt, Dir. 
Gerboth, Sept. 1942, FHA, H-4-II/44, Bl. 76每9. On the law, see the discussions and memoran-
dum of early 1944 in SM, 1458/5/274, Bl. 4每10. 127 Aktennote Alzheimer, 20. Aug. 1940, MR, A 2.6/12. 128 For these alterations see the reports of May 29, 1942, June 5, 1942, and Aug. 5, 1942,SM, 
1458/5/319, Bl. 34每44. 
absorbing Rhein und Mosel, since Swiss Re had a substantial holding in the company and also did most of its reinsurance business; the German insurance leaders had apparently promised the Swiss not to use the military situation to their own advantage in this case. Impatient to pocket Rhein und Mosel, Samwer (as Ch谷neaux de Leyritz informed Hilgard) denounced Mouchard and had him imprisoned by the Gestapo. When criticized for this action, Samwer defended himself by claiming that the German government, as Amend and the Foreign Offce had informed him, intended to put an ※iron curtain§ between Alsace and France and that it was necessary to denounce Mouchard because the latter had falsifed papers and was trying to reassert his old position and remove Rhein und Mosel assets to Vichy France. Schmitt felt Samwer＊s performance ※to be the only black spot on the wartime record of the Mchener-Allianz Konzern.§ While regarding Samwer as an ※exceedingly able but extremely self-centered man,§ Schmitt and his colleagues sharply criticized Samwer to his face about his methods and did not think much of his self-defense. As Schmitt admitted, how-ever, no effort was made to do more than call Samwer to account verbally for his actions.129 
As demonstrated in this volume, there were some other ※black spots§ on the Allianz-Munich Re escutcheons, albeit of a different nature. Yet concerning their behavior toward their colleagues in Belgium, the Netherlands, and France, the situation in its basic characteristics was not much different than it had been in France. Allianz had already been operating in Belgium since 1936 through its agency Maurice Deckers in Antwerp, while Frankfurter Versicherungs-AG worked through the Antwerp frm of Martroye & Luth & Varlez & Marx. Nei-ther company sold life insurance, and the Frankfurter was limited to fre and transport.130 Similarly, Munich Re was also active in Belgium, where it had ac-quired 32.5% of the shares of La Minerve de Belgique; 65.3% of the shares were held by Les R谷assurances in Paris, which (as we have seen) was controlled by Munich Re.131 Despite these examples of foreign direct and indirect insurers in Belgium, the German role was quite small in comparison to the English, French, and Swiss. From the German perspective, the Belgian market was overpopulated (with no fewer than 250 companies, loosely organized in voluntary organiza-tions), undisciplined in its premium policies, and poorly supervised.132 
129 Interrogation of Kurt Schmitt, July 15, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /58/5; interroga-
tion of Baron Edgar Uexkl, June 7, 1947, ibid., 2 /57/4; interrogation of Hilgard, July 15, 1947, 
ibid., 2 /57/6每8; interrogation of Samwer, July 17, 1947, ibid., 2/56/1. See also Samwer＊s postwar 
explanation, ※Meine T.tigkeit f die Rhein & Mosel Versicherungs-Gesellschaft-Stra.burg,§ 
sent to Director Hermann Hitzler on Aug. 30, 1945, HM, A0001-00056, Bd. 2. Samwer claimed 
that Cheneaux suspected him of wanting to take over the Paris operations of the company, which 
Samwer claimed he did not want to do. For a more critical stance on the role of Cheneaux in 
this matter, see Lecroix-Riz, Industrielles et Banquiers, p. 237. 130 Rundschreiben von 15.Feb. 1941, FHA, S 17.7/72. 131 Munich Re to OMGUS, Property Division, June 28, 1949,MdF,EN.17.136. 132 See the Lagebericht der Oberfeldkommandantur, 11.Nov. 1940, pp. 90每4,CREH,LL 1/1. 
As in France, the German insurers at once sought to win over the Belgians and to make sure that they derived maximum advantage from their position. In a letter of September 1940 to Military Administrative Councilor Sperl in Brussels, who handled insurance matters, Alzheimer thought it psychologically important to keep measures of administrative intervention to the minimum required for re-organization and to assume that replacing British and French insurers would lead the Belgians to turn to the Germans. It was important, however, to prevent any kind of organization of Belgian reinsurers, and Alzheimer also urged that the number of German companies licensed to work in Belgium be limited so as to keep the market as stable as possible. Like Schmitt, Alzheimer favored a liberal approach to the transfer of English portfolios, undoubtedly sharing Schmitt＊s expectation that the better portfolios would fall to them or to friendly Belgian companies.133 
This calculation, however, soon proved rather problematic for the sixteen German companies licensed to work in Belgium. On the one hand, the Belgian companies took advantage of their relative lack of organizational and supervi-sory constraints to compete with the German companies. On the other, they were quite aggressive in trying to gain control of English portfolios. This was es-pecially evident at a meeting of the Belgian committee of the Reich Group with representatives of the Belgian insurers in September 1941. In response to Hil-gard＊s question of how the German insurers could be assured participation in the former English business, the Belgian director Francis Diercxens responded that the English had gained so large a share of the Belgian market after the Great War by underpricing their Belgian competitors and taking away the better risks while leaving the Belgians with the poorer ones. For this reason, ※the Belgian insurance companies now have the wish to get back again this business which originally belonged to their portfolio. They therefore have been striving not to share this business with any foreigner, and to be sure also with no Englishman.§ Hilgard apparently found this a bit much and responded that 
the dropping out of the English is a consequence of the war won by Germany, and it will not do that the fruits of this war now be exclusively claimed by the Belgian companies. If the desire of the German insurance companies for a reasonable participation in Belgium is not satisfed, then he [Hilgard] does not know what will happen. He also considers it better in the interest of the Belgian corporations to come to an understanding and con-siders it in their own interest if they themselves do something about it.134 
These remarks left little to the imagination, and the Belgians came up with a self-denying proposal that limited their participation in English policies to no more than 50%. 
133 Alzheimer an Sperl, 18. Sept. 1940, MR, C 2 /4, and Aktennote Schmitt, 28. Aug. 1940, MR, C 
2 /8. 134 Niederschrift er die gemeinsame Sitzung in Brsel am 23. Sept. 1941,SM, 1458/16/86, Bl. 
161每5, zit. Bl. 162每3. 
As in France, so in Belgium. There was an increase of premium income for both the German and the Belgian companies after 1941, in part because of new business but increasingly because of the higher risks. Similarly, the issue of sabo-tage was of growing concern and importance, especially in agriculture, since the farmers were refusing to grow endangered products like fax and rapeseed. The Belgian insurers refused to cover clear cases of sabotage, but the burdens of pay-ing out on unclear cases were causing increasing diffculty. Ultimately, the Reich Group asked the authorities to impose a premium on all insurance policies with the object of covering these added damages. By the summer of 1944, of course, business was collapsing. German insurers had already reserved the right to can-cel transport contracts in the event of an Allied invasion 每 and this after charging an extremely high premium on the movement of goods to and from Germany. Once the invasion took place, the entire transportation insurance business sim-ply came to a halt.135 
The Netherlands were the remaining western European country where the German insurers pursued their policy of frm but negotiated infltration and cre-ation of greater homogeneity between the insurance organization in Germany and the occupied territory. The Allianz concern was represented in the Nether-lands by no less than three member companies: the ※mother§ company Allianz itself, Frankfurter, and Globus, with the latter concentrating on fre and trans-portation insurance. These companies operated through Dutch agency frms, since the role of agents was extremely important in the Netherlands. In order to avoid undesirable competition and duplication of effort within the concern, the business of all three companies was coordinated by the foreign business section of Allianz in Berlin. Munich Re also maintained contact with agencies in the Netherlands and had close connections with the Dordrecht fre insurance frm of ※Holland van 1859§ as far back as 1896. However, the role of English insurers and reinsurers was of particular importance in the Netherlands, and the Nazi invasion created substantial reinsurance diffculties.136 
Needless to say, there was strong hostility toward the Germans, especially given the many friendly and indeed vital economic services performed by the Dutch for the Germans during the post-1918 period, which included credits and a venue for German companies to operate under Dutch names and do interna-tional business from which they might otherwise have been excluded. The frst response of the Dutch insurers, whose industry was better organized and disci-plined than that of the Belgians, was an attempt to fll the vacuum created by the disappearance of the English by forming a special corporation with 5 million 
135 See the Lageberichte der Oberfeldkommandantur, Oct.每Nov. 1943,p. C-21, and June 1944,B-
4 /5, CREH, LL1/1. 136 Rundschreiben vom 15.Feb. 1941, FHA, S 17.7/72; Gratama an das Hauptquartier der III. 
Amerikanischen Armee, Bad Tz, 7. Jan. 1946, MR, D/2. See also the article by Martin Herzog, 
※Versicherung in den Niederlanden,§ Der Deutsche Volkswirt, 8.Nov. 1940, GDV, Personenar-
chiv, Akte Martin Herzog. 
forins in capital to cover large risks in the event that they could not be covered by the individual frms. Whatever individual Dutch feelings may have been, this action was not taken in an atmosphere of rejection of the Germans; at a June 1940 meeting in the Hague, Hilgard and Alzheimer expressed strong approval of the efforts of the Dutch to deal with their problem through their own resources. In short, there was no rejection of the Germans establishing their own agencies in the Netherlands and trying to fll the vacuum but only a request that the Ger-mans play by Dutch rules, keep to premium rate agreements, limit the number of agencies they might found, and not compete with Dutch companies in the provinces, since the latter had a surfeit of coverage. Hilgard was perfectly agree-able to the idea of not overstraining market capacity and was pleased to fnd what he felt to be a concordance of views and a good basis for future collabora-tion.137 Hilgard also assured the Dutch representatives that the Germans had no intention of demanding that the Dutch create an organization comparable to the Reich Group, but he did hope there would be a counterpart organization avail-able so that one could settle matters effciently. This existed in the form of an insurers committee 每 to whose head, Director Heering of De Niederlanden van 1845, he could turn. An agreement was reached that the insurance agents would refer half of the English portfolios to German companies.138 
Thanks to this situation, the German companies could boast some economic success in the Netherlands during the occupation, and the insurance industry had a positive balance of payments in 1940 for the frst time in years.139 How-ever, in the Netherlands (probably more than in Belgium or France) German insurers had to deal with a highly nazifed occupation regime of particular ruth-lessness. In contrast to the central role of the military authorities in France and Belgium, the Netherlands was placed under the Reich Commissar for the Oc-cupied Netherlands Arthur Sey.-Inquart, whose right-hand man for economic affairs was Hans Fischbk 每 one of the more brutal and imaginative despoilers of the Jews during his tenure as economics minister in Austria. Hence the oc-cupation regime in the Netherlands was far more ruthless and ideological than in either Belgium or France, and the Holocaust was much more thoroughgoing in the Netherlands than in the other two countries. Not surprisingly, Schwede-Coburg and Hans Goebbels took a particular interest in the area and hatched plans to set up an organization of the fre insurance mutuals in the provinces with a central headquarters in the Hague. J. W. Gratama, a leading Dutch in-surance man who headed the Dordrecht fre insurance company of Holland van 1859 (which as noted had close connections with Munich Re), was asked to join the supervisory board and was deeply troubled about getting involved. Indeed, he even declined to join Schmitt＊s Association against Large Risks because it was 
137 Besprechung im Finanzministerium, 19. Juni 1940, MR, C 2 /14. 138 See Martin Herzog, Beispielsammlung f die Kriegswirtschaftsgeschichte, 18. Sept. 1942,GDV, 
Personenarchiv, Akte Martin Herzog. 139 Monatsberichte des Kommissars bei der Niederl.ndischen Bank, 1940每1941, RIOD, FiWi 47, 7b. 
under German leadership. In his dealings with his colleagues at Munich Re, he was very frank about these matters and apparently had their sympathy.140 This was amply demonstrated in the spring of 1943, when Gratama and three col-leagues and relations were picked up as hostages by the Gestapo. Not only did Alzheimer send an agent to procure their release, but Schmitt sent an urgent tele-gram to Sey.-Inquart emphasizing Munich Re＊s close relationship to Gratama＊s company and the importance of having those involved released for the contin-uation of operations. This probably saved their lives and certainly earned the gratitude of Gratama, who was actually a member of the Dutch underground.141 
It was one thing to help and save business colleagues who were endangered by the regime, but quite another to refrain from exploiting the business oppor-tunities created by the systematic expropriation pursued by German authorities in the Netherlands. The occupation regime demanded that insurance compa-nies report the extent to which they were owned by Jews as well as the names (and extent of participation) of Jewish shareholders, and the Jews were forced not only to surrender their shares but also to pay what usually amounted to 1% of the share capital.142 The German rulers in the Netherlands were successful in forcing Jews to account for their assets; they even set up a former Jewish bank, Lippmann, Rosenthal & Co., to collect Jewish assets 每 including shares in insur-ance companies owned by Jews and life insurance policies. For German insurers connected with such companies or wishing to buy shares in Dutch insurance frms, Lippmann, Rosenthal became a useful source for such shares. Thus, on March 16, 1942, the Handelstrust West N.V. wrote to the offce in charge of Jew-ish assets asking that it instruct Lippmann, Rosenthal to ※offer the shares of the Assur. Mij. De Nederlanden van 1845, Den Haag for the account of the German interested party, the Allianz Lebensversicherung AG, Berlin.§143 
However, the most important source of this Dutch company＊s shares was the Dresdner Bank. On March 17, 1942, its securities section wrote to Allianz that it was pleased by the interest expressed by Hilgard in the Dutch company and that, as agreed, it had consulted with the Reich Commissar for the Occupied Dutch Territories to arrange that Allianz have frst call on all shares of the company 每 above all, those that had been in Jewish possession. Thus, 
140 See Aktennote, 2. M.rz 1942 und 8. M.rz 1943, MR, C 2 /14. 141 For Schmitt＊s undated telegram, see RIOD, T 63.3; for the postwar correspondence on Alz-
heimer＊s role, see the correspondence with the Allied authorities of 1946 in FHA, NL 1/157, and 
Gratama an das Hauptquartier der III. Amerikanischen Armee, Bad Tz, 7. Jan. 1946,MR, D/2. 142 Vermerk zu den Besprechungen der Versicherungsreferenten der besetzten Westgebiete im Haag 
am 31. Okt. und 1.Nov. 1941,AN, AJ 40/835, Bl. 11每15. 143 Handelstrust West N.V. an Generalkommissar f Finanzen und Wirtschaft, Der Sonderbeauf-
tragte, z. H. von Herrn Pfeffer, CABR, Dossier LIRO. On Lippmann Rosenthal, see Gerard 
Aalders, ※Three Ways of German Economic Penetration in the Netherlands: Cloaking, Capital 
Interlocking and ＆Aryanization＊,§ in Overy, ※Neuordnung§ Europas, pp. 273每98. See also Ger-
ard Aalders, Geraubt! Die Enteignung jischen Besitzes im Zweiten Weltkrieg (Cologne, 2000), 
esp. Chs. 6每8. 
it can be expected that very shortly the Jewish securities, under which shares of the afore-mentioned company can be found, will be up for sale. In view of the desired amalgamation between the German and Dutch economies, the relevant German agencies naturally have an interest in seeing that the delivery of the blocks of shares gathered among the Jew-ish goods, wherever possible as complete blocks, be directed over to the German hands most appropriate for such amalgamation. It should therefore be possible, to gain in the relevant cases as complete blocks not only the shares originating in Jewish goods but eventually also the blocks of shares stemming from the confscated enemy property. Be-yond this, the interested German party will as a rule have the sole permission to buy up all the wares offered on the Dutch exchange.144 
Jewish as well as enemy assets were therefore to be used to promote German economic imperialism, and Hilgard and Alzheimer (who was kept informed) were very interested parties indeed. Thus, in late April Allianz bought 300,000 guilders＊ worth of shares in the Dutch company previously in Jewish and en-emy hands; Dresdner Bank offered another 61,000 guilders of former Jewish holdings a month later, another 45,000 guilders in June, and 10,000 guilders in August. Only in March 1943 did Allianz hold back when offered another 142,750 guilders in shares from enemy assets.145 Finally, it is worth noting that Allianz not only bought Jewish securities of Dutch insurance companies from the Dresd-ner Bank and Lippmann, Rosenthal, it also provided transportation insurance in 1943每1944 for the shipment of securities and other valuables from Lippmann, Rosenthal to Germany.146 
The driving out of Jews from the insurance business and the confscation of in-surance assets were not limited to the Netherlands and were pursued vigorously in France and Belgium. The evidence suggests that Allianz was not alone among German companies in showing interest in insurance company shares made avail-able by Aryanization. Thus, at a meeting of the Reich Group Advisory Council on March 6, 1942, Director Bothe complained that the French were resisting par-ticipation of the newly licensed German companies in French companies and mentioned that the Jewish shares were to be sold off.147 It should be clear, how-ever, that the measures themselves were initiated by the German authorities 每 namely, by the military in the occupied areas of France and Belgium148 and, in France, by the Vichy regime. Furthermore, insofar as life insurance policies were concerned, we have seen that the German companies played only a small role in the occupied areas in the West, so the confscation of Jewish insurance assets primarily involved indigenous companies. Insurance policies were not, after all, 
144 Copy of Dresdner Bank an Allianz, 17. M.rz 1942, sent by Hilgard to Alzheimer on March 19, 1942, FHA, AZ 8.1/1. 
145 
The detailed documentation of both offers and shares is in ibid. 146 CABR, Lippmann/Rosenthal, 81379, I Asd. This fle also contains a policy of the Gerling 
Concern. 147 Stenographische Notizen er die Beiratssitzung am 6. M.rz 1942,GDV,RS/28,p. 7. 148 There is a good collection of these orders in CREH, LL 3/12. 
negotiable, and they do not appear to have been deposited initially with other negotiated assets and valuables. In the Netherlands, for example, both the Jews and the companies in question were required to report Jewish-owned policies, but there was some question as to whether Jews might not be allowed to con-tinue to pay premiums and thus defray some of the administrative costs of the companies. It was only in 1943 that Jews and insurance companies were actually required to surrender their policies to Lippmann, Rosenthal, presumably for the purpose of procuring their cash value.149 The process was also fairly slow in Bel-gium, where Jews in late 1941 were actually buying rather large policies based on large single-premium payments, presumably as a means of reducing their seiz-able assets, whereafter the German authorities began to consider banning such sales.150 Nevertheless, a decree of May 31, 1942, required that all Belgian in-surance companies making payments to Jews be obliged to deposit them in a blocked account at the Soci谷t谷 Fran.aise de Banque et de D谷pots.151 
As demonstrated by the report of the Matt谷oli Commission on the despolia-tion of Jewish assets in France, the French authorities and business community, including their insurance companies, were by no means innocent in their applica-tion of the Aryanization process in their own economy. In the case of insurance, payouts to Jews were blocked beyond certain specifed limits 每 18,000 francs be-fore the summer of 1941 and then 10,000 francs in cash or 6,000 francs as a pen-sion 每 and Jews were thus deprived of the full value of their insurance assets by the French government and the insurance companies. Such monies as were paid could often go only into blocked accounts. It is believed, however, that insurance assets in France were of less value than other types of assets and that less interest was shown in confscating them.152 At the same time, there was a bizarre compe-tition between the occupied and unoccupied areas in the appropriation of Jewish assets, as demonstrated by the grotesque reports of Ferdinand Niedermeyer, the German ※Administrator of Assets Forfeited to the Reich in the Territory of the Military Commander in France,§ who had been installed to ensure the confs-cation of assets belonging to non-French Jews, especially German, Czech, and Polish emigr谷s. Niedermeyer 每 who deserves a special place in the history of or-ganized governmental thievery and an even more special place in the history of 
149 See the statement by the Dutch Government on ※Restitution of legal rights with regard to Jew-
ish life insurance policies in the Netherlands after the war,§ United States Holocaust Museum, 
http://www.ushmm.org , Holocaust assets by country. 150 Niederschrift er die Besprechungen der Versicherungsreferenten der besetzten Westgebiete im Haag, 21. Okt. 1941每1.Nov. 1941,AN, AJ 40/835, Bl. 3每10. See also ※Second World War: Final Report of the Second World War Assets Contact Group: Theft and Restoration of Rights§ (Am-sterdam, Jan. 12, 2000), esp. pp. 82每91. 151 See the Lageberichte der Oberfeldkommandantur, 1. Juni bis 1. Sept. 1942, CREH, LL 1/1,Nr. 
21,p.C-17. 152 Contribution sur les Pr谷judices Subis en Mati豕re d＊Assurance au Cours et au Lendemain de la 
Seconde Guerre Mondiale par les Personnes vis谷e par les Lois de Discrimination Raciale§ (Nov. 
1999), which is part of the general report of the Jean Matt谷oli Commission＊s Les Rapports de la 
Mission d＊谷tude sur la spoliation des Juifs de France, in www.ladocfrancaise.gouv.fr . 
art theft 每 was deeply upset that, prior to his arrival, many of the proceeds of such expropriations had found their way into the French treasury, a situation he cor-rected with fanatical dedication. His booty included insurance assets, although it was clearly but a small part of an immense catalogue. In any case, what is now known about the performance of the French insurance companies 每 as well as the French State 每 with respect to treatment of the Jewish insured in no way suggests a moral (or any other kind of) superiority over their German counterparts.153 
Conquest and Expropriation in the East 
It has been shown that German insurance companies exhibited considerable self-restraint in the West European occupied countries. The same was not true in the East. It was in Poland after the German conquest of 1939 that German insur-ers, more than anywhere else, were tainted by the regime in the wake of whose conquests they sought to do business. It is not surprising that Hilgard, in his apologetic account of Allianz after World War II, writes extensively about Al-lianz＊s role in the West European countries but does not even mention Poland; he claims that Allianz＊s purpose in the East was primarly to provide insurance protection and peremptorily states that ※the territories north of old Austria were handled by Allianz and in part by its daughter companies, especially the Bay-erische Versicherungsbank.§154 The latter did indeed have a presence in Poland since the 1920s, although the operating conditions there, particularly in auto-mobile and fre insurance, were such that by April 1939 it was seriously contem-plating cutting its losses and, along with the other German company operating there (Aachener und Mchener), simply pulling out.155 The position of Mu-nich Re in Poland was much more active and powerful; often cloaking its role and working with Generali, the two companies controlled the majority of the largest Polish insurance companies: Generali-Port-Polonia Insurance Company, Patria Insurance Company, and Warsaw Insurance Co. (all domiciled in War-saw) as well as Florianka in Cracow. Taken together, they accounted for half of Poland＊s insurance business.156 
The German invasion of Poland created a complicated situation for the insur-ance business because Poland was divided into three parts.157 The frst of these were the areas annexed to Germany: the Wartheland, Danzig每West Prussia, and 
153 See Niedermeyer＊s report to the Milit.rbefehlshaber in Frankreich of July 4, 1942, and his report 
of Nov. 20, 1944, on his ※achievements§ in France, Bundesarchiv-Milit.rarchiv, RW 35/1188. 154 Hilgard, ※Allianz im 2. Weltkrieg,§ FHA, AZ 1.3/2,p. 38. 155 Aufsichtratssitzung der Bayerischen Versicherungsbank, 27. April 1939,FHA,B 3.3.1/2. 156 Mchener Rk an RWM, 28. Sept. 1939, MR, A 2.14/55. As the documents in this fle (and in 
MR, A 2.14 /54) show, Munich Re often used straw men to cloak its role and it also used Generali 
as a cover. 157 For a good view of the German economic policies in Poland, see Werner Rr, ※Zur Wirtschafts-
politik der deutschen Okkupanten im Polen 1939每1945,§ in Eicholtz, Krieg und Wirtschaft, pp. 
221每51. 
the Upper Silesian territories previously annexed to Poland. The second part was the Generalgouvernement, and the third was the territories taken over by the Soviet Union as a consequence of the Hitler每Stalin Pact. The Generalgou-vernement initially encompassed the area of Poland between the areas annexed to Germany and the areas occupied by the Soviet Union. It constituted an occu-pied area under the governorship of Hans Frank, whose rule was notorious for its exploitative and brutal character. The policy in the annexed area, as Assessor Herzog of the Reich Group put it, was ※the elimination of everything Polish,§ and this meant the transfer of Polish and British assets to German companies. A different policy was pursued in the Generalgouvernement, where most insurance companies had their headquarters and where, for political reasons, the assets of British companies were not confscated and the formal existence of the Polish companies was continued throughout the remainder of the German occupation. Matters remained to be clarifed for the third area, portions of which were to be-come part of the Generalgouvernement (Galizia) while others were to become parts of the Reich Commissariates for the Ostland and Ukraine after the Ger-mans launched their attack on the Soviet Union in June 1941. Prior to this time, Munich Re took the position that the assets of the Polish companies under its control be considered German and/or Italian property and be compensated by the Soviet regime.158 
Despite these complexities, Allianz and Munich Re were very well positioned to do business in a repartitioned Poland, and the arrangements made were an-other illustration of the way in which Munich Re and Allianz worked hand in hand. Thus, on November 9, 1939, Allianz sent a circular to the entire concern defning its role in the former Polish territories.159 The point of departure of this circular was explaining the control of Generali-Port-Polonia, Warschauer, and Patria by Munich Re and Generali. The circular then described the subsequent history of Allianz＊s involvement. Thus, following Poland＊s collapse, the German government had initially appointed trustees for the various Polish companies in the annexed areas while banning German companies from doing business there. Thesetrustees were assignedthetasks ofrunningthe companiesinquestion, both fnancially and administratively, and either liquidating them or presiding over their transfer into German hands. While formally an uncompensated public re-sponsibility, trustee status obviously gave the company so designated an ※inside track§ in beneftting from the disposal of the assets assigned to it. In the instance of Munich Re＊s assigned trusteeships, for example, the concern intervened to ask that Allianz (along with Allgemeine Elementar, which belonged to Generali) be made trustee for the aforementioned Polish companies under its control in the to-be-annexed areas 每 in return for a guarantee of a portion of the portfolios. This was not exactly a chance development. The person charged with assigning the 
158 See Martin Herzog, Beispielsammlung f die Kriegswirtschaftsgeschichte, 18. Sept. 1942,GDV, Personenarchiv, Akte Martin Herzog. On the properties in the Soviet area, see Schmitt an RWM, 
9. Okt. 1939, MR, C 2/16. 159 Orga-Rundschreiben an die Direktionen, 9.Nov. 1939, FHA, S 17.7/70. 
trusteeships in the insurance feld (the so-called General Trustee for Individual Insurance for the Civil Administration of the Occupied Former Polish Territories of the Eastern High Command) was none other than Wilhelm Arendts, general director of Bayerische Versicherungsbank, who had been drafted into military service and, as an insurance expert, was charged with handling the non-German insurance companies in the region. Though obviously given responsibility to serve the occupation authority and not private interests, Arendts was nonethe-less in a position to act according to his lights and certainly must have found it easy to reconcile the public and the private interest. He knew, of course, that Munich Re was a major shareholder in the Polish companies, and asked it to name trustees for the companies. These were trustees who could be counted on: Rudolf Schneider (for Patria), who had worked for a decade in the service of Mu-nich Re; Renato Sambri (for Generali-Port-Polonia), who had long experience working for Generali in Poland along with a retired Regierungsrat Cuntz from Vi-enna; and Edwin Magnus (for Warschauer), a lawyer and highly trusted Latvian ethnic German who had worked for Munich Re in the region for some time and who was to play a key role for Munich Re and Allianz during the occupation.160 
With this authorization from the trustees for Munich Re, Allianz frst negoti-ated with the original government-appointed trustees in Kattowitz, and then in Posen for the so-called Warthegau, and fnally in Danzig for Danzig每West Prus-sia. Allianz took over trusteeship of the portfolios of the Kattowitz branches of Warschauer and Patria as well as the fre, break-in and theft, and glass insur-ance of the Bielitz branch of Generali-Port-Polonia. Erste Allgemeine became trustee for the Kattowitz branch of Generali-Port-Polonia and for the accident and liability insurance of the branch in Bielitz. At the same time, Allianz Leben negotiated to act as trustee in the annexed territories for the relatively small life insurance portfolio of the English company Prudential. By the beginning of January, these petitions were approved and Allianz and Allianz Leben had established themselves in the annexed areas, with branches in Kattowitz under Director Hansgeorg von der Osten and in Posen for Warthegau under Branch Di-rector Gther Klein. By early February 1940, negotiations over the Prudential portfolio were completed, and Allianz Leben along with Allianz were licensed to work in the annexed areas. Furthermore, Bayerische Versicherungsbank trans-ferred its interests in the area over to Allianz and to Kraft and also closed down its operations in Upper Silesia in favor of Allianz. Further changes in organiza-tion were undertaken at the beginning of 1941, when the Allianz administrative control of Wartheland was transferred to Breslau (along with responsibility for Kattowitz) and von der Osten was put in charge in Breslau, while Branch Direc-tor Rudolf Bartholome was placed in charge of the Kattowitz agency. Allianz remained offcially excluded from the Generalgouvernement, where Bayerische Versicherungsbank continued to operate from its branch in Cracow, but it did 
160 Arendts an Mchener Rk, 21. Okt. 1939, and Antwort, 24. Okt. 1939, MR, A 2.14 /54; 
Arendts an Mchener Rk, 21. Okt. 1939, and Antwort, 24. Okt. 1939, ibid.; Mchener 
Rk an Arendts, 24. Okt. 1939, MR, D/6. 
its business for the account of Allianz. However, Allianz did receive permission to handle the policies of ethnic Germans in its own name.161 
To a signifcant extent, the Allianz concern was able to capitalize on the special claims made by Bayerische Versicherungsbank, which as early as September 1939 joined with Aachener und Mchener in complaining that the RAA was allow-ing other German companies to conclude insurance contracts in Upper Silesia instead of giving special consideration to the two companies that had stuck it out against the discriminatory behavior of the Polish government. It was on this basis that Bayerische Versicherungsbank also made appeals to be licensed in the Generalgouvernement. The Poles, however, were gone, and in October 1940 Al-lianz made clear to its daughter company that ※we intend to pursue business in the Generalgouvernement more intensely than before.§162 If Allianz held back in simply replacing Bayerische Versicherungsbank, it was because Generalgou-vernement authorities feared their efforts to control the number of German com-panies wanting concessions would be undermined. At the same time, Allianz was able to to make use of the Bayerische Versicherungsbank＊s claims of mistreatment by the Poles to support and collaborate in the 1941 attempted takeover of the non每life insurance portfolios of the only major Polish insurance company actu-ally controlled by Poles: the Vesta. Bayerische Versicherungsbank asserted that it hadlost 1.2 millionzlotybecausethePolishgovernmenthadrequiredahugebond and other guarantees for allowing Bayerische Versicherungsbank to do business in Upper Silesia in 1929, after which its business was undermined by the govern-ment＊s Polandization program. Nevertheless, Bayerische Versicherungsbank had stayed on ※under the greatest diffculties and sacrifces in the interests of Ger-mandom in Eastern Upper Silesia§ and was now requesting the entire business of the Vesta (excluding life insurance) be given as compensation.163 As in the previ-ous year, when Allianz hoped to replace its daughter company, so now it wished to get the Vesta portfolios directly; but once again the authorities in the Gener-algouvernement were quite insistent that the concession not be exchanged at the expense of the daughter company 每 in order to keep the number of insurance companies in the area under control and reduce paperwork. Everyone knew, after all, that Bayerische Versicherungsbank belonged to Allianz, and that it was the latter whose resources were now driving the concern＊s activity in the area.164 
161 Orga-Rundschreiben an die Direktionen, 9.Nov. 1939, 16. Jan. 1940, und 7.Feb. 1940,FHA, 
S 17.7/70; Rundschreiben vom 15.Feb. 1941,FHA, S 17.7/72. On the booking of Bayerische 
Versicherungsbank＊s work in Poland, see the Sitzungsprotokoll des Aufsichtsrats, 24. Juni 1942, 
FHA, B 3.3.1/2. See also Clemens Maiholzer, ※Die Berliner Allianz-Betriebe vom Beginn des 2. 
Weltkrieges (3. Sept. 1939) bzw. vom Beginn des 51. Gesch.ftsjahres der Allianz Versicherungs-
AG (1. Jan. 1940) bis zu den ersten Jahren des Wiederaufbaues 1945/1946 nach dem Zusammen-
bruch im Mai 1945§ (Munich, 1960) (unpublished ms.), FHA, pp. 5每7. 162 Allianz (Lux und Haase) an die Bayerische Versicherungsbank, 3. Okt. 1940, and correspon-
dence between Walter Schmidt, General Director of Aachener und Mchener, and Arendts, 
Sept.每Oct. 1939, FHA, B 3.6/6 163 Allianz an das RAA, 7. Juli 1941, ibid. 164 Aktennote, 9. und 25. Aug. 1941, ibid. 
There was more business for Allianz to do in the Polish areas annexed to the Reich, and a great deal of it was quite ugly. For one thing, it was impossible not to be involved in the activities of the dominant economic institution of these areas: the Head Trusteeship Offce East (HTO), whose central headquarters were in Berlin. This institution was created by Ging on October 10, 1939, for the pur-pose of taking over the assets of the Polish State and undertaking the measures necessary to Germanize the Polish economy by acting as a trustee for Polish and Polish-Jewish enterprises and assets through confscation, administration, and (insofar as worth doing) sale to German enterprises and ethnic German settlers in former Polish territories. The director of the HTO, Max Winkler, directed a substantial staff in Posen, Zichenau, and Kattowitz. The offce was, to put it quite simply, assigned the task of despoiling Poles and Jews for the beneft of Ging＊s Four-Year Plan and the Nazi racial resettlement programs. It was the HTO, for example, that oversaw the liquidation of the Vesta, most of it done through the publicly chartered Posensche Feuersoziet.t. In June 1943, the HTO branches could boast a balance of 1.5 billion RM as a result of almost three years of organized and systematic government-sanctioned thievery.165 
At the beginning of its operations, all Polish insurance companies 每 including those owned by Munich Re and Generali 每 fell under the purview of the HTO, so that the German insurers acting as trustees for Polish insurance enterprises were formally acting as ※commissarial administrators§ of these companies and guaranteed the insurance obligations undertaken by Polish frms. In the case of life insurance, this extended only to ethnic Germans, thus eliminating all claims by Poles and Jews to payment for their life insurance policies. Property insur-ance, however, was fully guaranteed with the understanding that the insurance companies would receive compensation as part of settlements in the liquidation of Polish assets. Recognizing that most of the real ownership of the major Pol-ish companies had been cloaked and desiring to cut down on time-consuming work and administrative expenses, the HTO terminated the commissarial sta-tus of these companies in January 1942. This was also in recognition of the fact ※that here under diffcult circumstances pioneering work in the German interest entailing heavy losses had been performed and therefore now the Polish daugh-ter companies had to be recognized as German enterprises.§166 
Allianz, Munich Re, Aachener und Mchener, and other German companies were not relieved of their obligations to pay out on prewar Polish policies and on policies of Polish Jews, but they were instructed to make payment of these obligations to the German State. As the HTO made clear in a circular of August 1941, claims by Polish citizens against German companies were to be reported 
165 Jeanne Dingell, ※Die Haupttreuhandstelle Ost, Treuhandstelle Posen: Staatliche Raubze, 
＆deutsche＊ Kolonisierungsbestrebungen und deren Auswirkung auf das warthel.ndische Ge-
sch.ftsleben im Zweiten Weltkrieg,§ unpublished paper presented at the ※Arbeitskreis zur Rolle 
der Unternehmen im Nationalsozialismus§ of the Gesellschaft f Unternehmensgeschichte, 
Frankfurt a.M., January 2000. Ms. Dingell is fnishing a full-length study of the HTO. 166 Report by Krier, HTO, 26.Nov. 1942,BAB,R 144 /194. 
to the local HTO. Such claims were then subject to sequestration by the branch of HTO nearest to where the claimant lived and were confscated when they fell due. Indeed, since the assets of Poles in the annexed areas were subject to confs-cation, most such claims could simply be ignored since they would be confscated anyway. The value of their insurance policies were to be surrendered to the fnan-cial authorities.167 It is a measure of the cynicism and criminal rapacity to which German banks and insurance companies were party that the HTO in August 1942 concluded it would be good to further encourage the Polish propensity to save. As the HTO noted matter-of-factly, this had been signifcantly diminished by the confscation of all Polish savings, but from the outset the idea of encour-aging new capital formation among Poles had been contemplated for ※reasons of credit policy.§ This was why assets acquired after December 31, 1939, were exempt from confscation 每 along with a thousand RM of old assets. As argued in an HTO circular of November 13, 1940, ※so long as Poles and Polish Jews re-main in the areas that have become German and participate in economic life, it has to remain possible for them to form new wealth and especially to keep funds from newly saved or earned money free of confscation in the German credit institutes.§168 The question in 1942 was whether to bring this further to the attention of the Polish public 每 the Polish Jews obviously did not come into con-sideration by this time 每 and encourage saving. In the Economics Ministry there was some skepticism as to whether the Poles had anything to save under existing conditions and also whether it would be a good idea to spell out what the con-fscation policy had been.169 Nevertheless, Krier, the HTO offcial charged with insurance, thought that not only savings but also insurance should be encour-aged among ethnic Poles. As he brutally concluded, ※this should in no way be viewed as a danger to the German interests, since a newly forming upper strata would undoubtedly, as soon as it becomes expedient and necessary, be deported to the Generalgouvernement.§170 The fate of their ※new§ savings and policies can well be imagined. 
While it is doubtful that many Poles insured themselves with German com-panies during these years, the HTO itself and its activities were a source of business for the German insurers and particularly for Allianz. Beginning in 1940, Allianz provided the HTO with liability insurance, automobile insurance (through Kraft), and break-in and theft (!) insurance, as well as a group acci-dent policy for 125 persons that was issued in May 1944. 171 It also provided fre and liability insurance for the Catholic Church properties placed under HTO trusteeship.172 As was the case with Lippmann Rosenthal, the Dutch bank used 
167 Rundverfung Nr. 126, 10. Aug. 1941,APP,HTO/2129. 168 Quoted in Krier an den Reichswirtschaftsminister, 4. Sept. 1941,BAB,R 144 /199. 169 See RWM an HTO, 22. Aug. 1942,BAB,R 144 /193. 170 Krier an RWM, 4. Sept. 1942,BAB, 144 /199. 171 For these policies, see APP, HTO/2128. 172 See the correspondence with Bleckmann, who was in charge of church assets for the HTO, and 
other relevant documentation from November每December 1941 in APP, HTO/13241. 
to collect Jewish assets, Allianz also provided insurance for the transport of con-fscated assets, in this case securities from the HTO to the Reichsbank.173 
The conquests in the East indeed seemed to offer all sorts of opportunities, and oddly this sense of pioneering effort seemed to linger on in an unpublished 1960 account by Director Clemens Maiholzer of the Berlin branch of Allianz during the war. Thus, in describing the building up of the Posen branch, he reminisced: ※Here something completely new had to be created out of nothing, whereby the taking over of the portfolios of free Polish insurance companies pro-vided the frst basis.§174 This comes out even more strongly when he turned to the further expansion of Allianz: 
Soon the business operations of the Wartheland branch expanded to Lodz (Litzmann-stadt), where the Wartheland direction set up a district offce under the leadership of the previousorganizationheadofthebranchdirectioninPommerania,Dr. Hner .... The frst visit in 30. cold, the most diffcult lodging conditions and the initially completely disordered circumstances. It was a ray of light that the German insurance companies and especially the Allianz were welcomed in the most friendly way by the old German frms in Lodz, mainly large textile mills.175 
There were, of course, other old textile and other frms in Lodz, one of the major industrial cities of eastern Europe, and it was a standard piece of HTO self-legitimation to claim that a combination of ※Polish methods of oppression and Jewish greed for proft§ had made it possible for Jews to dominate the in-dustry, drive back German entrepreneurship, and inhibit modernization. The HTO reversed this alleged situation, taking over all the Jewish frms, closing down 1,600 of the 2,600 textile frms, and managing the rest until they could be sold to ethnic Germans and other suitable purchasers.176 As for the Jews, the Wartheland＊s Governor Arthur Greiser ordered that they be sealed off in a ghetto in December 1939 in the anticipation that they would soon be transported into the Generalgouvernement. The plan, in the meantime, was to extract what re-mained of their assets in return for food, which was tantamount to a policy of slow starvation. This policy became problematic, however, when the plan to evacuate Jews to the Generalgouvernement was put off indefnitely. The policy of attrition then appeared counterproductive since, given the death rates, it was becoming clear that the limits of extracting were being reached and that feeding the Jews, however miserably, was still going to cost money. This paved the way for a reversal of policy in which the ※productionists§ 每 that is, those who felt the Jews should work for their survival and that the Reich should beneft from their labors 每 won out. There developed a grotesque community of interest 每 between the head administrator of the Ghetto, Hans Biebow (who took the ※produc-tionist line§) and the head of the Jewish council, Chaim Rumkowski 每 to make 
173 See, for example, HTO an Allianz, 7. April 1942,BAB,R 144 /191. 174 Maiholzer, ※Die Berliner Allianz-Betriebe,§ FHA, pp. 253f. 175 Ibid., p. 254. 176 See ※Die Industrie in Litzmannstadt,§ 27. Aug. 1940, APP, HTO/79, Bl. 139每47, and Rechen-
schaftsbericht HTO Posen, 1939每1942,APP,HTO/1, Bl. 98每103. 
the Ghetto self-sustaining and so permit the Jews to survive in return for work. Biebow not only procured the necessary machinery toward this end but also went about Germany and persuaded various companies (above all, the military) to give the Ghetto contracts for clothing and other items.177 He was always on the lookout for sewing machines, and what better place to fnd them than at the revenue offces that had confscated them from deported Jews all over Germany. They created enough plant and production to require insurance, and Hner and Allianz were in the forefront of those trying to satisfy these insurance needs. Indeed, they insured the transport of those sewing machines to Litzmannstadt from places like Eschwege, Heppenheim, and Gemd.178 
The frst policy taken out with Allianz seems to have been on July 19, 1940,to cover stored Wehrmacht-supplied textiles intended for clothing manufacture in the Ghetto against theft. The value was 100,000 RM and the premium 250 RM. It was to run for three months unless renewed. A similar policy for fur goods valued at 1.2 million RM (with a premium of 864 RM) was issued on Novem-ber 22, 1940. A fre policy on the same items was issued jointly on the same date with Posensche Feuersoziet.t in which each company received a 450 RM premium.179 A year later, however, Biebow and his chief deputy Friedrich Wil-helm Ribbe were asking Hner to arrange for much larger policies to be issued out of the Posen offce that required sharing of the risk among a number of companies. Typical was a three-month January 1942 fre policy for 40 mil-lion RM on military-supplied materials stored all over the Ghetto, for which Allianz issued the policy on behalf of itself (with 20% participation) and a con-sortium composed of Iduna-Germania (20%), Posensche Feuersoziet.t (15%), Schlesische Feuerversicherungs-Gesellschaft (12%), and seven other companies whose participation ranged from 2%to 8%.180 It would seem that Allianz and Iduna-Germania had reached an agreement in handling such large policies, since there were occasions when Iduna-Germania took the lead for an equal percent-age with Allianz. The leading company in such a consortium received a special commission for negotiating the contract on behalf of the others and took re-sponsibility for the basic arrangements. The forms used for the contract itself were provided by the leading company of the consortium. Finally, there was the transport of the fnished products to the military and various companies that 
177 On these policy shifts, see the Niederschrift der Beauftragten des Rechnungshofs des Deutschen 
Reichs er die tliche Prung der Ern.hrungs-und Wirtschaftsstelle Ghetto des Oberb-
germeisters der Stadt Litzmannstadt of April 1940 and the other relevant documents in BAB, R 
2 /56159. See also the helpful discussion in Christopher Browning, Nazi Policy, Jewish Workers, 
German Killers (Cambridge & New York, 2000), pp. 65每70, 83每8, and Hanno Loewy & Ger-
hard Schoenberner (eds.), ※Unser einziger Weg ist Arbeit.§ Das Ghetto Lodz 1940每1944 (Vienna, 
1990). 178 Biebow an Finanz.mter Dieburg, Eschwege, Heppenheim, Gemd, 24. April 1942, und Schrei-
ben Allianz, 24. April 1942, APL, Ghettoverwaltung/31179, Bl. 69每73. 179 The policies are to be found in APL, Ghettoverwaltung/31182. 180 Allianz an den Oberbgermeister von Litzmannstadt, 18. Dez. 1941, APL, Ghettoverwaltung/ 
31179, Bl. 25每6. 
had ordered them, and the insurance companies had to be provided with spe-cifc lists of both insured raw materials being stored in the Ghetto and fnished products to be transported.181 
Needless to say, these lists are a remarkable record of what was being produced by the Jews who labored in this terrible place, but this account must concentrate on the issues raised in assessing the role of those who insured Biebow＊s enter-prise. One of these is the extent to which those present at the negotiations with Biebow and Ribbe ever actually entered the Ghetto and had direct contact with the conditions and persons involved. It is, after all, normal for insurers to in-spect the properties they are insuring and make certain they are not undertaking improper risks. This issue came up in the spring of 1941 when the Ghetto ad-ministration was raising its combined policy (which provided comprehensive insurance against fre, theft, etc.) from 6 to 11 million RM because of its great expansion; Allianz introduced a clause in the new policy calling for a yearly in-spection by the Association of Private Fire Insurance Companies to determine if the safety measures were up to standard. Allianz was informed, however, that permission to enter the Ghetto for such purposes could not be given. Also, there was little point since no materials were available to bring the electric facilities beyond prewar Polish standards. At the same time, Allianz was assured that the Ghetto fre department and the Litzmannstadt urban fre department could deal with any emergency. Another effort was made at the end of 1941, when Allianz 每 acting on behalf of the consortium for a total policy that had risen to 40 million RM 每 suggested that a lower premium might be offered if at least the areas of greatest risk could be directly inspected. Alternatively, it provided a question-naire that might be flled out to help insurers calculate their risks. It was the questionnaire that won out, and no on-site inspections were allowed.182 
These rejections of inspections could only heighten the sense that conditions in the Ghetto were very different from those on the outside. However, there is no reason to think that the insurers engaging in the negotiations actually cared, since they were asking to enter the Ghetto not out of curiosity but rather out of concern for running risks by not engaging in on-site inspection. And even though insurance company representatives never had any direct negotiations with Rumkowski, it was clearly stated by Biebow and Ribbe that the insurers were ultimately dealing with the Jewish council and its leader because it was the responsibility of the Jews to account for the material being insured, make sure it was kept safely, and in effect to cover the costs of the insurance. As Ribbe in-formed Hner, ※I continue now as before to judge the risk favorable, since the Jewish elder places a permanent guard in the work room day and night and be-sides this has an interest in being able to work since this is the only possibility 
181 See, for example, the lists for May每September 1942, which often include information as to the 
destination of the produced goods; ibid., Bl. 526每610. 182 Degner an Biebow, 26. Juni 1941, APL, Ghettoverwaltung/31180, Bl. 22; Degner an Allianz, 30. 
Juli 1941, ibid., Bl. 52; Allianz an Ribbe, 15. Dez. 1941, APL, Ghettoverwaltung/31179, Bl. 23每 
4; Allianz an Biebow, 14. April 1942 und Antwort, 24. April 1942, ibid., Bl. 67每8. 

Allianz transport insurance policy for clothes manufactured in the Lodz Ghetto, issued January 6, 1942. 
for the Jewish community to eke out their subsistence.§183 Rumkowski was in-deed required to inform Biebow what was to be insured (and its value) on the 10th of every month, and the insurance companies were thus well aware of the procedure involved.184 
Insuring the Ghetto, however, was viewed as a lucrative and desirable busi-ness 每 once the companies involved engaged in it. Initially it seemed rather risky, and Allianz was virtually alone in pursuing it; as soon as the amounts involved required a consortium, Iduna-Germania became an equal of Allianz in the busi-ness. Since there were risk limits, Allianz did not seem to object, but it was furious when the Mayor of Litzmannstadt began to push for the publicly char-tered Posensche Feuersoziet.t to take the lead in the Ghetto＊s fre insurance. The old battle between the private companies and the publicly chartered ones thus fared up once again, and in September 1942 the Posensche reminded the Ghetto administration that the Allianz policy would soon come to an end and required a three-month notice. Ribbe opposed such a change, telling Biebow: ※Allianz is the company which laid the basis for our insurance contracts and was the frst that was at all ready to conclude an agreement with us.§ He thought it disloyal to change, but the pressure on Biebow seemed to be too great; he annoyedly told Ribbe to ※dissolve the present contract so that the tiresome matter is fnished once and for all.§185 Allianz did not take this rejection lightly. It had been told by the Mayor of Litzmannstadt that, all things being equal, he had to favor the publicly chartered company. Allianz did not think that things were equal and pointed out that the Posensche did not even do its own transportation insurance but rather acted as an agent for the Zentropa frm in Berlin. Given that Allianz was pursuing such transportation insurance when other companies were not tak-ing the risk, it felt it should receive more consideration.186 There is no record, however, of Allianz having recovered its leading position in Lodz during the pe-riod prior to the dissolution of August 1944, a period of increasing deportations of its inhabitants and their murder at the death camps in the vicinity. 
Lodz was by no means the only site of Jewish forced labor insured by the Allianz concern, as is demonstrated by the case of the forced labor camp Krakau-Plaszow, which lay behind Cracow＊s Jewish cemetery.187 The camp, which was controlled by the SS and police leader of the Cracow district, grew from 2,000 prisoners when opened in October 1942 to 12,000 in the fall of 1943; following liquidation of the Cracow Ghetto, it swelled to 22,000每24,000 
183 Ribbe an Allianz Litzmannstadt, 7. Juli 1941, APL, Ghettoverwaltung/31180, Bl. 34. 
184 
See Biebow an den .ltesten der Juden, APL, Ghettoverwaltung/31179, Bl. 37. 185 Posensche Feuersoziet.t an der Oberbgermeister, Ghettoverwaltung, 11. Sept. 1942, and Notiz 
f Biebow mit handgeschriebener Antwort, 15. Sept. 1942, ibid., Bl. 283每4. 186 Allianz an den Herrn Oberbgermeister, 27. Okt. 1942, ibid., Bl. 482. 187 I am grateful to Marian Rappl for a very useful analysis of the materials on Krakau-Plaszow 
in BAB, NS 3/688, upon which in part I rely here. On the forced labor camps, see Dieter Pohl, 
※Die gro.en Zwangsarbeitslager der SS-und Polizeifrer f Juden im Generalgouvernement 
1942每1945,§ in Ulrich Herbert, Karin Orth, & Christoph Dieckmann (eds.), Die nationalsozia-
listischen Konzentrationslager. Entwicklung und Struktur (Gtingen, 1998), Bd. I, pp. 415每38. 


Letter of Bayerische Versicherungsbank in the name of eight further insurance companies (December 2, 1943) about the conclusion of a fre insurance policy for the forced labor camp Krakau-Plaszow for a temporary coverage of 35 million zloty. 
prisoners by June 1944, when it was formally turned into a concentration camp under the chief economic department of the SS in Berlin. The camp initially ser-viced private frms in the area, the most famous of which was the Deutsche Email-warenfabrik Krakau Oskar Schindler, which actually developed a sub-camp of its own. The disorderly conditions and lines of authority in the camp may have served Schindler well in his heroic rescue work, but the camp itself was notorious for the inadequate provisioning of its inmates and the arbitrariness and brutality with which they were treated. Be that as it may, a consortium headed by Bay-erische Versicherungsbank (which, as noted earlier, was allowed to operate in the Generalgouvernement) offered to insure the entire camp for 3 million zloty 
(1.5 million RM) for a 5% premium which was then further reduced by 10%.188 This offer was made after the offcials of the Cracow branch of Bayerische Ver-sicherungsbank had visited the site, which was in marked contrast to what had been allowed in Lodz 每 and which means that they had direct experience with conditions in the camp. Bayerische Versicherungsbank led the consortium with a 20% share, while Florianka, Generali-Port-Polonia, Orzel, Silesia, and Vesta joined with 16% apiece. In February 1943, the value of the insurance was raised to 6 million zloty (3 million RM), with Orzel leaving and Aachener und M-chener, Adler Versicherung, Allgemeine Versicherungsanstalt Krakau, RAS, and Warschauer joining. Bayerische Versicherungsbank took a 12.5% quota while the others took 10%, except for Warschauer, which took 7.5%.189 In December 1943, a contract for temporary coverage in the amount of 35 million zloty (17.5 million RM) was concluded, and this was followed in January by another tempo-rary policy for 29.8 million zloty.190 At this point, it is unclear whether insurance on the barracks continued; it is highly unlikely since this would be unusual for a concentration camp, into which Plaszow had been transformed. This change of status meant that Bayerische Versicherungsbank was now doing business with Deutsche Ausrtungswerke, because the latter managed the concentration camp factories. This supports the assumption that the policies at this point covered only production and not prisoner barracks. Thus, the fnal policies in April and October 1944 were for 6 and 1.3 million zloty, respectively. This, especially the last-named sum, was much more in line with the insurance provided in con-nection with other concentration camps (to be discussed shortly) and shows by comparison how large were the policies arranged for Krakau-Plaszow 每 at least before it became a ※normal§ concentration camp. One thing is for certain: Bay-erische Versicherungsbank paid very close attention to safety provisions in the woodworking plants, complaining in a letter of June 1944 that its inspection ※did not lead to very happy results.§ The furnaces of the types employed were not 
188 Bayerische Versicherungsbank an die Wohn-und Siedlungsgesellschaft Krakau, 9. Okt. 1942, BAB, NS 3/688, Bl. 59每62. 189 Bayerische Versicherungsbank Krakau an den SS-und Polizeifrer im Distrikt Krakau, 26.Feb. 1943, ibid., Bl. 63每4. 190 Bayerische Versicherungsbank an den SS und Polizeifrer Krakau, 2. Dez. 1943, and SS und Polizei-Frer an die Bauleitung des ZAL, 30.Nov. 1943, ibid., Bl. 44每5. 
normally used in such plants; Allianz insisted that the furnaces be replaced and that proper equipment be installed.191 

Doing Business with the SS 
Thiswashardly the only concentration campto be graced byvisitsof Allianz con-cern inspectors, since it had an insurance engagement with SS enterprises in most of the principal concentration camps: Auschwitz, Lublin, Neuengamme, Stutt-hof, Buchenwald, Ravensbrk, Sachsenhausen, and Dachau. Although highly suspicious of Biebow＊s operations at Lodz and preferring concentration camps to forced labor camps, Himmler had long encouraged the development of an SS economic empire in connection with the concentration camps under Oswald Pohl. The latter, already involved in the economic activities of the SS, was for-mally appointed chief of the head economic offce of the SS in 1942. Here, then, was another set of productivist ambitions, which were already evident in 1938每1939 with the creation of Deutsche Erd-und Steinwerke GmbH and Deutsche Ausrtungswerke GmbH. The latter developed into a holding com-pany for more than 39 companies and 100 plants, many of them in concentra-tion camps and their sub-camps, where they produced, using forced labor, a variety of products (primarily wooden furniture, clothing, and metal objects) for use by the SS and in the camps themselves. Himmler＊s pretensions to the con-trary, they were never the major producers of weapons and munitions he had intended.192 Allianz＊s opportunity to insure these plants came in the early fall of 1940, when they ceased to work for the account of the NSDAP and hence the Party treasurer would no longer insure them. Since they now formally be-came private enterprises run by the SS, they required insurance; the frst fre insurance policies for the plants in Dachau were concluded through Bayerische Versicherungsbank.193 
The head start in this engagement, however, had apparently come a few months earlier in connection with insuring the production of the SS Dachau factories, and it seems by and large to have been the product of the connec-tions of an Old Fighter on its staff. The person in question was subdirector Max Beier, a committed Nazi activist and an energetic insurance man who had 
191 Bayerische Versicherungsbank Krakau an die Deutschen Ausrtungswerke, 27. Juni 1944, ibid. Bl. 16每18. 
192 Walter Naasner, Neue Machtzentren in der deutschen Kriegswirtschaft 1942每1945. Die Wirt-schaftsorganisation der SS, das Amt des Generalbevollm.chtigten f den Arbeitseinsatz und das Reichsministerium f Bewaffnung und Munition/Reichsministerium f Rtung und Kriegs-produktion im nationalsozialistischen Herrschaftssystem [Schriften des Bundesarchivs, Bd. 45] (Boppard am Rhein, 1994), pp. 234每40, and the useful critical article by Jan Erik Schulte, ※Das SS-Unternehmen ＆Deutsche Ausrtungswerke GmbH＊,§ in Ulrich Herbert, Karin Orth, & Chris-tophDieckmann(eds.), Dienationalsozialistischen Konzentrationslager.EntwicklungundStruk-tur (Gtingen, 1998), Bd. II, pp. 558每83. 
193 Chef des SS-Hauptamtes an Chef des V.u.W. Hauptamtes, Amt IIIc, 19. Sept. 1940, and Bay-erische Versicherungsbank an Allianz, 28. Sept. 1940,BAB,NS 3/279, Bl. 154每7, 168. 

Max Beier (1889每1945), subdirector of the Berlin branch of Allianz, about 1934. 
qualifed for the Large Life Insurance Club in 1937 (i.e., he had sold insurance worth a million marks or more in premiums). Beier had made his earlier career in Magdeburg but spent most of his time during the war at the Berlin branch, from which he did a considerable amount of business for Allianz with the DAW. He seems to have courted the high and mighty, and there is a record of his giv-ing a Christmas present to Ging in 1937. He died in a prison in Naumburg in 1945; when his wife claimed a pension, the factory council of the Berlin branch raised no objection but recorded that: ※We consider it important to note that Herr Beier is to be considered completely as a Nazi activist and profteer whose business deals could only be attained through his strong political connections to the SS and the NSDAP.§194 He was regarded more highly by the executives in Berlin. He. had granted him entitlement to a higher pension in 1944 because he was earning so much beyond his normal salary through commissions and pre-miums,195 and when Frau Beier requested that she receive some payment from 
194 Zweigniederlassung Berlin an die Allianz-Versorgungskasse, 13. Jan. 1949, FHA, AVK/909872B. 
He gave Ging a framed picture of the Karl-Ging-Stra.e, IfZ, Sammlung Irving, Ed 100/267. 195 Internal Note of Jan. 21, 1944, ibid. 
his life insurance in 1965, Allianz General Director Alfred Haase responded very warmly 每 saying that he ※gladly remembered Max Beier with whom we experi-enced so many pleasant hours.§196 Haase, in recommending that Frau Beier be helped out, made a point of mentioning how successful her husband had been and that he was well known to He..197 This was probably a reference to the prewar period, however, since Haase spent the entire war in the Army. What-ever the case, Beier＊s activities clearly were well known to the leading directors in Berlin; he was considered an asset when he lived, and his timely demise kept him from becoming a visible liability when that might have mattered. 
Beier provided a variety of insurance products to his SS clients, including au-tomobile insurance and accident insurance for German personnel supervising and working in the plants in the various camps.198 Most important, however, was the fre, theft, and damage insurance for the factories themselves. Beier usu-ally worked through the local Allianz or Bayerische Versicherungsbank offces near the relevant camps, but on at least one occasion, in June 1940, he went him-self to Dachau to estimate the value of the stored wood and plant facilities.199 Needless to say, all the concentration camp plants Beier and Allianz insured in Germany were grim establishments, but those at Auschwitz and in Eastern Poland had a special quality because of their proximity to the Holocaust. In the case of Auschwitz, Beier was frst contacted by the SS offce in Berlin oversee-ing Deutsche Ausrtungswerke and informed that a new factory complex had been set up in Auschwitz 每 similar to those in Dachau and Sachsenhausen 每 con-taining plants for cabinet making and carpentry, a machinist plant, and similar plants that needed insurance; he asked Beier to contact the Kattowitz branch and arrange for the necessary on-site inspection with SS Obersturmfrer Wagner, who was in charge of plants located on the concentration camp grounds. As was the case throughout, the Kattowitz branch handled the actual drawing up of the insurance policies; a Herr Plints undertook the inspection on May 2, 1941, and described the facilities in the four-story building and its fre safety and frefghting arrangements. Premiumsweresetat 1.75% for the building, 2.50% for the equip-ment, and 3% for the stored materials needed for the carpentry work 每 which together were estimated to have a worth of 570,000 RM. Allianz asked, however, that a further inspection be made once the plant went into actual production. The policy was backdated to April 10, 1941; the premium was 1,360.95 RM.200 Another inspection was made at the end of January prior to the renewal of the policy by Alfred Sack of the Kattowitz branch. By this time 250 prisoners were working in the plant, which was expected to employ 700, and the report was more 
196 Haase an Gertrud Beier, 8. Sept. 1965, ibid. 197 Haase an Meister, 8. Sept. 1965, ibid. 198 There is material on the collective policies for both types of insurance in BAB, NS 3/1479. 199 Notiz, 21. Juni 1940,BAB,NS 3/279, Bl. 193. 200 Chef des Amtes III C an Beier, 15. April 1941, Bericht Plints, 8.Mai 1941, Allianzan die Deutschen 
Aufrtungswerke Auschwitz, 16.Mai 1941, Chef des Amtes III C an das Werk Auschwitz, 2. 
Juli 1941,BAB,NS 3/280, Bl. 43, 45每7, 60, and related documents and policies in this volume. 
detailed. It noted that ※as a result of the constant military supervision, there is perfect order and cleanliness. The work is located within the concentration camp Auschwitz, so that the entire area will always be under military guard.§201 
By October 1942, the plants were valued at 1,535,100 RM, and Allianz now gathered a consortium to insure them; it took 25% of the risk, with consortium members Aachener und Mchener (20%), Magdeburger (20%), Schlesische Feuer (15%), Victoria (10%), and Silesia/Bielitz (10%) taking the rest.202 A year later, the value was estimated at 3,217,000 RM and the premium was set at 14,758.15 RM, of which Allianz received 3,704 RM. Although some supplemen-tary policies were drawn up to deal with short-term needs, the basic policy con-tinued at these levels in July 1944. Sack undertook further inspections, although there is no record of them, but the policies themselves were treated as a ※State Secret.§ In September 1944, a new building was put up and there were also new woodworking machines that required a supplementary policy; the fnal policy made by the consortium for Auschwitz, which was to cover the period 1944每1945, beginning October 15, provided Allianz with a premium of 4,220.75 RM. There were, however, some costs: there was a fre in one of the barracks storing textile materials in the women＊s camp on December 22, 1944; the combination of ma-terial loss and other costs, including the wages calculated for prisoner labor, was estimated at 30,000 RM.203 But the Russians were about to arrive, so the matter would have to be settled back in Germany. 
The correspondence between Allianz and Bayerische Versicherungsbank, on the one hand, and the SS authorities and plant managers in the concentration camps, on the other, have a remarkably bland quality and an extraordinary con-sistency. It was, indeed, ※business as usual,§ with some changes in the makeup of consortia, some quibbling over prices, and some demands that safety standards be met. With only a few exceptions, one would never know that the Russians were coming or that there was no future in the business as one reached the end. It is almost a shock when one reads a note of August 15, 1944, from Bayerische Ver-sicherungsbank to the sawmill in the Lublin-Pulawy camp, to which it provided liability insurance, that the policy might as well be terminated since insurance policies ※have become illusory§ because ※of the military conditions that have developed in the area.§204 
In the last analysis, however, the surreal seems to dominate in the insurance history of the concentration camp plants. Thus, in the fall of 1944, SS offcials in charge of the factories were trying to work through the problem of whether they should offer their employees a pension plan or group insurance with Allianz, as proposed by the ever-active Beier. The discussion had begun in September 1943 and had dragged on over a year while the SS mulled over Beier＊s proposals and 
201 Besichtigungsbericht, 29. Jan. 1942, ibid., Bl. 13每17. 202 Allianz an Reichsfrer-SS, Amt W IV, 27. Okt. 1942, BAB, NS 3/217, Bl. 103每5. This volume 
contains a record of the subsequent history and development of the policies discussed here. 203 Schadensregulierung, Dez. 1944每Jan. 1945, ibid., Bl. 2每8. 204 Schreiben, Bayerische Versicherungsbank, 15. Aug. 1944,BAB,NS 3/686, Bl. 13. 
compared them to the much less competitive proposals of the Deutscher Ring insurance. Whereas Allianz offered a policy that promised care for the policy-holder or his family in old age, the latter had a much more rigid policy that did not do so. Though the decision still was not reached at the end of 1944,it ap-peared in 1945 that Allianz would get the contract!205 
Although Allianz seemed to be winning on this front, it was losing on an-other. In February 1945, SS-Obersturmfrer Reinartz of Pohl＊s offce informed Beier that his contracts at Auschwitz, Buchenwald, Dachau, Ravensbrk, Sach-senhausen, Stutthof, and Neugamme were terminated. This was because the agent used by the SS, Hans Bergler, had apparently been able to put together a new consortium to take over the policies on better terms; it was headed by Agrippina-Gruppe and composed of Iduna-Germania, Erste Allgemeine Unfall-und Schadens-Versicherung AG, Helvetia, Gerling, and Nordstern. Neverthe-less, Beier seems to have fought back, and Reinartz agreed to review the two premium schedules on March 6. Beier was thus able to inform Deutsche Aus-rtungswerke on March 25, 1945, asking for an appointment to discuss the question so that the policies could continue. Whether these discussions took place between then and the unconditional surrender of May 8, 1945, and what the outcome might have been, is not recorded.206 
One can imagine why an old Nazi like Beier would cling to his SS business to the very last, but it is diffcult to fathom what would move the new consortium to seek this business in 1945. One answer may lie in the fact that the business world and the insurance companies had become so habituated to working and expand-ing with the regime that it became diffcult not to continue 每 even as the camps and their factories were being captured by Allied forces and the insured plants were shut down, leaving nothing to insure. This is well demonstrated by an-other episode of the Eastern ambitions of Allianz and the Munich Re, which by no means stopped at the Warthegau and Generalgouvernement. In September 1941, they had petitioned the RWM for permission to found a Versicherungs-Aktiengesellschaft f das Ostland 每 that is, a new company to cover Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, and White Russia. They already had daughter companies in the area and warmly recommended Edwin Magnus, who headed up their oper-ations in the Generalgouvernement. Schmitt wrote personally to Hinrich Lohse (Reich Commissar for the Ostland) as well as to the RWM in support of this ef-fort. Nevertheless, the infuence of Schwede-Coburg seemed to dominate here, and in February 1942, Allianz and Munich Re teamed up with Deutscher-Lloyd, Magdeburger Feuerversicherungs-Gesellschaft, and Nordstern in a new effort to create the proposed company. However, this effort failed, too.207 
It was probably just as well, since within a year the insurers were complaining bitterly about damages for which they were forced to pay, which they considered to be war damages but which were not treated as such. As they lamented: ※The 
205 For the discussions and proposals, in which Beier was very active, see BAB, NS 3/1058. 206 For this correspondence between Feb. 2 and March 25, 1945, see BAB, NS 3/216, Bl. 4每9. 207 For this correspondence, see MR, A 2.14 /61. 
political leadership does not want to hear about partisans, and those organs responsible for the security of the State from now on only know about robber bands.§208 But this was not a luxury that the insurance companies could afford, and they began a lengthy battle to have such damages recognized as war damages and to increase premiums to cover such events. These, however, were as nothing compared to the problems of 1944. In September, following the Warsaw upris-ing, Magnus reported that 80% of Warsaw had been destroyed, including most of the insurance offces with which he and the Munich Re had been associated. The time had come to cut losses. Magnus ordered that new business was to be cut off as much as possible and the known existing damages paid off as quickly as possi-ble 每 so as to cut down on potential claims against their Polish companies. As this and other reports demonstrated, the German insurance business in Poland had come to a miserable end.209 It was time to save what could be saved back at home. 
There was no way, however, that Allianz could be saved from the taint of its engagement in the barbarities of the German war effort and of the proximity of the concern and its personnel to the crimes of the regime and the Holocaust. Lodz surely was the worst of its engagements in this connection, and it was cer-tainly a product of the concern＊s continual and oft-stated ambitions to be more ※active§ in the East. It was hard to be ※active§ without being aware of some of the unfolding events 每 certainly not for those who dealt with the ghettos and the camps nor for those who insured the assets of the persecuted back to the Reich for agencies whose purposes and activities were well known. There were cer-tainly some instances where Allianz offcials could quite plausibly not be aware of the horrors underlying their business activity. In 1943, for example, Allianz insured substantial shipments of gold for the Dresdner Bank to Istanbul, with some of the gold in coins and some in bars. All the gold, of course, was stolen, since the Reich by this time did not have any gold of its own, but the fact that some of the gold was victim gold (i.e., gold smelted at Degussa, the point of origin for some of the shipments) was something the insurers were unlikely to know.210 However, it was impossible not to know that the Wzburg construc-tion frm of Ernst Gr, which was working in the East for Organisation Todt, employed 200 men of whom three quarters were Russian POWs or other forced laborers 每 especially since Allianz＊s insurance agent in Schweinfurt informed Bayerische Versicherungsbank of this fact in order to show that the prospect of providing liability insurance for the frm entailed a very low risk because these workers were not paid by the frm and had no entitlement against it.211 Similarly, as noted earlier, Allianz eagerly sought contracts for construction insurance and 
208 Niehuus an das Aufsichtsamt f das Versicherungswesen im Generalgouvernement, 4. Jan. 1943, 
MR, C 2/16. 209 Magnus an Mchner Rk, 19. Sept. 1944, and other reports, MR, A 2.14/55. 210 Altbankarchiv der Dresdner Bank, Konsortial-Abteilung Nr. 430, 4. Etage, Regal 20, Akte 
※Allianz Versicherungs-AG§; Industriebo, 4. Etage, Regal 35, Akte Nr. 94049. One of the 
shipments was actually stolen and Allianz had to pay 32,038 Swiss francs for the loss. On the 
gold shipments of the Dresdner Bank, see B.hr, Goldhandel. 211 Abschrift Schreiben von Meukel an Generaldirektion Mchen, 13. Okt. 1942,FHA,B 3.6/6. 
took considerable pride in all the areas in which it worked, including the con-struction of works for the production of Buna. The most important construction site connected with Buna, after all, was at Auschwitz-Monowitz, but one did not have to go there to fnd examples of terrifying exploitation of forced labor tak-ing place practically wherever construction was going on in Germany and the areas it occupied. Unfortunately, the remaining records are too thin to spec-ify exactly where the Allianz construction insurance men were at work and who they were, but clearly they were everywhere they could be at home and abroad, and they must have seen and experienced a great deal. This does not make them or the concern they served criminal, any more than it was criminal for Allianz, which provided group accident insurance to IG Farben, to request and receive permission to extend such insurance 每 10,000 RM in case of death and 30,000 RM in case of disablement 每 to Austrian engineers working for the company at Auschwitz in 1943. 212 It was just one more piece of business in the Third Reich, but it demonstrated that such pieces on any large scale made contact at some point with all that is represented by the name ※Auschwitz§ 每 from slave labor to extermination 每 virtually inescapable. 
total war and doing business in the face of defeat 
Needless to say, Allianz 每 like every other German frm and concern 每 suffered signifcant losses of workforce as a result of the war and had to undertake a va-riety of measures to deal with the problem. Some 5,000 Allianz employees were called up in 1939 and an equal number in 1940; the numbers were to increase substantially in 1942每1944, when 6,996, 8,340, and 8,700 were called up, respec-tively. Nevertheless, the number of Allianz employees increased from 13,511 in 1939 to 15,190 in 1940, and then climbed in 1941 to 15,967 and to 16,325 in 1942 before descending to 16,030 in 1943 and 15,598 in 1944. The increases of per-sonnel, however, were primarily young trainees, female workers unrequisitioned for other duties, disabled, and retired persons 每 in short, less qualifed person-nel. By 1943, however, Allianz was employing no more than 40% of its prewar personnel, and quantity could never really replace quality.213 At the same time, these persons were laboring under conditions of increasing physical destruction from the air and, in the end, on the ground. 
The burdens of leading the Reich Group became both physically and psycho-logically heavier for Hilgard in the last two and a half years of the war. In the late fall of 1942 he came to the conclusion that Germany was facing a severe catas-trophe and actually said so to his colleagues at the fourth joint meeting of the directors of Allianz and Munich Re on October 28, 1942, at which time he urged measures designed to save some of Allianz＊s most important assets by getting them out of Berlin. Needless to say, such defeatist attitudes did not fnd their 
212 See Neue Frankfurter und Allianz an RAA, 16. und 23. Sept. 1943, BAK, B 280/13214, Bl. 37每40. 213 Hilgard, ※Allianz im 2. Weltkrieg,§ FHA, AZ 1.2 /2, pp. 14每15. 

Der Allianz-Adler Feldpost-Nachrichtendienst (Allianz Eagle Military Postal Informa-tion Service) was sent to drafted employees of Allianz on a regular basis. 
way into the minutes of the meeting, but there is no reason to disbelieve Hilgard＊s postwar assertions in this regard since, as will be shown later, Allianz pursued precisely the policy he advocated.214 At the same time, he was in constant strug-gle with the challenges created by the fanatical Nazis. He was especially plagued by General Director Heinrich Bothe, who headed one of the two property insur-ance groups in the Reich Group and whom Hilgard believed had been assigned the task of shadowing him in his various trips abroad. Hilgard certainly liked his trips to Western Europe, where he felt he could deal with cultivated fellow insur-ance men with whom he had a great deal more in common than Nazis like Bothe and other Party people who were in his company from time to time. Bothe was relatively bearable on such occasions because he spoke not a word of any foreign language, so Hilgard could say what he wished without fear that Bothe would understand a thing. At the meetings of the advisory council to the Reich Group, however, there were a series of nasty altercations. On one occasion, when Bothe aggressively complained that his group was insuffciently represented on a com-mittee, Hilgard ※asks Director Bothe to adopt a more polite tone in this circle. He [Hilgard] is used always to deal politely with those around him .... He has had enough of being subjected to Herr Bothe＊s loutish behavior before the en-tire group.§215 Hilgard was particularly irritated by Bothe＊s tendency to work around him and the advisory council and try to settle questions with Amend.216 
Hilgard＊s own tone had undoubtedly become harsher as he faced the antics of Schwede-Coburg and the proposals of Rath for the nationalization of the insur-ance business. In his capacity as head of the German insurance industry, Hilgard had to do everything possible to meet the demands for total mobilization of the economy as part of total war, at the same time trying to save what he could of the German insurance business in the face of total war enthusiasts like Schwede-Coburg and Bothe. The military and economic situation did seem to put an end to the ※reform§ efforts of Schwede-Coburg and Rath. Hilgard placed consider-able hope in a decree of Economics Minister Funk of February 6, 1943; referring to a confdential Hitler order that all activities not supportive of the war effort were to be terminated, Funk counted among these the debate over reform of the insurance business and ordered a termination of all such discussion. He banned further theoretical discussion as well as the carrying out of plans not relevant to the immediate war effort. While the renewed ban on the reform discussion seemed to provide the private insurance sector with some breathing room, the total war program was another vital threat to the industry.217 
214 Ibid., pp. 27每9. The only such meeting in the late fall was on Oct. 28, 1942; the minutes are to 
be found in FHA, S 17.2/73. 215 Stenographische Notizen er die Beiratssitzung der Reichsgruppe am 25. April 1941,GDV, 
RS/28,p. 1; Hilgard, ※Allianz im 2. Weltkrieg,§ FHA, AZ 1.3/2,p. 130. 216 Stenographische Notizen er die Beiratssitzung der Reichsgruppe am 1.Feb. 1943,GDV, RS/28, 
p. 19. 217 This decree of Feb. 2, 1943, was communicated to all members of the Reichsgruppe on Feb. 6, 
1943,GDV, 3-001; see also Niederschrift er die Beiratssitzung der Reichsgruppe am 5.Feb. 
1943,GDV,RS/28, pp. 7每8. 
Indeed, in early 1943 Hilgard faced the grim prospect of presiding over the vir-tual dismantling of important portions of the insurance business in carrying out total war measures demanded by the regime. Thus, he felt compelled to sum-mon an emergency meeting of the Reich Group Advisory Council on February 5, 1943, after the RWM asked for proposals to signifcantly reduce the number of those employed in the insurance feld. In Hilgard＊s view, three groups of activity had to be distinguished from one another. First, there was the gathering of new business, which encompassed the entire process that began with advertising and ended with issuing a new policy. Second, there was the administration of exist-ing portfolios. Finally, there was the handling of claims. In Hilgard＊s view, the latter two activities were of importance to the war effort and could not be shut down. Thus, the only areas in which Hilgard thought personnel savings were possible were advertising and sales. Even here, however, Hilgard wished to avoid a total shutdown, pointing out that those over 65 years of age were not mobilized and that many such persons needed the money and were available 每 as were those permanently disabled by the war. He thought that one could also continue to use persons for whom insurance selling was a side activity, although this would have to be in the context of the labor-mobilizing efforts of the government. He was also prepared to release offcials and inspectors insofar as they were primarily concerned with gaining new business, and in general thought that the industry could release 10% of its employees by such work reduction measures as cutting back or eliminating auditing and accounting requirements for the rest of the war. In order to maintain effectiveness, however, task reduction would be necessary, and Hilgard urged that 每 for the duration of the war 每 policyholders not be per-mitted to terminate policies in order to take out new ones. This would at once reduce the quest for new business and protect insurance salesmen who had been complaining about losing business while at the front. Hilgard was quite doubt-ful about efforts to consolidate the industry at this point. The experience at Allianz had demonstrated that concentration and consolidation were measures whose benefts became visible only with the passage of time and could not be expected to bring immediate savings of labor.218 
In the discussion that followed, Hilgard met with little opposition from the heads of the various economic groups, although there was a good deal of skep-ticism as to whether one would really reduce the number of employed by 10%. As had frequently been the case at these meetings, Hilgard openly clashed with Bothe. The latter, making reference to developments on the Eastern front, felt that Germany had to conduct total war in the manner of the Russians and ar-gued that all advertising and sales efforts should cease. Hilgard, however, could see no reason ※why I should destroy a large number of existences, people 65每70 years old. There are also among them war-disabled. Why should I drive them into the arms of public welfare?§219 In any case, the ultimate responsibility rested 
218 Stenographische Notizen er die au.erordentliche Beiratssitzung der Reichsgruppe am 1.Feb. 
1943,GDV,RS/28. 219 Ibid., p. 12. 
with him, and Hilgard pointedly told Bothe: ※I can as leader of the Reich Group listen to my advisory council, but then I can always still decide as I will. For the proposals come from me.§220 
Those proposals were sent to Funk on the following day and demonstrated Hilgard＊s willingness to more or less shut down the external service of the in-surance business while keeping at least some portion of it alive by employing the old and the disabled. He claimed there were approximately 82,000 persons (38,000 men and 44,000 women) working in the insurance business in May 1942 and that manpower measures had reduced the total number of employees to between 70,000 and 75,000 since then. He estimated the number of insurance agents and their employees at 13,500. It was this group that he was prepared to see placed at the disposal of the war economy, while keeping their activities as alive as possible with the types of workers mentioned earlier. Hilgard also sup-ported a ban on advertising, the carrying through of measures to simplify the insurance tax, and a ban on change of insurer for the duration of the war. He stressed that the last measure would save a great deal of administrative labor. Finally, he urged the RWM to consider eliminating auditing and fnancial report-ing requirements for a year. Hilgard rejected proposals for consolidating frms or shutting them down, just as he warned against trying to concentrate opera-tions like the handling of all damage claims in one frm, on the grounds that the effort to deal with different types of forms and procedures would create noth-ing but more work and confusion to boot. A very diffcult problem that Hilgard felt needed more consideration was of policyholders seeking added insurance, because underinsurance had become a major problem owing to infation and in-creased damages. Although companies were prepared to provide a margin of increased insurance of about 30% without increasing premiums, actual under-insurance amounted to a great deal more. Announcing the policy would lead to a wave of policyholders asking to increase their insurance, and this would cost much labor. If one said nothing, however, then the policyholders would be ig-norant both of what the companies were prepared to do and of the potential problems they would have.221 
On February 16, 1943, the RWM issued a decree based on Hilgard＊s sugges-tions, and Schwede-Coburg immediately raised objections. It is one of the more grotesque ironies of the politics of the insurance business under National So-cialism that the last hope of Schwede-Coburg and others seeking to nationalize the insurance business now lay in those measures of total mobilization, taken es-pecially at the beginning of 1943, which signalled that Germany was frmly on the road to defeat. Schwede-Coburg complained to Funk that he had not been consulted either about the decree on labor force mobilization or the decree stop-ping work on reorganization of the insurance business. He hastened to remind Funk that many of the preparations for reorganization were designed to simplify the business and reduce labor needs. Schwede-Coburg＊s chief proposal was to 
220 Ibid., p. 19. 221 Hilgard an RWM, 2.Feb. 1943, FHA, S 17.4 /6 and SM, 1458/1/95, Bl. 278每8. 
give his ally Amend and the RAA the right to order measures for simplifcation of procedures in the insurance business.222 This effort to switch the responsi-bility for the labor-saving measures from Hilgard to Amend succeeded and, as Alzheimer gloomily reported: 
Amend can today decide which employees are dispensible and which have to go to mili-tary service; he can have the operations of insurance branches shut down; he has the right to set up joint operations between the operations of individual companies or to under-takeafusion,etc. .... [O]nemustfearthathewillusetheplenarypowersgrantedtohim to achieve his plans.223 
Amend did indeed live up to the expectation that he would use his powers to reduce staffs of insurance companies still further, and this took the form of a decree of March 12, 1943, that threw Hilgard and most of his colleagues into something of a panic. Emphasizing the need for the insurance industry to rec-ognize the demands of the hour, Amend called upon leaders of the larger frms, private and publicly chartered, to undertake an examination of all aspects of their operations with respect to signifcance for the war effort. He warned that this would lead to the termination of many activities important to the business but not necessary for the war effort.224 Toward this end, Amend ordered a cessa-tion of advertising and sales. At the same time 每 and this was the portion of the decree that was most disturbing to the industry leaders 每 he set up percentual guidelines for the release of labor, proposing that life insurance companies strive to retain a maximum of one third of their staffng levels of July 1, 1939, with a target level of 40% for most other staff; health insurance was to limit itself to 40%每50% of its prewar staff size. Even in cases where companies had already cut back to these levels at the beginning of 1943, Amend expected further person-nel reduction of 10%每20% due to the elimination of sales operations. Amend specifcally noted that these requirements already took into account the fact that portfolios had increased in size and value since the beginning of the war and that the quality of the personnel employed had decreased. Among the further mea-sures Amend proposed was a severe reduction in accounting and bookkeeping. Finally, he warned that the sooner the frms undertook to meet these standards, the less likely they were to have interference from his side. To check on perfor-mance, he provided a rather detailed questionnaire for the purposes of verifying the measures taken. 
At the Reich Group advisory council meeting on March 26, 1943, a very upset Hilgard pointed out that Amend had promised to keep him informed before tak-ing measures but had not done so. In the case of Allianz, this would mean giving up 35% of its property insurance staff and 46% of the staff at Allianz Leben. In Hilgard＊s opinion, neither Allianz nor the other companies could continue to operate in an orderly manner under such conditions. The problem, as Hilgard 
222 Schwede-Coburg an Funk, 23.Feb. 1943; Stellungnahme, ibid., Bl. 217每21. 223 Mitteilung Alzheimer, 8. M.rz 1943,SR, FA A7.3-03. 224 RAA an die greren Versicherungsunternehmungen, 12. M.rz 1943,GDV, 0-101, Bd. 1. 
saw it, was that Amend＊s guidelines refected the basically false assumption that most of the labor-saving measures he was proposing needed to be undertaken. In reality, they had already been put in place so that further savings of manpower could not be expected from them. Hilgard＊s concerns were widely shared by his colleagues (with the exception of Bothe, who apparently felt that any order from on high was more or less feasible by defnition), and they added other consid-erations not present in the Amend decree 每 namely, the effects of bombing on productivity and the complication of operations arising from these and other war-induced conditions (e.g., increased death rates). The dilemma was to either carry out the orders and answer the questions by the unrealistic deadlines or face the charge of engaging in economic sabotage.225 
As was so often the case, Hilgard turned to the RWM for help, and on March 31 he sent a long letter of criticism and protest aimed at Amend＊s decree. Hilgard spoke for himself and his colleagues 每 a point to which Bothe objected, claiming to be misrepresented by Hilgard 每 in arguing that the demands were not feasible and would only bring disorder into the insurance business without beneftting the war economy. He went on to detail the false assumptions under which the RAA was operating and to reiterate his claim that sales by the elderly and war wounded were in no way costly in manpower.226 Indeed, some ten days later, Hilgard was able to describe the futility of the RAA＊s demands with the example of Bayerische Versicherungsbank, which had placed 70 of its employees at the disposal of the labor exchange in Munich on April 1 as required in the RAA decree 每 only to fnd that the labor exchange refused to take them and asked that no such further actions be taken since it was not in a position to process them. Hilgard noted various cases where employees thrown on the market by insurance companies were unable to fnd the suitable war-essential jobs for which they were let go.227 
Although certainly not so intended, the decree is useful to the historian seek-ing to gain some sense of Allianz＊s situation in the fnal phase of the war, since Allianz (along with all the other companies) had to fll out the RAA question-naire.228 Hilgard provided the answers, which refected the current situation of Allianz and how involved the company had become in the war effort. He pointed out that rationalization 每 once undertaken to cut costs and increase profts 每 had since, because of military requirements, increasingly taken on the exclusive pur-pose of wringing as much productivity out of as little labor as possible. The concern had lost half its trained male and female personnel to the war effort, and these had been replaced by wounded and disabled persons and pensioners over 65. It had become highly dependent on untrained employees, and sick leave, which had doubled since 1938, had increased 20% between 1941 and 1942. Air raids increasingly taxed the physical and mental endurance of the work force. 
225 Stenographische Notizen er die Beiratssitzung am 26. M.rz 1943,GDV,RS/28. 226 Hilgard an RWM, 31. M.rz 1943,SM, 1458/1/95, Bl. 82每91; Bothe an die Reichsgruppe, 10. 
April 1943, ibid., Bl. 131; Hilgard an Bothe, 13. April 1943, ibid., Bl. 132. 227 Hilgard an RWM, 12. April 1943, ibid., Bl. 134每5. 228 For this discussion, see ※Bericht an das R.A.A. vom 27. April 1943,§ FHA, S 17.4/6. 
At the same time, wartime conditions had multiplied paperwork. Many policy-holders were changing their residence or were diffcult to locate because of the war, while others had lost their policies. Despite all this, Hilgard was prepared to offer another 1,122 persons to the labor exchanges, but he warned that this was the outer limit of sacrifce. 
He went on to remind the RAA that Allianz performed a variety of services vital to the war effort: heading the Luftpool, running a testing laboratory for materials in Berlin-Mariendorf, and providing machine insurance (whose pre-miums had doubled between 1938 and 1942). The same held true for transport insurance. Though the automobile insurance business had decreased, the paper-work connected with it had become more complicated and time-consuming. In fre insurance, the war had certainly brought more business, with premiums for Allianz climbing from 31.9% of their business in 1938 to 41.5%in 1942.The problem was that damages and claims, especially those due to air raids, had climbed even more, from 54.5%in 1938 to 72%in 1942. While the traditional foreign business of Allianz had been reduced or eliminated in areas under Allied control, Allianz was highly active in the conquered areas and had been com-pelled to set up a host of new offces that faced not only their normal tasks but also the special tasks associated with working in non每German-speaking areas. In short, Allianz was overextended, and the efforts to master the tasks involved with unskilled employees and 60-hour work weeks necessarily had their limits. 
Yet in making his case, Hilgard also demonstrated how inextricably involved Allianz had become in the German expansion and German war effort. This was particularly evident with respect to the East, where Hilgard stressed that Allianz had been granted the right to provide insurance protection to German interests in the Generalgouvernement, and this involved building up a complicated new portfolio and the setting up of a major business offce in Cracow as well as offces in various Polish cities. Even more important in adding to the labors of Allianz, however, was the expansion in the Eastern territories annexed to Germany. Hil-gard＊s summary demonstrated the scale and scope of Allianz＊s activity: 
Here there was an uncommonly complicated reviewing and liquidation of what had re-mained of former business offces of three Polish corporations in Gotenhafen, Posen, Kat-towitz and Bielitz and, alongside their administration in the capacity of a trustee (which included also a number of properties) and the taking over of ethnic German and Polish personnel, there was the building up of a large, new, German portfolio. Our branch in Kigsberg, which now had to care for the Memel territory, and the districts of Sulwalki, Bialystok and Zichenau, had to be built up along with the Danzig branch responsible for the Gau Danzig每West Prussia and the new District Offce in Bromberg. Also, the branch offce in Breslau had to be built up into an independent regional headquarters, to whose area of competence belongs Lower and Upper Silesia, the East Sudetengau, and the Warthegau with the newly established branch offces of Posen and Kattowitz and the district offce in Litzmannstadt.229 
229 Ibid., pp. 8f. 
In arguing for the retention of as much of the Allianz labor force as possible, Hilgard understandably placed great emphasis on the role of construction insur-ance, whose importance to the German war effort has already been discussed. Hilgard stressed that no competition among insurance agents was involved be-cause the premiums were defned by the price commissar, who also determined what the construction companies could charge. Nevertheless, it was necessary to have staff on the spot to determine costs and risks under wartime conditions. He employed testimony from Organisation Todt, which warned that reducing the company＊s effectiveness would have negative consequences for the drawing up of proper contracts and the control of prices. Speer＊s Armaments Ministry and the Air Ministry also testifed to the importance of Allianz＊s services in this area. Here at least Hilgard had a good case 每 but from a historical perspective, his argument constitutes strong evidence of the concern＊s direct and heavy in-volvement in the war effort. 
Such contributions to the war effort did not end all efforts to comb out nonessential industries likeinsurance, but both the RAA and the RWM seemed to become quite concerned by late 1943 and during 1944 that call-ups were reaching the point where the entire fnancial sector (i.e., banks and insurance companies) would become nonfunctional. The situation was worsened by the tendency of Gauleiter and Party offcials to take matters into their own hands and take ac-tions that ran contrary to the ministry instructions. Yet another problem was the military call-up of key persons in the companies and the threat this carried of decapitating the company operations for which they were responsible. 
It is interesting to note that the Allianz offces in Berlin were permitted by the labor offce to use some 40 foreign employees, who were either prisoners of war or foreigners obligated to work in Germany (12 of them French offcers and 20 Czechs, all of whom had worked in the insurance or banking sectors back at home) as well as such employees from Belgium, the Netherlands, and Latvia. Director Maiholzer described them as ※forced laborers,§ but he hastened to add that relations with these persons were especially good, that they pitched in with their German compatriots in air raids, and that they were well treated. Given that these individuals were familiar with the kind of work being done at Allianz, which was certainly less onerous than that done by forced labor in industry, Maiholzer＊s claim seems plausible. Apparently, the Berlin offces also employed some Jews and part-Jews supplied by the labor offce, and Maiholzer claimed they were never subjected to abuse by supervisory personnel. In any case, the concern cannot be considered a signifcant employer of forced labor because the priorities for assigning such labor lay elsewhere.230 
Therefore, in the last years of the war, Allianz clearly had more business than it could handle 每 both because of the volume and increasingly high premiums in 
230 See the Niederschrift er die Beiratssitzungen von 1. Okt. 1943 und 14. April 1944,GDV, RS/28, 
and Maiholzer, ※Berliner Allianz Betriebe,§ pp. 22每3. See, in general, Ulrich Herbert, Fremdar-
beiter. Politik und Praxis des ※Ausl.nder-Einsatzes§ in der Kriegswirtschaft des Dritten Reiches 
(Berlin & Bonn, 1985). 
certain cases due to war risk and damage and also because it did not have the personnel it needed to deal with the situation. It would be utterly senseless to try to account for the concern＊s status during this period in terms of proft and loss, since one would not be dealing with anything remotely resembling a nor-mal economic or fnancial situation. To begin with, Allianz 每 especially Allianz Leben, which was the repository for the concern＊s major investments 每 was in-vesting more than ever in a losing war. The headline of one newspaper article in late 1942, ※Life Insurance in the Service of War Finance,§ accurately stated the inescapable reality.231 As of September 1, 1942, insurance frms were required to invest three quarters (rather than two thirds) of their available means in Reich bonds, and these bore 3.5% instead of the previous 4.5% interest.232 Such in-vestment was made all the more necessary by the severe restrictions imposed by the RWM on loans to industry and municipalities in the fnal war years. Such loans had to be demonstrated as absolutely essential to the war effort in order to justify not using the available funds to invest in Reich bonds. Also, insur-ance companies were forced to charge a higher interest rate for industrial loans (so as to make them less attractive), and the rate could only be lowered in the case of wholly or partially government-owned companies.233 It was a sign of the times, however, that the insurance frms were urged not to request that the Reich bonds in which they were investing be sent to them, since they were in danger of burning up in air raids, but rather have their investment noted in the Reich Debt Ledger, which was allegedly safe. Indeed, while the companies were compelled to invest their paper Reichsmark in paper assets, their real assets were burning up. In its report to the supervisory board of December 8, 1944, Allianz Leben noted that, at the end of 1943, 10.5% of its property holdings had been totally destroyed. The net book worth of this property amounted to 21.2 million RM 每 that is, 27% of the total net book worth of its properties. Another 56%ofits properties were partially damaged, the repair of which was roughly estimated at 4.2 million RM. At the same time, 12% of the properties on which Allianz Leben held mortgages were totally or very severely damaged 每 40.8 million RM in value, or 9.5% of its entire mortgage investment.234 Naturally, more was to come in 1944 and the frst months of 1945. 
Needless to say, the business headquarters of insurance companies were in no way immune from bombing, and one of the decisions made at the meeting of the Allianz and Munich Re directors on October 28, 1942, where Hilgard stated that the war was lost, was to deal with the implications of Allianz＊s exposed situation in the center of Berlin. A decision was taken to begin removing all the securi-ties held by Allianz to areas that were less endangered. Thus, starting in early 
231 Mchener Neueste Nachrichten, 28./29.Nov. 1942,GDV, 2-066/1. 232 Rundschreiben vom 23. Jan. 1941, 13. Jan. 1943, 6. Jan. 1944,GDV,RS/22. 233 RWM an Reichsgruppe, 14. Aug. 1943, and correspondence within Allianz Leben concerning the 
problem of industrial credits of Feb.每March 1944,B 1.3.1/23. 234 Bericht vom 8. Dez. 1944,BAB, 80 Ba 2 /P 5776. 

The Allianz headquarters on Mohrenstra.e 63/64 after being severely damaged during Allied air raids of Berlin in 1944 and 1945. 
1943, especially reliable members of the fnance department were given the task of undertaking numerous trips to transport these securities to friendly banks in various towns 每 such as Straubing and Deggendorf in Bavaria, but also to Weimar and Sonnenberg in Thuringia 每 for safekeeping. Given the war situation in Ger-many, these actions were undertaken at no small risk to those involved. Some of those responsible continued to demonstrate their company loyalty and initia-tive at the end of the war: Director Ernst Manteufel took the securities stored in Thuringia to Coburg before the Russians came, and Walter Bredow of the fnan-cial section (along with his wife) violated American orders to stay in Straubing and managed to carry all the heavy sacks flled with securities registers some 25 kilometers for safekeeping in a peasant＊s barn. This enabled Allianz to have demonstrable title to these assets later on.235 
Unhappily, Allianz was less solicitous of its historical and managerial records, most of which 每 especially the papers of the central management in Berlin 每 suffered destruction or became widely dispersed as a consequence of the bomb-ings of its Berlin buildings. The frst of these bombing raids took place on the night of November 23每24, 1943, when the recently built Allianz Leben build-ing on the Mohrenstra.e was virtually destroyed. Some days later, the spacious quarters of Frankfurter Versicherungs-AG on the same street was totally demol-ished. A hiatus followed until April 29, 1944, when further devastation was visited on the buildings in central Berlin, this time on the Taubenstra.e, which housed the headquarters for the Air Insurance Pool and Kraft. The latter shortly afterward moved its central offces to Hitz in the Sudetenland, one of over a hundred safety areas used by the various divisions and branches of Allianz and other companies seeking to escape the Berlin bombing and to continue oper-ations as best they could. In contrast to the frst two big raids, the third raid affecting the Berlin headquarters took place on February 3, 1945, during work-ing hours and cost the lives of seventeen employees as well as other persons from the vicinity who used Allianz facilities and shelters. The area around the Al-lianz headquarters was severely damaged by the bombing, as were the buildings of Allianz. By this time, however, air-raid shelters had come to serve as work-places as well as places of refuge against Allied raids. Indeed, even after the war, on November 28, 1946, an Allianz building on Taubenstra.e, in which Allianz Leben archives were stored and which was also used to continue such opera-tions as were possible, was destroyed in a fre that could not be put out owing to inadequate water supply. The days of Allianz＊s presence in this part of Berlin were numbered anyway, and the dreams of a great administrative building on the Runder Platz had certainly dissolved in the ongoing catastrophe that was de-stroying much of the record of the past and leaving a very uncertain future in its wake.236 
Nevertheless, there were still immediate problems to be solved by the end of 1943, and matters were not made easier by the fact that Allianz had to share some of its quarters with government agencies and personnel whose own quar-ters had been bombed out. In November, Allianz sought permission to purchase a property in Berlin-Scheberg as a temporary solution to the problem of hous-ing its Berlin branch until such time as the buildings on the Runder Platz could be built. They estimated it would take at least two years or more for the build-ing to be completed, quite aside from the fact that the plans for the fa.ade, which would require Hitler＊s personal approval, had not yet been drawn up. 
235 Hilgard, ※Allianz im 2. Weltkrieg,§ FHA, AZ 1.3/2, pp. 47每51. 236 On the bombing raids, destruction of documents, and fre, see Maiholzer, ※Berliner Allianz-
Betriebe,§ FHA, pp. 81每9. 
Originally, Speer had granted permission for the branch to stay at its headquar-ters in the Bellevuestra.e 14 but had then gone back on his promise because the Bellevuestra.e building would have to be torn down to make room for a new Reichsmarschallamt. Apparently Allianz intended to take out a credit to purchase the building. The RAA refused the request in February 1944 on the grounds that such purchases could only be allowed in special cases; they could not view the proposal as either necessary for the war effort or particularly press-ing. A renewed petition in August 1944 was also turned down at the end of the year by both the RAA and the RWM despite the backing of Speer＊s offce, which claimed that construction on the Reichsmarschallamt would continue de-spite the use of construction workers to repair bombed buildings. But the RAA was not impressed by the arguments of Allianz that the purchase was important for the war effort and that the Reichsmarschallamt, even if not built during the war, would most certainly be built right after its end. While these surrealistic ex-changes were going on, portions of the Berlin staff seem to have been transferred to safer quarters on the outskirts of Berlin 每 along with documents needed for their everyday activity 每 and had to be compensated for their travel costs. It was a measure of the desperateness of the situation that Allianz Leben showed inter-est in the offer of a Hamburg broker of Dutch houseboats and other vessels that might be used as offces, some of these having already been sold to agencies in Berlin. The Allianz Leben offcials involved thought the houseboats too small, but asked to be informed should larger ships come on the market.237 
Despite all these diffculties encountered at home in Germany, Allianz and Munich Re sought as much as possible to protect their old interests in neutral nations: Spain, where they controlled Plus Ultra; Sweden, where the Bore stood under their domination; and Switzerland, where Allianz held the majority of Schweizerische National-Versicherungs-Gesellschaft and Munich Re controlled the Zich-based Union Rkversicherungs-Gesellschaft. In contrast to the oc-cupied areas (where the Germans could anticipate being thrown out) and the enemy states (where assets had already been confscated and, if at all returned, then only with the greatest diffculty), Allianz and Munich Re could at least entertain the hope of having a continued presence in neutral states after the war. Also, even before and then increasingly during the war, Munich Re had pursued a policy of acquiring assets abroad with which its business partners in neutral countries could fulfll Munich Re＊s obligations to those it reinsured, even in the occupied areas, in the event that Germany lost the war and was barred from fulflling its business obligations.238 All this made efforts to cloak and protect their interests in these countries 每 especially Spain, Sweden, and 
237 For the correspondence on the building purchase in Berlin, see BAB, R 3104/20512, Bl. 3每15.On 
the transfer of work to Berlin safe areas, see Maiholzer, ※Die Berliner Allianz-Betriebe,§ FHA, 
pp. 48每51. On the ship offer, see the Notizen of the Vermensverwaltung, Berlin, 26.每28.Feb. 
1944, FHA, B 1.3.1/23. 238 Von Reininghaus an Prss, 3. Sept. 1946,SR, FA A 7.3-03. 
Switzerland 每 appear worthwhile, despite the fact that they were all on the Al-lied blacklists and were coming under increasing pressure as the outcome of the war became more obvious. 
Notwithstanding the costs and diffculties of the Spanish Civil War, Plus Ultra, which Allianz had built up from a small Catalan insurance company to one of the major companies in Spain, continued to enjoy the solicitude of Allianz and Munich Re. The latter had sold its interests in the company to Allianz in 1933, but then repurchased 50%in 1940 under the new common interest agreement of that year. In 1943 there were strong tendencies toward economic nationalism in Spain, and the fear arose that the Spanish government would demand that the majority control of the company be placed in Spanish hands. Allianz had long pursued a policy of instructing its employees to always refer to Plus Ultra as a ※friendly company§ rather than the ※daughter company§ that it really was, but this no longer fooled anyone, if it ever had.239 That Plus Ultra was on the Allied blacklist compounded the problem, since it hurt the company＊s business and pro-vided yet another reason for reducing German control. The problem was thus to fnd reliable Spanish shareholders who could be counted upon to administer the company properly and at the same time look after German interests until they could be recovered under more auspicious circumstances. Needless to say, no guarantee that they would so act could be demanded or given, and so the entire cloaking effort was both risky and adventuresome. The key fgures in carrying out this plan were Hilgard and Karl-Friedrich von Schlayer, who headed the Paris offce of Allianz and regularly travelled to and from Madrid 每 the formalities of his journey made easier by the assistance of a young border guard who had been in Allianz＊s service. In the spring of 1944, Hilgard and von Schlayer met together in Madrid with Spaniards whom they believed reliable enough and concluded an arrangement for the transfer of the largest portion of their holdings into Spanish hands. All this was accomplished with a great deal of friendliness and hospi-tality; at a dinner party in March 1944 hosted by the supervisory board of Plus Ultra, there were expressions of confdence in Germany and a German victory. Hilgard found it all quite painful, but he was confdent that he had done the right thing. The same cannot be said for Hans He., who, as Hilgard reported, ※viewed my trips to Madrid with disapproving eyes and condemned my position in Madrid in every respect.§ He., who apparently felt that Hilgard＊s arrange-ment was too risky, actually travelled himself to Madrid a number of times in the unfulflled hope of changing the arrangement. Hilgard proved right in the end with respect to the probity of his Spanish shareholders, although their man-agement of the business was less than satisfactory.240 
Allianz was to have much less luck with the Bore company, which was headed by a very pro-German Swede, G. Juhlin-Dannfelt. Hilgard made numerous trips 
239 See the Rundschreiben der Organisations-Abteilung der Allianz, 4. Dez. 1935,FHA,AZ 5.1/4. 240 Hilgard, ※Leben,§ pp. 131每3, FHA, NL 2 /7. See also the documents in MR, A 2.20/127, espe-
cially the Aktennote of 1. Okt. 1943 and MR, A 2.20/128. 
to attend to its affairs but became increasingly skeptical about chances for keep-ing the company in view of the growing hostility toward Germany and Juhlin-Dannfelt＊s excessive public support of Germany. Toward the end of the war, German assets were frozen at Allied request, and the Germans apparently had great diffculties getting back anything. As Hilgard bitterly noted in his post-war memoirs: ※I cannot get over the fact even today that Sweden, upon whose loyalty we had all counted as being as frm as a rock, was after the war among the countries that showed the most enmity with respect to the return of German property, at least insofar as we were concerned.§241 
However, Switzerland was the most important country from the standpoints of Allianz and Munich Re foreign holdings and international insurance business. Quite aside from the signifcant business conducted by the Swiss daughter com-panies of these German concerns, Schweizer National and Union Rk took on additional signifcance in wartime as a means of continuing to conduct business in enemy states and as instruments to cloak some of the German interests in the occupied areas. Nevertheless, by May 1940 Schweizer National was already complaining about the burdens of the Allied blacklist. In a meeting between Schmitt and General Director Hans Theler, the latter pointed out that Schweizer National had suffered a loss of half a million Swiss francs and was suffering at-tacks from the competition; something had to be done to meet Allied conditions, since there was no point trying to negotiate with the Allies. Theler proposed that Paul Jaberg, president of Schweizerische Bankgesellschaft and vice-president of Schweizer National, resign from the supervisory board of Munich Re and that business dealings with the German companies be suspended. Schmitt found this too much and, while respecting Theler＊s managerial capacities, believed that his sympathies lay with the Allies. Nevertheless, these actions were approved since even He., to Schmitt＊s irritation, believed them necessary.242 
In late May 1940, of course, the Germans were in control of Paris and the French were no longer blacklisting German-owned frms, but by May 1943, Theler was once again complaining to He. that the blacklist was ruining his transportation insurance business and was hurting in other areas. Through Schweizer National＊s agent in Bern, they had come into contact with the British embassy and believed that they could get off the blacklist if only the Germans refrained from appearing at administrative board meetings and limited their reinsurance involvement to 20%. He. understood the relationship between Schweizer National and Allianz/Munich Re to be one of partnership, however, and would only agree if there was a clear commitment to prolong the relation-ship and to keep funds in reserve for subsequent reinstallation of the German quota. He.＊s opinion was shared by Rudolf Ernst (president of the adminis-trative board) and Vice-President Jaberg, both of whom agreed to reaffrm the commitment to the relationship without putting this into the minutes of the 
241 Hilgard, ※Leben,§ pp. 133f., FHA, NL 2 /7. 242 Aktennote Schmitt, 10.Mai 1940, MR, A 2.19/109. 
offcial administrative board meeting. Yet another point of discussion was that Theler asked the two German companies to reduce their shareholdings from 43%to 20%, which meant surrendering 1,180 shares. In the negotiations over this issue at the end of 1943 with Ernst and Jaberg, Alois Alzheimer insisted that such a reduction in no way prejudice the existing reinsurance quotas. In Alzheimer＊s negotiations with Theler, he sought to pin the latter down by con-ceding a reduction of the reinsurance quota from 50%to 33-1/3% if Schweizer National would agree to continue to view the relationship between Schweizer National and themselves as one similar to the relationship existing between Al-lianz and Munich Re. Once again, the leaders of Schweizer National appeared to agree to the German proposal. It rapidly turned out, however, that Theler also wanted the reinsurance quota permanently reduced to 20%soastoavoid being put on the blacklist again decades down the road, and that there had been a misunderstanding in the negotiations.243 
This issue was a matter for the Swiss bankers on the administrative board, and it soon became apparent that they were trying to get as much of the best of both worlds as they could under diffcult circumstances. On the one hand, Ernst and Jaberg were anxious not to offend the Americans, since their Schweizerische Bankgesellschaft had substantial interests in the United States.244 On the other, Jaberg seemed prepared to give a verbal promise that Schweizer National had the right to give the shares back to the Germans within fve years. Schmitt found this too vague and unsatisfactory a commitment, however, and emphasized the his-torical relationship between the two German concerns and Schweizer National. Munich Re had played a great role in getting Schweizer National back on its feet and supporting it fnancially in 1921, and this transaction between Allianz and Schweizer National had established a special relationship. Allianz had given up its majority to help Schweizer National out at the beginning of the war, and now it was reducing its holdings still further, but it could not tolerate a total alien-ation of its holdings without jeopardizing its own future prospects. Schmitt was prepared to have the shares placed in a deposit but was not prepared to sell the 1,180 shares in question. After a considerable amount of complicated negotia-tion, much of it created by the fact that Ernst and Jaberg had already promised to let two private bank houses sell the shares to their customers, an agreement was reached under which the bank houses in question received 250 shares; the 930 re-maining shares were to be deposited with Schweizerische Bankgesellschaft. The repurchase of these shares by the German companies was to be guaranteed by the creation of a special deposit of securities of equivalent value. That this was intended to be a cloaking operation was made manifest by the second point of the agreement as outlined by Schmitt, ※that the Mchener and Allianz have not agreed to this transaction and do not know anything about it. In their view they remain shareholders and consequently will not place this transaction on their 
243 Aktennote 18.Mai 1943, and Aktennote Alzheimer, 18. Dez. 1943, ibid. 244 The bank was the forerunner of the United Bank of Switzerland (UBS). 
books.§245 Finally, after the war and ※the calming of the political situation,§ the conditions as understood by the two German concerns would be restored in that the 930 shares would be returned at the going market quotation and paid for from the aforementioned deposit. At the same time, it was hoped and ex-pected that the private banks of Roguin and Lombard and Odier & Cie. would hold the shares for resale to the two German concerns. Jaberg assured Schmitt that his arrangement had the agreement of his colleagues, and Director Hans Grieshaber of Union Rk was subsequently asked to serve as trusteee. Hence, for all intents and purposes, the 1,180 shares (1,000 of which belonged to Allianz and the remainder to Munich Re) were secure, as was the relationship between the two German concerns and Schweizer National. Indeed, this impression was strongly confrmed when Alzheimer met with Theler in March 1945 in Zich and the latter emphasized his desire to continue the relationship as soon as con-ditions allowed. As became evident after the war, however, the agreement turned out to be the stuff of which lawsuits are made.246 
The other important direct holding in Switzerland that was in increasing jeop-ardy as the war came to a close was Union Rk, founded in 1923 by Munich Re, which held 80% of its shares despite its Swiss management under Director Hans Grieshaber and the administrative board headed (as in the case of Schweizer Na-tional) by Ernst and Jaberg. Schmitt, Alzheimer, and other Allianz and Munich Re leaders were constantly travelling to and from Switzerland, dealing with the affairs of Union Rk as well as of Schweizer National. In July 1943, for exam-ple, Schmitt and Alzheimer visited Grieshaber for the purpose of transferring Munich Re Italian business to Union Rk because of the political situation in Italy, and Union Rk was granted all kinds of powers to act for Munich Re as the political situation for Germany steadily deteriorated.247 In November 1944, Munich Re petitioned the RWM to permit Alzheimer to travel to Switzerland and look after its affairs, pointing out that Union brought in 40 million in pre-miums and handled many kinds of business in other countries where Munich Re had diffculties working because of Allied pressure. This included portions of Munich Re＊s earlier Argentine, Portuguese, Turkish, Finnish, Bulgarian, and Ro-manian business, as well as Spanish and Swedish business of more recent vintage. The question of how to declare such business in the balances of Union Rk in a manner that was acceptable to the Swiss supervisory authorities was a special problem under the existing circumstances, but the Union Rk also needed reg-ular advice on technical issues in the management of the portfolios being sent its way if Anglo-American competitors were not to gain control of them. Union Rk＊s problems became worse in December 1944, when the French government 
245 Streng vertrauliche Aktennote von Schmitt, 20. Jan. 1944, ibid. 
246 Aktennote Alzheimer, 15. M.rz 1945; see also the contract between Union Rk and Schweiz-erische Bankgesellschaft and the Zusammenfassung der Verhandlungen, 26.Mai 1944, ibid. 247 The remaining fles of the Union Rk are to be found in the archive of Swiss Re. See especially the Aktennote and correspondence of July 1943, SR, R-Union Rk: Kriegsfall 1935每1944. 
under Charles de Gaulle basically took over the American blacklist and thus banned Union Rk from business in France, although Grieshaber hoped to keep up at least his life insurance business in France (if the ban did not last too long); he and Alzheimer agreed to hold back on transferring the French portfolio of Union Rk to another company.248 In contrast to the case of Schweizer Na-tional, however, no arrangement was made for the transfer of shares prior to the end of the war, which meant that Grieshaber and the Union Rk would have not only to fnd a way off the blacklist on their own when the war ended but also to deal with a Swiss commitment to the Allies to liquidate German assets. 
It is very important to recognize that the Swiss-German connection in the in-surance feld was highly prized by both sides, and this was because it brought a multitude of advantages. One of these, hard to pin down precisely but cer-tainly of great moment, was that Switzerland and the Swiss insurance leaders provided something of a respite for the German insurance executives. It pro-vided a venue to visit valued and more fortunate colleagues, to speak about their worries back home more freely, and to get away (however briefy) from the Third Reich. This was especially evident in the case of Kurt Schmitt and his close re-lationship with Heinrich Fehlmann of Winterthur, but Hilgard, Alzheimer, and He. also made regular trips to Switzerland in which business was mixed with social relations.249 
At the same time, the business relationship in insurance between the two coun-tries was extremely important. In 1943, German business provided two thirds of Switzerland＊s foreign premiums in life insurance, or 27% of its entire pre-mium income. Swiss Re, which handled the lion＊s share of Swiss reinsurance, received 20% of its premium income in reinsurance from Germany, which trans-lated into 25% of total profts on reinsurance.250 An important aspect of this business was the fve-year German-Swiss Reinsurance Agreement of March 1940 and its counterpart for the Protectorate of Bohemia-Moravia. The central prob-lem dealt with in these negotiations was how to allow the Swiss to receive profts they made from their German operations (which they obviously did not want to hold in Reichsmark) in Swiss francs, despite German exchange controls. Thanks to this agreement, between 1940 and 1945 the Swiss insurers were able to draw on Reichsbank accounts at the Swiss National Bank and take their German 
248 See Mchener Rk an RWM und Gauwirtschaftskammer Mchen, 14.Nov. 1944, RAA 
an RWM, 25.Nov. 1944, Gauwirtschaftskammer Oberbayern an RAA, 17.Nov. 1944,SM, 
1458/11/174, Bl. 119每22, 157每9. See also Aktennotiz er Union Rk, 21.Mai 1946,MR, 
B 22 /35, and Aktennote Alzheimer, 14.每19. Dez. 1944, MR, B 12 /19. 249 The importance of these relationships will become more apparent in the next chapter, but see the correspondence between Schmitt and Fehlmann (e.g., Fehlmann an Schmitt, 2.Mai 1947, NL 1/14), where the former notes their frequent conversations on Schmitt＊s grim forebodings concerning the war. 
250 See Unhabh.ngige Expertenkommission Schweiz 每 Zweiter Weltkrieg, Die Schweiz und die 
Goldtransaktionen im Zweiten Weltkrieg. Zwischenbericht (Bern, 1998) (hereinafter: Bergier 
Kommission, Zwischenbericht), Ch. V, esp. pp. 188每90. 
profts in Swiss francs. These accounts, established under the general German-Swiss Economic Agreement, contained a certain percentage of Swiss payments for German imports that could be used to pay German debts to Swiss creditors. Appendix D of the agreement enabled the Swiss insurers to make immediate use of the accounts to cover their German business in Swiss francs. This arrange-ment was doubly advantageous to the Swiss, enabling them to receive their own hard currency as payment and also to keep their Reichsmark balances low, en-suring that 每 in any depreciation or devaluation of the Reichsmark (and a loss in the value of the RM could certainly be anticipated) 每 they would have made an exchange proft from the ability to pay such German obligations as they had in RM while having collected their German earnings in Swiss francs.251 
By late 1944, however, it was becoming clear that this ※happy§ state of af-fairs 每 for the Swiss because it was so proftable, and for the German insurance business because it permitted them to pay their obligations and maintain their most important international connection 每 was coming to an end. General Di-rector Hans Koenig of the Rentenanstalt, who was also chief negotiator for the Swiss Insurer＊s Association and the Swiss government in negotiations on in-surance questions with the Germans and who had largely been responsible for negotiating the insurance side of the German-Swiss economic agreement, was a remarkably tenacious and effective representative of Swiss insurance interests. He noted in October that the transfer had been benefcial but that the account available for Swiss creditors was now running out of money because the Ger-mans were selling so little to the Swiss. The Germans, who at the beginning of the arrangement of 1940 anticipated annual payments of 12 million Swiss francs for insurance (divided roughly as 45% for direct insurance and 55% for reinsur-ance) found themselves facing increasing cost overruns, so that 13 million Swiss francs were paid for 1943, 17.2 million for 1944 (of which 9 million was still ow-ing at the end of the year), and a 20 million debt was anticipated for 1945. 252 Both sides were anxious to continue the agreement, but how was this to be done given the German situation? In January 1945 new negotiations were held, with Hans Koenig and Paul Guggenbl of Swiss Re negotiating for the Swiss and Ministerial Director Hans Storck of the RWM heading the German delegation. The two sides reached a compromise under which the Germans would immedi-ately pay the 9 million Swiss francs owing for 1944, while the Swiss would agree to a ceiling of 13 million Swiss francs for 1945 that would not be payable until the end of the year. An important aspect of this arrangement was the anticipa-tion that the Reichsbank would be able to sell gold to the Swiss National Bank to cover its obligations, although by this time 每 thanks both to Allied warnings 
251 Ibid., pp. 190每2; for Anlage D, see SM, 1458/11/142, Bl. 95每102. See the revealing report by 
P. Guggenbl, Verwaltungsratssitzung vom 28. M.rz 1945, SR, Protokolle der Verwaltungsrats-Sitzungen, Bd. X, pp. 175ff. 
252 Koenig an Hotz, Kohli, usw., 4. Okt. 1944, Besprechung mit den Herren der deutschen Delega-tion, 18. Dez. 1944, BAR, E 2001 (E) 2 /582. 
and other information 每 it was quite clear that such gold was almost certainly stolen and, indeed, possibly gold taken from Jewish victims.253 
Manifestly, everyone involved knew that Germany was on the verge of col-lapse, and the Swiss were unabashedly trying to get as much from the Germans as they could before the end came. This effort was complicated further on Febru-ary 16, when the Swiss Federal Council fnally succumbed to Allied pressure and issued a freeze on all German assets as well as a ban on business with Germany. Needless to say, this put the entire arrangement with the insurers in danger, along with the plans to assist other Swiss creditors in a similar manner. Nevertheless, the arrangement between the Germans and Swiss with respect to insurance was confrmed on February 28 as if it had no bearing whatever on the agreement with the Allies and especially on the negotiations with President Roosevelt＊s represen-tative Lauchlin Currie. Much would depend, therefore, on the impending Swiss negotiations with the vice-president of the Reichsbank, Emil Puhl. 
Puhl did indeed offer gold. Some of the Swiss offcials 每 such as Robert Kohli, head of the legal and private assets abroad section of the political section of the Federal government 每 thought that it might be accepted to cover the insurance obligations. He admitted that 
it is certainly diffcult to take gold, since one does not know from where it comes and one cannot tell by the smell from whence it was stolen or robbed. But he, Kohli, hopes that the Allies would see that it is better if Germany pays us this gold to fulfll its obligations than when the gold otherwise goes foating about.254 
But Walter Stucki, the much-harrassed head of the political department of the Swiss Foreign Offce, had no more taste for gold purchases and further Allied protests on this score, and he told Koenig that the Swiss government could not accept the gold. Nevertheless, Koenig did manage to get the insurance business excluded from any payment ban with respect to the Reichsbank accounts, so that something could still be saved of the agreement. 
What could be saved was still an open question, but it is striking how anx-ious the German insurance leaders were to maintain the relationship in these last months of the war and to continue doing business in Switzerland. The block-ing of German accounts and freeze on German business very much alarmed the Germans, and they were even more upset to learn that the agreements (between Storck and the insurers) of December 1944 and January 1945 might be unful-fllable because there might not be enough in the Reichsbank accounts to cover them. Thus, in mid-March, Alzheimer and Schmitt requested permission to visit Switzerland to negotiate with their Swiss contacts and friends about gaining an exception for the German insurance business 每 just as the Swiss insurers had 
253 Koenig an Hotz, Kohli und Homburger, 24. Jan. 1945, BAR, E 2001 (E) 2 /575; for the general 
account see Bergier Kommission, Zwischenbericht, pp. 190每2. 254 Quoted in ibid., p. 194. 
managed so successfully to put themselves outside the general regulation of Feb-ruary 16. Alzheimer reported on his mission in a detailed account to Storck of March 26. 255 His frst goal apparently was to induce the Swiss to agree to ex-cluding German insurance frms and interests from provisions of the February 16 order. Although Alzheimer held an offcial position as head of the reinsurance economic group, he emphasized that he was coming as a private person rather than as someone empowered to negotiate and sought ※to employ the business connections of the Munich Re to Swiss enterprises over many years and my personal friendly relations with the leading persons of the Swiss insurance busi-ness, in order to make possible the continued operation of the German insurers and especially here the strongly interested German reinsurance business.§ As Alzheimer reported, his Swiss colleagues demonstrated ※great understanding§ for his proposals and he found ※completely loyal support.§ He thus believed he had accomplished his goals of excluding the German insurers from the freezing of their assets and permitting those under German infuence to continue op-erations, although this involved very complicated arrangements with the Swiss authorities with respect to the kinds of accounts that could be used by the Ger-mans for their business. Emil Boss, the head of the Swiss Insurance Offce, also indicated full support for Alzheimer＊s effort to keep the German-infuenced rein-surance companies operating. Alzheimer in turn promised to do everything in his power to make Swiss operations in Germany as functional as possible. 
Despite all good will, it was now a race against time to see if anything could be saved of the arrangement to pay the Swiss insurers from Reichsbank funds. As Guggenbl reported on March 28, one could no longer expect the 9 million due in 1944 to be paid, since the money was not there and there were pressing claims for some 27 million RM by Swiss creditors. Of these, if the transfer was still technically possible before Germany collapsed, 4.5 million would be avail-able for the insurance payments. Obviously they had hoped for more but, as Guggenbl noted, the transfer agreement had enabled 40 million Swiss francs to be transferred and had thus been a great success.256 Finally, a new agreement was reached with Puhl in early April on the Reichsbank accounts to be used to pay off the Swiss creditors, and a ※Girokonto I§ was set up on April 11, 1945, upon which the Swiss insurers could supposedly draw. 
Indeed, the capacity of the Allianz and Munich Re leaders to look after these interests and move back and forth across the border was quite remarkable, given the problems they were having at home. On January 5, 1943, Paul Lux 每 a mem-ber of the board of management who was also Hilgard＊s right-hand man and the 
255 ※Bericht er meine Reise nach der Schweiz,§ Zich, 24. M.rz 1945,SM, 1458/11/140, Bl. 
227每36. The Union Rk Akten in the archive of Swiss Re report that Schmitt and Alzheimer 
travelled back to Munich by auto on March 27, which demonstrates that Schmitt came along de-
spite some problems in his getting permission reported in the documents of Feb.每April 1945 in 
SM, 1458/11/193. 256 Verwaltungsratssitzung vom 28. M.rz 1945, SR, Protokolle der Verwaltungsrats-Sitzungen, Bd. 
X, pp. 175ff. 
plant manager in Berlin 每 died following an operation at the age of 41. Lux was greatly admired for his competence and personal qualities; his death was a hard blow and meant the loss of a rising star in the concern. Richard Krause, a mem-ber of the board of management of Allianz Leben and its chief mathematician, also died of natural causes in 1943. The war years were taking their toll of the concern＊s leadership. Director Georg Kig, Herbert Mathy (head of the assets division of Allianz Leben), and Steffen Boetius (head of the Magdeburg branch) were victims of combat.257 
At the same time, the top management of Allianz was aging. He. turned 60 in 1941, and he and Schmitt 每 who was deputy chairman of the Allianz super-visory board as well as general director of Munich Re, and who continued to discuss all important questions bearing on Allianz with He. 每 hoped to con-tinue the Allianz policy of having the general director step down within a year of turning 60 so as to open the way for younger leadership. He. believed in this policy and did not want to make an exception for himself, to which was added the problem of his heart condition and his inability to control his natu-ral urge to be overly active. A further consideration was that He. was having increasing diffculties with his housing situation. He had homes in Berlin and an estate in Saxony at Agnesdorf, and maintaining them was a problem under wartime conditions. While both men knew the war was lost, they were also aware that the end could take a few years and feared that He. would not be up to facing the potentially revolutionary social situation that might develop and the attendant loss of income. Schmitt hoped that He. would move to the supervisory board and serve as a semi-delegate to the board of management. In thinking about a successor, frst Lux and then (after Lux＊s death) Goudefroy and Schmidt-Polex came to mind, since Hilgard was only a few years younger than He.. Schmitt and He. were uncertain about which of the two would be bet-ter, and thus discussed with Hilgard the possibility of his taking over as general director for a two-year term with Goudefroy and Schmidt-Polex as deputy gen-eral directors. This would provide an opportunity to determine which of them would be best.258 
A major barrier to this solution was the head of the Allianz supervisory board, August von Finck, who disliked the idea of having anyone with a special position that might diminish his own on the supervisory board and also seemed averse to changes so long as the war lasted. Von Finck and the supervisory board had agreed in 1941 that He. could effectively work half-time if he wished, but He. had never taken advantage of this offer and asked to resign at the end of 1942. With unusual passion, however, von Finck urged He. to stay on and made him promise to do so until the war ended.259 
257 On Lux, see the moving tribute by Hilgard in ※Allianz im Zweiten Weltkrieg,§ pp. 14每21,FHA, 
AZ 1.3/2. For the deaths in Allianz management, see Maiholzer, ※Berliner Allianz-Betriebe,§ 
pp. 93每4. 258 Schmitt, ※Meine Beziehungen zu Dr. He.,§ 17. Aug. 1949,FHA,NL 1/20. 259 He. an August von Finck, 4. Dez. 1944, FHA, NL 3/4. 
Nevertheless, in September 1943, He. used his housing situation to make a new effort to resign, informing von Finck that his country home had been se-questered for bombing victims and this was forcing him to make a decision between his Berlin and his country homes, since he could not expect to retain both under existing circumstances. He decided to return to Agnesdorf, which meant that his Berlin quarters would be sequestered for bombing victims. Under these circumstances, he needed to resign since he thought it improper to serve as general director from the safety of his estate while the other employees con-fronted air raids, but he was prepared to serve the concern in any other way the supervisory board might deem appropriate.260 Once again, however, von Finck dissuaded He. from this purpose and frustrated Schmitt＊s efforts to create a new succession. 
Schmitt was probably correct in later surmising that He. really found it hard to leave his position and stop being active, but what was truly remarkable was that He. remained an asset to the concern during these years despite his fairly obvious hostility to the Nazi regime. He apparently refrained from using the Nazi salute, demonstrably did not sign his business correspondence with ※Heil Hitler,§ and did not let his three children join the Hitler Youth. His youngest son was jailed while doing labor service in Belgium for making anti-Nazi remarks. As has also been shown in the case of Maximilian Eichbaum, he was known to protect Jews. Most serious, however, was that He. had some close contacts to the Resistance and was apparently aware of the existence of a circle of offcers planning to kill Hitler, although it is unclear if he knew the specifcs of the July 20 plot. As he explained somewhat misleadingly after the war, ※I drew the ultimate consequence when I joined with the men who over the years had continuously forged plans to bring down the entire Nazi structure with an act of force.§261 This suggests a participation in the movement for which there is no evidence. His chief contact with the Resistance was Count von Helldorf, the Police Presi-dent of Berlin, certainly a dubious character but nevertheless someone who had decided to abandon the regime and support the plotters. Both were members of the Club of Berlin, and He. claimed to have seen him almost daily before the events of July 20; He. went on to point out that ※[i]f Count Helldorf, who was an old National Socialist and committed all sorts of stupidities in connection with the Jewish question in the early years, totally changed during the war, if he turned from a Saul into a Paul, then that is something specially to be credited to myself.§262 This may have been taking too much credit, indeed. Helldorf was 
260 He. an von Finck, 21. Sept. 1943, FHA, NL 1/20. 261 ※My attitude toward National Socialism§ (※Meine Stellungnahme, die ich zum Nationalsozial-
ismus eingenommen habe§), FHA, NL 3/6. 262 He., ※Meine politische Einstellung, in Sonderheit [sic] zum Nationalsozialismus,§ an die Kreis-
boden-Kommission Sangerhausen, Agnesdorf, 16. Dez. 1945, FHA, S 17.2 /165. This was written 
in an effort to save his property from sequestration. It is curious that a slightly different version, 
composed for similar purposes in Berlin and dated Jan. 23, 1946, is less clear about Helldorf＊s 
conversion, stating simply that if Helldorf joined the conspiracy then it was to He.＊s credit. See 
FHA, NL 3/6. 
an old putschist, having participated in the Kapp putsch of 1920, the Munich putsch of 1923, and possibly the SA putschist plans in 1932,but by 1944 he felt unappreciated and neglected by the regime＊s leaders and dissatisfed with the war and its progress.263 Hence, the extent of Helldorf＊s conversion and his motives remain unclear. There can be no question, however, that He. knew him well, knew there was a conspiracy, and was thus guilty of a capital offense. He was in fact arrested shortly after Helldorf and questioned for hours by the Gestapo be-fore being ※temporarily§ released, and it is probably true that, as He. claimed to have learned later from a Gestapo offcial, that he was saved by Helldorf＊s re-fusal to implicate him in any way. Helldorf himself suffered a particularly cruel fate, being forced as a renegade Nazi to watch his compatriots slowly strangle after being hung on meat hooks before suffering the same fate himself.264 
He.＊s narrow escape initially was without consequence for his position at Al-lianz, but his engagement in the events of July 20 每 which seems to have been limited to knowledge about the plot, the encouragement of Helldorf, and con-tact with some of the others involved 每 was soon to produce problems. He. managed to procure a visa to travel to Switzerland for eight days on business in early September, but then had a heart attack a few days after his arrival and ended up in a Basle hospital. He sent a telegram to August von Finck that he was ill and that he hoped to return in about three weeks. This meant, how-ever, that he had to miss an important meeting of the executive committee of the supervisory board in Munich on September 8. Von Finck, who had been informed of He.＊s Gestapo interrogations by He. himself, apparently thought that He. was trying to fee the country; he took Schmitt aside before the meet-ing and told him that he was going to propose that the committee send He. a telegram asking him to return to Germany immediately. Schmitt was alarmed at the suggested procedure, pointing out that such a telegram would be noted by the German border authorities and would produce misunderstandings. At that meeting, von Finck nevertheless proposed to those present 每 Kisskalt, Carl Goetz of Dresdner Bank, Schmitt, Hilgard, Goudefroy, and Schloe.mann 每 that the telegram be sent. Kisskalt made a compromise proposal that He. submit a medical statement confrming his illness, whereupon Schmitt pointed out that he was going to Switzerland in a few days and could convey the message per-sonally. As a result, the committee sent a simple message to He. wishing him a speedy recovery and hoping that he would return soon.265 Schmitt then saw He. in Basel, and the latter confrmed his illness by sending a medical report back to von Finck and declared that he would return as soon as possible. 
263 This is the argument of Ted Harrison, ※ ＆Alter K.mpfer＊ im Widerstand. Graf Helldorf, die NS-
Bewegung und die Opposition gegen Hitler,§ Vierteljahrshefte f Zeitgeschichte 45 (1997), pp. 
385每423. 264 Die Tagebher von Joseph Goebbels, hrsg. von Elke Frlich, Teil II: Diktate 1941每1945, Bd. 
13: Juli每Sept. 1944, bearb. von Jana Richter (Munich, 1995), p. 245 (Eintrag vom 16.8.1944). 
265 Protokoll, 8. Sept. 1944,FHA, NL 1/14, and Schmitt, ※Meine Beziehungen zu Dr. He.,§ 17. Aug. 1949, FHA, NL 1/19. 
This was the beginning of a great deal of nastiness and bad feeling between He. and von Finck and eventually between He. and his old friend Schmitt. Von Finck was annoyed at the manner in which He. had communicated with him and worried about what might happen. Apparently, von Finck felt it impor-tant for the executive committee to cover itself in the event that He. decided to stay in Switzerland and thus for those on the committee to demonstrate that they had taken action in case an investigation took place 每 since it clearly was odd for the general director of so large a concern as Allianz to be absent from so impor-tant a meeting.266 However, when He. heard from Schmitt about the discussion of his absence at the meeting, he was infuriated, pointing out in an angry letter to von Finck that, at the age of 64 and after 26 years of service to the company, he knew what his obligations were and did not need to be informed of them by a supervisory board. He was especially annoyed because it was von Finck, after all, who had persuaded him to stay on the job in the frst place. On October 3, He. then sent von Finck his electrocardiogram and a medical report attesting to the seriousness of his illness. He., who wished to impress on von Finck how much he was sacrifcing for the concern by staying on under the existing circum-stances, remarked that the worsening of his condition had much to do with his experiences during the last bombing attack on Allianz in Berlin. He then re-ported further on his condition on October 13. Although his doctor in Basel had urged him to rest and continue treatment, and although he had also con-tracted bronchitis, He. decided to return home to their safety areas in Weimar and Erfurt and then go to a clinic in Bad Nauheim. By this time, the relation-ship with von Finck had become very troubled indeed. Von Finck was angry that He. had been so critical in a letter 每 especially since it had been opened by the censors 每 and believed that such questions should be dealt with verbally rather than in writing. As for He., he felt deeply hurt that he had received an undeserved vote of no confdence. In fact, von Finck had come to the conclu-sion that He. was a liability and, in a letter of November 21, used He.＊s health as an excuse to declare that the supervisory board would not ask him to stay on for 1945. He., however, had no intention of letting himself be fred in this man-ner. In a response of December 4, he announced to von Finck that he would be happy to hear that he was now fully ft to return to work. He reminded von Finck that he had never taken advantage of his extraordinary offer to work half-time for the concern back in 1941 and also that, at their meeting in late 1942, they had solemnly shaken hands in agreement that He. would stay on until the war ended.267 
The exchanges between He. and von Finck put Schmitt in a very diffcult posi-tion. On the one hand, he felt that He. had neither a legal nor a moral claim on his position for 1945, since his contract ran from year to year and his health made 
266 Von Finck an Dmler, 10. Okt. 1947,FHA,NL 1/14. 
267 He. an von Finck, 23. Sept. 1944, 3. und 13. Okt. 1944, von Finck an He., 14. Okt. 1944,He. 
an von Finck, 27. Okt. 1944, von Finck an He., 21.Nov. 1944, He. an von Finck, 4. Dec. 1944, 
FHA, NL 1/20. 
it quite natural for von Finck (and other members of the personnel committee) to feel that a change was necessary. On the other hand, Schmitt was anxious to restore harmony and felt that this could best be done through personal meet-ings rather than through exchanges of letters and the misunderstandings they generated. Apparently, von Finck and He. did meet in December, and the lat-ter asked that he be allowed to make the announcement of his resignation at a meeting of the supervisory board. Such things were diffcult to arrange in the frst months of 1945, however. Von Finck hoped to hold a meeting of the exec-utive committee of the supervisory board in February or March, but one could not be certain as to its feasibility. He., however, was as testy as ever, claiming that he above all wanted to continue to settle matters in person but also insist-ing that he had been unfairly treated and that von Finck had no right to make sudden use of his illness to let him go, especially since he was well aware that the illness was anything but new. This bickering by mail and He.＊s increasing re-sentment 每 not only against von Finck but also against Schmitt 每 over the feeling that he was being undeservedly pushed out was bound to intensify in the ab-sence of a genuine possibility to hold a meeting in which all the diffculties and problems could be aired. Schmitt not only thought He. increasingly unreason-able but also seemed to be nursing bad feeling toward He. for not consulting with him as much about Allianz matters as he would have liked. But there was no possibility of airing such issues, or of holding a supervisory board meeting, given the general problems of travel and also Schmitt＊s journey to Switzerland in March to assist Alzheimer with negotiations on the future relations between the two insurance industries and on the transfer problem. This was to be the situation until war＊s end.268 
Although it is diffcult to fathom all of He.＊s emotions and motives, there is strong evidence that he did feel a high degree of moral and personal obligation to stay at the helm so long as no one else was there to do the job. As he told von Finck, 
in one point we are in agreement, namely that just in these times a man in his best years should stand at the head of Allianz who would be possessed of robust health, the strong-est nerves, and the greatest initiative. If the supervisory board has such a man, then I will cheerfully step down tomorrow. The entire question is less that of my person than of Allianz, for whose welfare and fate I feel morally obligated to care because of my en-tire course of life, and this also in the sense of our 50,000 co-workers, who have given me their unlimited confdence at all times.269 
One of the persons who 每 while certainly not young 每 might have helped fll the breach was Hilgard, who had the good fortune to be laid up in bed owing to a nerve infammation resulting from a fall on a icy staircase shortly before Christ-mas 1944 during a visit to Schmitt at Tiefenbrunn. He was thus compelled 
268 Von Finck an He., 22. Jan. 1945, He. an von Finck, 30. Jan. 1945, ibid.; He. an Schmitt, 30. 
Jan. 1945, Schmitt an He., 21.Feb. 1945, Goudefroy an Schmitt, 27. M.rz 1945, Schmitt an von 
Finck, 21. M.rz 1945, Schmitt an von Finck, 4. April 1945,FHA,NL 1/19. 269 He. an von Finck, 30. Jan. 1945,FHA,NL 1/20. 
to be away from Berlin for the last months of the war and, as he later noted, was possibly thus spared the fate of the head of the Reich Group for Banking, Otto Christian Fischer, who was seized by the Russians and disappeared with-out a trace. Herzog sought to fll in for Hilgard during these months, but the Reich Group＊s effectiveness appears to have suffered rather badly at this time.270 Whatever the case, business in Berlin was shutting down, and He.＊s description of conditions at Allianz in a letter sent to Hilgard for the latter＊s 61st birthday at once describes the horrendous conditions under which it was functioning and attests further to He.＊s motives for staying on: 
Things are frightful at our Allianz. The last attack, during which I once again distin-guished myself by my absence, once again caused all kinds of damage. The old damages to windows and doors could only be partially repaired before then, and now everything has gone to the devil again. There can be no thought of doing any real work. Every-one is going about in their winter coats, their collars turned upward, their hats on their heads, walking about in the bureaus without sitting down. Whatever one grasps is flled with dust and dirt. No heating, no water, no telephone, and added to it the most un-believable transportation circumstances. Your proposal to leave Berlin with a staff was therefore certainly worthy of notice, but it is unfortunately not implementable because none of the men of whom you specially thought can leave Berlin anymore today. And where would one still be safe from destruction today in Germany? I travel back and forth between Berlin, Agnesdorf and Erfurt with my car. I cannot perform any really positive work today either. But it is also not necessary. It suffces that one is seen over and over again, so that the retinue does not appear without leadership since the board of man-agement shrinks increasingly. At the moment only Goudefroy, Maiholzer, Mler and Eggerss are present.271 
Employees continued to show up for work at Allianz in Berlin 每 albeit in de-creasing numbers and under increasingly intolerable conditions 每 until April 21, 1945, when transportation for such purposes shut down and Berlin was declared a fortress.272 
Although certainly not free of air raids, the situation of those working for Allianz and the Munich Re was less dramatic and frightening than in Berlin. Hilgard and Schmitt had homes in the countryside, and Schmitt＊s estate Tiefen-brunn became particularly important for meetings of the top echelon of the concerns. The last joint meeting of the directors of the two concerns, for ex-ample, took place at Tiefenbrunn on December 8, 1944. 273 Here also Schmitt conferred with his colleagues on planning for the future, and he drew in some of the more important branch directors who might have to assume responsibility in the event something happened to the top leadership. One of these was Direc-tor Walther Boehm, who succeeded Eggerss as liaison man between Schmitt and 
270 Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7,p. 135; Goudefroy an Schmitt, 27. M.rz 1945, Schmitt an von 
Finck, 21. M.rz 1945, FHA, NL 1/20. 271 He. an Hilgard, 1. M.rz 1945, ibid. 272 Maiholzer, ※Die Berliner Allianz-Betriebe,§ pp. 96每7. 273 FHA, S 17.2/73. 
Ging before 1933; currently he was head of the Allianz branch for Saxony and Silesia and was headquartered in Dresden. The two men apparently discussed the military situation because, after returning home, Boehm wrote that 每 despite the seriousness of the situation 每 he continued to maintain his ※confdence in a turn for the good§ and cited a letter he had just read from Field Marshal Model that the Allies would be stopped at the German border. He also sent along por-tions of a letter from a general with whom he was acquainted who insisted that the Allies would be stopped once their armored vehicles began to experience the problems of being refueled as they advanced. Most important, however, was that ※a people of 80 million with a fanatical will and belief cannot be driven off the face of the earth.§ As for the plotters of July 20, this general thought them too clever for their own good, arguing that their cleverness had destroyed their understanding of the need to subordinate themselves and put their confdence in the leadership. At their trial, he found their mental state and attitudes ※not only frightening but nauseating.§ Boehm had obviously not learned much over the previous twelve years, and he undoubtedly was responding to Schmitt＊s open or veiled pessimism. Schmitt chose to thank Boehm for his letter and to remark that ※your confdence and reports pleased me. After all the heavy sacrifces and fantastic accomplishments of our people, a victory of our arms would be no gift but rather something well earned.§274 It is hard to believe that Schmitt really be-lieved this. The issue, after all, was not the sacrifces and accomplishments but rather the cause in which they had been made. Schmitt was defnitely in no posi-tion to speak his mind about that cause in a letter, and certainly not to the likes of Boehm. 
Furthermore, there is good evidence that Schmitt was sympathetic to the Re-sistance and had an unusually good understanding of the political problems involved, if not a very practical solution to them. Thus, sometime in 1943, he entertained Fritz Walter (an insurance executive) and Colonel Hans Otfried von Linstow. Schmitt knew they were both opponents of the regime and began to talk about the war and military situation. He feared that eliminating Hitler would feed another stab-in-the-back legend, turn Hitler into a hero, and place all the blame for the failures of the regime on his close associates. He tried to persuade von Linstow that the best solution would be to simply throw all the German forces against the East and then let the Allies conquer Germany from the West, impose unconditional surrender, and occupy the country. He hoped Linstow would persuade his fellow conspirators to pursue this course. Linstow, who was in the Paris headquarters, was arrested for his involvement and was ex-ecuted on August 30, 1944, while Walter was placed in Moabit prison but then released.275 
In fact, Schmitt was suspect to the Gestapo, and with good reason. It was not simply a matter of his efforts to release Pastor Martin Niemler and his care for 
274 Boehm an Schmitt, 18. Sept. 1944, Schmitt an Boehm, 26. Sept. 1944,FHA,NL 1/12. 275 Eidesstaatliche Erkl.rung Fritz Walter, 9.Nov. 1948, FHA, NL 1/104. 
Niemler＊s son. Schmitt and Alzheimer had turned the Munich Re into some-thing of a haven for persons connected with the Resistance, specifcally Ulrich von Hassell, Eduard Hamm (a former economics minister and head of the Ger-man chamber of commerce), and Franz Sperr (a diplomat who had been Bavarian envoy in Berlin until 1934). All three were arrested after July 20. Von Hassell and Sperr were executed at Plzensee prison; Hamm committed suicide in his Gestapo cell. The Schmitts were on particularly intimate terms with Franz Sperr and his wife Traudl, and Schmitt later told her that he had turned to the chief miltary judge of the Luftwaffe, Eugen Schmidt, whom Schmitt knew to be sym-pathetic and who had important Jewish clients in civilian life, after their arrest 每 only to be told that nothing could be done and warned that he would be well ad-vised to keep as much out of the picture as possible. Indeed, before their arrests, all three had cautioned Schmitt and Alzheimer against trying to do anything for those arrested in connection with July 20, Sperr having the sense that the regime was not only trying to eliminate those who were implicated but also persons who might become popular as politicians. In any case, Schmitt was very suspect to the regime. As he later learned, another close friend (Theodor Ss, a professor of insurance science at the University of Berlin) had been regularly interrogated by the Gestapo about Schmitt and appeared more suspect to the Gestapo than He. or Kisskalt, especially because of his friendship with von Hassell.276 
Thus, when Schmitt alluded to heavy sacrifces, he knew whereof he spoke. For Schmitt and his family, the war ended in the same kind of personal tragedy with which it had begun. The Schmitts＊ 20-year-old son Klaus was missing in action. Klaus had frst served as an air intelligence offcer, and Schmitt tried to use his connections with Ging＊s adjutant to keep him in that service and to have him stationed in Italy or on the Western front, rather than on the Eastern front. This, however, was not to be, and the last news the Schmitts received from him was a letter that arrived on February 23 from Koblenz. Schmitt and his wife hoped Klaus had been taken prisoner by the Americans, and it was only in late November 1945 that they learned Klaus had been killed. Initially they thought he had fallen in the Harz in April, but they then found out that he had taken a bullet in the chest and died instantly during the fghting in the Eifel on February 19, 1945, thus giving his young life 每 as Schmitt bitterly told his daughter and son-in-law 每 ※for a cause that was so distant from him.§277 
276 See the sworn testimony of Alzheimer, 16. Juli 1945; see also Schmitt an Traudl Sperr, 23. Juli 
1946, FHA, NL 1/94, and Ss an Schmitt, 29.Nov. 1945, FHA, NL 1/13. For the connections 
among von Hassell, Sperr, and Hamm, see Gaertringen (ed.), Hassell-Tagebher, pp. 98每9, 
148. See also the report of the interrogation of Schmitt by Dr. Harry Philippi, 5. Juli 1946, AM, Spruchkammerakten Dr. Kurt Schmitt, Akten der Spruchkammer Starnberg, 1. Teil, Bl. 25, and Eugen Schmidt＊s testimony before the Spruchkammer Starnberg, Sept. 1947, ibid., 2. Teil, Bl. 278. 
277 Schmitt an Otto und Hildegard Pape, 20. und 28.Nov. 1945,FHA, NL 1/15; Schmitt an Gritzbach, 23. Jan. 1945, Herbert Becker an Schmitt, 26. Dez. 1945, as well as other relevant correspondence in FHA, NL 1/120. 
9 


Confronting the Past: Denazifcation and Restitution 
It is a mistake to claim, as had often been the case until recently, that Germans in general and German businessmen in particular did not ※confront the National Socialist past§ after World War II. The real problem is the manner in which they did so. Recent research on West German industry has shown that its leaders were preoccupied and 每 in cases where they were subjected to lengthy denazifcation proceedings or threats of socialization 每 even obsessed with the Nazi past and their role in it. They developed both personal and organized ways of trying to deal with that past that were personally bearable but that also permitted them to present a case to the outside world that at once legitimized the personal rehabil-itation of those who were accused of working with the National Socialists and made the case for reconstruction of German industry along traditional lines.1 As shall be demonstrated here, this was also true of the leaders of the insurance business and of the insurance industry itself. 
Indeed, this confrontation with the Nazi period was an inescapable necessity for three reasons. First, business leaders were subject to denazifcation. If, in retrospect, the denazifcation appears to have been poorly conceived and incon-sistently and inadequately implemented, it nevertheless required the flling out of lengthy and detailed questionnaires, liability to internment in some instances (as well as dismissal and blockage of accounts in many others), and subjection to legal proceedings that could lead to signifcant penalties if those appearing be-fore the tribunals did not succeed in exonerating themselves. In the last analysis, the entire enterprise proved something of a monument to two American manias, questionnaires and letters of reference. The latter become known as the ※Per-silscheine§ 每 attestations (named after a popular German laundry soap) that someone was not really a Nazi or had done good deeds during the Nazi period despite Party membership. Nevertheless, denazifcation generated a great deal of concern and a remarkable amount of information that deserves more attention 
1 See Jonathan Wiesen, West German Industry and the Challenge of the Nazi Past (Chapel Hill, 2001), and his ※Overcoming Nazism: Big Business and the Politics of Memory,§ Central European History 29 (1996), pp. 201每26. More generally, see Robert G. Moeller, ※War Stories: The Search for a Usable Past in the Federal Republic of Germany,§ American Historical Review 101 (1996), pp. 1008每48. 
444 
than it has received.2 Second, the resurrection of the old economic order was anything but guaranteed. This became rapidly apparent in the Soviet zone of occupation, but the Western powers (especially the Americans) were also highly critical of German big business. There were powerful political currents in the Social Democratic Party 每 and also in what was to become the Christian Demo-cratic Union 每 that were anxious to make major changes in the economic order. Thus, decartelization, deconcentration, and even socialization were very much on the table after Nazi Germany＊s military and political collapse.3 Finally, there were the issues of Wiedergutmachung (restitution and compensation) to those who had been robbed, persecuted, physically exploited, and murdered under the National Socialist regime. The efforts to settle these issues inevitably involved the German business community, either directly or indirectly. This was the case because business leaders had been involved and often complicitous in the dis-missal of its Jewish employees, the disposal or acquisition of Jewish assets, the expropriation of Jewish and non-Jewish assets in the occupied territories, and doing business connected with the use of forced and slave labor and sites of ex-termination. While these questions of Wiedergutmachung returned to haunt not only the German but also signifcant segments of the European and even Amer-ican business world in the 1990s, the initial confrontation of Germany and its business community with these issues occurred during the occupation and frst decade of the German Federal Republic.4 
Theresurrection ofthese questions attheend ofthetwentieth century is intelli-gible only against the background of the inadequacies, failures, and peculiarities of the postwar efforts, however substantial these efforts may have been in many respects. Undoubtedly, more time was needed to grasp the full magnitude of National Socialist criminality and the extent to which German society as a total-ity became implicated in it, and it is doubtful that fuller knowledge could have been either intellectually digestible or psychologically bearable at the time for the victors or the vanquished. What the practical consequences of such knowledge 
2 There is a substantial literature dealing with the American role in the denazifcation. See John Gimbel, The American Occupation of Germany. Politics and the Military, 1945每1949 (Stanford, 1968), pp. 101每10, 158每74; Harold Zink, The United States in Germany 1944每1945 (Princeton, 1957), pp. 150每65; Lutz Niethammer, Die Mitl.uferfabrik. Die Entnazifzierung am Beispiel Bay-erns, 2. Auf. (Berlin & Bonn, 1982); Carolyn Eisenberg, Drawing the Line. The American Decision to Divide Germany 1944每1949 (New York, 1996), pp. 36f., 118f., 122每38, 262f. For a good sur-vey of the newer literature, see Cornelia Rauh-Kne, ※Die Entnazifzierung und die deutsche Gesellschaft,§ Archiv f Sozialgeschichte 35 (1995), pp. 35每70. 
3 Eisenberg, Drawing the Line, pp. 139每51; Volker Berghahn, The Americanisation of West German Industry 1945每1973 (Cambridge, 1985), Ch. 1; Anthony J. Nicholls, Freedom with Responsibility. The Social Market Economy in Germany 1918每1963 (Oxford, 1994), Chs. 5每8. 
4 Constantin Goschler, Wiedergutmachung.Westdeutschland und die Verfolgten des Nationalsozia-lismus (1945每1954) [Quellen und Darstellungen zur Zeitgeschichte, Bd. 34] (Munich, 1992), and Ludolf Herbst & Constantin Goschler (eds.), Wiedergutmachung in der Bundesrepublik Deutsch-land (Munich, 1989). 
could or should have been is also unclear. As is well known, the management of Wiedergutmachung questions in the frst decades after the war was very much affected by the problems of German and European reconstruction and the Cold War. From this perspective, the solutions found and the issues left unresolved at that time were virtually inevitable results of the historical conditions existing in the years immediately following the war. Nevertheless, the attitudes of German businessmen toward their obligations with respect to Wiedergutmachung were very much conditioned by their understanding of their role in the Third Reich as it found articulation during denazifcation. If there was a change in business consciousness in the 1990s when these issues came up again 每 and there is good evidence for such a change 每 then it is important to understand what the old consciousness was and how and why it might have been transformed. Allianz had left behind a substantial record of its efforts to cope with restitution issues in the years after the war, a matter of no small importance because Allianz was and is Germany＊s largest insurance concern. More recently, it has been at the forefront of the restitution discussion insofar as this has pertained to the insur-ance industry. Allianz, therefore, is signifcant as a case study of this protracted but interrupted history of a great German concern coming to terms with its Na-tional Socialist past. 
self-exculpation and image reconstruction 
In trying to fathom the complex story of reconstruction and denazifcation at Allianz and in the German insurance business in general, it is important to recog-nize that the division of both Berlin and Germany into four zones of occupation created considerable opportunity for inconsistency and confusion. The discus-sion that follows makes no attempt to deal in any detail with denazifcation in the Soviet occupied areas and also does not pretend to present a comprehensive discussion of denazifcation in the West. Insofar as the Soviet area is concerned, the insurance business was socialized fairly rapidly; its leading personnel appear to have fed to the West, and the Soviets were not terribly interested in denazifca-tion in any case since they perceived the problem as one of changing the economic system itself. Indeed, they were quite casual about keeping on former Nazis in the economic sphere.5 At the same time, no attempt is made here to provide a full account of the denazifcation of Allianz＊s employees, since the available records make such an effort pointless. What is provided here is a discussion of denazifcation of the leadership of the concern and of some available cases of de-nazifcation at the middle management level 每 insofar as existing records permit. 
The problems of reconstruction and denazifcation were not only complicated by the division of Germany into four zones but were also compounded by other peculiarities of the occupation regime 每 for example, the initial division of the 
5 See Norman Naimark, The Russians in Germany. A History of the Soviet Zone of Occupation, 1945每1949 (Cambridge, Mass., & London, 1995), esp. pp. 172, 191每2. 
American zone into four military commands. Efforts to begin reconstructing a national business organization like Allianz, assuming it would even be possi-ble, were something akin to fying blind, and the terrible transportation and travel conditions and the diffculties of communication in any form made mat-ters much worse. The situation in Berlin was particularly messy because of the massive destruction of major Allianz buildings and their location in the Soviet zone. Also, the leading directors were absent from Berlin when the war ended. He. was in South Germany, as was Hilgard, who had retired early in 1945 but whose formal retirement date was backdated to December 31, 1944. The ailing Schloe.mann, who had also retired at the beginning of 1945, was in the South as well and died on December 10, 1945. The postwar management in Berlin was thus initially in the hands of Directors Hans Goudefroy, Clemens Maiholzer, and Gerd Mler of Allianz Leben; Mler would eventually become Schloe.mann＊s successor. In addition to trying to get the Berlin offces functioning again, they also sought to maintain contact with He. and with the various Allianz branches in the West, where some branches were able to open even earlier than in Berlin. Thus, the branch in Hamburg, which had closed May 3, opened again on May 7; the Frankfurt branch was allowed to reopen on May 11, albeit only in the open air since the building on the Taunusanlage was being used by the occupation authorities.6 
Director Gerd Mler had already demonstrated considerable initiative at the Berlin offces following the defeat. He posted a sign on what was left of the Taubenstra.edoorwayadvisingtheAllianzstaffthattheyshouldmeet onMay 18 and see what to do next. Some 250 persons showed up on that date and set to work cleaning up, rescuing material and machines, and removing the dead bodies of seventeen soldiers who had died in the struggle for Berlin. Temporary per-mission to start up business in Berlin again was granted by the local authorities on May 22. The cleanup continued until July, and formal permission to conduct business was granted on October 20 by the fnancial section of the Berlin Mag-istracy. The frst two months after the collapse had been particularly diffcult because of the absence of the leading directors and the diffculty of making bind-ing commitments. Also, Allianz employees were forced to do general clearing of rubble in the city itself by the authorities. Maiholzer complained that some of the other private insurance companies took advantage of Allianz＊s situation to compete with particular ferocity for customers in the much-reduced postwar Berlin insurance market. The situation in the Soviet sector led to an early de-cision to seek new headquarters in the West. By the end of August, a suitable building had been found in Charlottenburg, and the general headquarters moved to Jebenstra.e 1每2 in October 1945, although the move of the entire Berlin oper-ation was not completed until February 1946. 
6 This account is based on Maiholzer＊s valuable study of 1960, which is often based on accounts he 
had gathered from those involved in the reconstruction of Allianz in Berlin; see Maiholzer, ※Die 
Berliner Allianz-Betriebe,§ Parts II and III, FHA. 
The permission given by the mayor of Berlin-Friedrichstadt to reopen business in May 1945 was tied to the appointment of a committee of four shop stewards, three recommended by Allianz and one appointed for political reasons by the mayor. However, at least one of those appointed at the behest of Allianz also had a distinctly political favor 每 namely, Max Scholber, the Social Democrat who had headed the factory council that was forcibly removed by the Nazis in 1933. In late July 1945, Scholber began attending the regular Tuesday meetings of the leading managers of the Allianz offces in Berlin as one of the representa-tives of the employees, and Goudefroy made a special point of welcoming him to this body. Scholber and his colleagues appear to have enjoyed the confdence of the employees as well, since they won the factory council elections held in March 1946. The three members originally recommended by Allianz received the greatest number of votes, with Scholber topping the list.7 
This was, of course, hardly proof that the Allianz leadership or its personnel had been transformed into democrats overnight. Writing of these events as late as 1960, Maiholzer could not refrain from describing his frst post-capitulation visit to Potsdam in February 1946 in a manner that suggested that he remained susceptible to the spell that certain events of 1933 must still have held for him. Thus, he was shocked by the condition of the Garrison Church and noted par-ticularly the unprotected and miserable condition of the grave of the ※Old Fritz across from which had been placed the seats of honor for Reich President von Hindenburg and the Reich Chancellor named by him in the midst of a forest of old venerable fags at the celebration of the seizure of power on March 21, 1933.§8 Apparently, Maiholzer found it impossible to let refection about the connection between the unnamed Reich Chancellor, the Day of Potsdam, and the condition of the Garrison Church in 1946 interfere with such sentimental reminiscence. But a quick tour of Potsdam and his observations of the Russian generals and troops who ruled there rapidly brought him back to reality and ※taught me anew to be satisfed with our conditions in the British zone of occu-pation in Berlin.§ 
In any case, the more immediate goal after German capitulation was denaz-ifcation, and here Maiholzer, who had never joined the Party,9 was actively engaged in the process as it affected the Berlin branches of Allianz. The frst steps taken toward this end were based on a general order by Marshal Georgij K. Zhukov of June 15, 1945, calling for the dismissal of all Nazis in Greater Berlin and for verbal agreements with the Russian authorities and the city agencies they had appointed as well as with the two relevant unions, the Association of Com-mercial and Bureau Employees and the Federation of Free German Trade Unions. The initial denazifcation measures of possibly tainted employees at Allianz were 
7 Ibid., pp. 126, 140每2, 151. 8 Ibid., pp. 148. 9 See the letter of Maiholzer to the Bezirksbgermeister des Verwaltungsbezirks Zehlendorf of July 
6, 1945, Staatsarchiv Hamburg, 221-11,F 17350. 
undertaken on July 15 together with a program of staff reduction of male and female employees hired during the war. Such reductions were necessary in order to make room for Allianz employees returning from the front, but they were used to eliminate former Nazi Party members in the process. Thus, of the 239 Allianz employees, 82 were put on leave without pay, and 31 were dismissed for purposes of denazifcation. At Allianz Leben, where there were 313 employees, 127 were put on leave without pay and 25 were dismissed as part of the denazifcation. Nevertheless, the ranks of both companies were rapidly reflled by returning sol-diers, and denazifcation continued to be used as a mechanism to reduce staff in connection with the more systematic denazifcation program that developed 
10
in 1945每1946. 
The nature of that program was initially discussed on July 23, 1945, at one of the regular Tuesday meetings by Goudefroy, who had been travelling in West Germany. He reported on a U.S. military forces directive of July 7, 1945, that required persons in responsible positions to fll out a 131-item questionnaire designed to elicit as much information as possible about their political afflia-tions and attitudes (as well as their personal histories) during the previous twelve years. The directive also banned the employment of persons who had joined the NSDAP, the SA, and the SS before April 1, 1933. As interpreted by Maiholzer, the directive did not require the suspension of managing boards of normal insurance companies but only of reinsurance companies doing international business. It was clear, however, that the personnel policy of Allianz in Berlin had to take the directive into account even if laws in the American and other zones were not ap-plicable to Berlin, just as laws in the Soviet zone of Germany were not applicable in Berlin. Denazifcation was in fact handled differently in the different zones, al-though the American model was the most important for the Western zones. On September 26, 1945, the military government in the American zone of Germany issued a new Law No. 8, which extended denazifcation to the entire economy, re-quired the dismissal of all Party members from positions that involved more than ordinary labor, and made all enterprises liable for implementing the law. Lastly, a ※Law for the Liberation from National Socialism and Militarism§ issued for the American zone on March 5, 1946, set up fve categories of persons: major of-fenders, offenders, lesser offenders, followers, and non-offenders or exonerated persons. The frst three categories were subject to punishment: in the worst cases, imprisonment, confscation of property, and prohibition from employment in responsible private or public positions; in other cases, fnes. Persons in the sec-ond category, however, could be placed on probation. The burden of contesting placement in the frst four categories fell on the individual, who might appeal the categorization to tribunals of Germans selected to deal with such cases.11 
The anticipation that comparable legislation would soon come into effect in Berlin was realized on March 10, 1946, in the form of a Denazifcation Order of 
10 Maiholzer, ※Die Berliner Allianz-Betriebe,§ pp. 163, 183每9,FHA. 11 Zink, United States in Germany, pp. 162每3. 
the Allied Control Council that required the dismissal of Party members insofar as their activity had been anything more than nominal. The types of activities that could make an employee liable to dismissal 每 such as violations of interna-tional law, mistreatment of foreign nationals in the areas occupied by Germany during the war, or accusations of having denounced opponents of the National Socialist regime 每 were in fact fairly substantial. In West Berlin as in West Ger-many, the accused had the right to appeal dismissal at a hearing.12 As head of the Berlin Allianz offces, Maiholzer did not want the responsibility for deciding (along with one member of the employee group) on denazifcation appeals; he therefore secured He.＊s permission to create a denazifcation commission com-posed of three representatives each from management and the employees to hear such cases. The commission held ffteen hearings between May 1946 and July 1949 and dealt with 60 cases. Such meetings could be summoned at the behest of the accused, management, the employees council, or a government agency in Berlin. Maiholzer participated in fourteen of the hearings, normally as chair-man. The exception was on May 14, when Maiholzer＊s questionnaire and those of ten other Berlin managing board members 每 including that of He., who had never been a Party member 每 were discussed. No political reservations were ex-pressed about any of them.13 
The result of the 60 cases investigated by the commission was that 20 persons were dismissed or pensioned off, and in four cases the commission found that the individuals in question were genuine culprits. It would be a mistake, how-ever, to think that these numbers tell the entire story (or even an accurate one) about the denazifcation problem in Berlin. On the one hand, many of those who knew they were vulnerable never asked for a hearing and simply gave up their jobs. On the other hand, in Maiholzer＊s view, many Allianz employees who appeared before government denazifcation commissions were unjustly charged and lost their positions because those commissions did not ask their employer (i.e., Allianz) about their behavior.14 
It is to be noted that some of the major directors who had initially played an important role in postwar Berlin 每 Hans Goudefroy, Gerd Mler, Walther Mercker (who headed the Assets Division), and Werner Krause (who directed the Berlin branch) 每 did not come up for discussion in the Allianz commission. Goudefroy＊s case was not considered because he did not submit a questionnaire to this commission. He subsequently underwent denazifcation in Hamburg (where he directed the branch of Allianz) and was completely cleared, but he had already been permitted by authorities in Berlin-Zehlendorf to represent He. on the basis of a variety of attestations by Maiholzer, members of the factory coun-cil, and other Allianz employees known to have opposed National Socialism. He. wrote a strong letter on Goudefroy＊s behalf, pointing out that Goudefroy 
12 Maiholzer, ※Die Berliner Allianz-Betriebe,§ pp. 204每9, FHA. 13 Ibid., pp. 213每15. 
14 
Ibid. 
wanted to leave the Party in 1935 but was advised against it by He. himself. As shown in Chapter 5, Goudefroy＊s account of his role in dealing with the insur-ance problems connected with the Pogrom of November 1938 was, to say the least, a very skewed one, but there was no one around to challenge it.15 Goude-froy was eventually to succeed He. as general director in October 1948. Gerd Mler moved to Hannover and soon went to Stuttgart to assume the leadership of Allianz Leben in 1947. Although never a Party member, his activity as a mil-itary administrative councilor in France led to some inquiries, but he was also fully cleared.16 
The case of Walther Mercker is interesting because he had been put on leave until his case could be clarifed, which it had not been by the end of 1945 be-cause the original certifcation given to him had to be supplied by another district offce. Although it was anticipated that he would be adjudged as a person ※not to be considered an NSDAP member,§ a decision was nonetheless made to keep him on leave ※out of regard for the mood in the company.§ What this suggests is that there was considerable pressure from the employees to eliminate former Nazis and a tendency to be suspicious of premature exonerations. In the case of Mercker, the problem was eliminated (for Berlin, at least) by his transfer and the transfer of his entire section to Hannover.17 
Werner Krause＊s case is signifcant for rather different reasons. He had ac-tually been dismissed on September 26 by the American military authorities for membership in the Party. Krause apparently knew what was coming and, after discussions with Erwin Weber (head of the employee representation at the branch), composed a lengthy letter describing his career. Krause, who had already reached retirement age, came from a well-to-do Berlin family with cul-tivated artistic and intellectual interests and had grown up in a milieu in which there was regular contact with Jewish artists and intellectuals. He found his orig-inally intended career in the military too confning and, through the good offces of the Cologne banker Baron von Oppenheim, sought a position connected with horse racing (apparently one of his passions) or in commerce or industry; he became the general secretary of the Union-Klub of Berlin in 1919. In this ca-pacity he later ran afoul of the Nazis because he was involved in disseminating an anti-Nazi brochure in Hoppegarten, the suburb of Berlin in which he lived, and in 1933 he found himself under pressure to leave his position. Hans He., who was head of the fnance commission of the club, suggested that Krause re-sign voluntarily and take a position at Allianz. Thanks to his connections, he did splendidly as an insurance salesman and became head of the Berlin branch in 1940. This was a prominent position in the concern and the insurance business, 
15 See Chapter 5,p. 234. 
16 See the various letters of support, including that of Maiholzer and Scholber of July 6, 1945, and 
He.ofAug. 6, 1945, Staatsarchiv Hamburg, 221-11,F 17350 (Dr. Hans Goudefroy). On Mler, 
see his Spruchkammerakte, Staatsarchiv Ludwigsburg, EL 902 /20,AZ 3/11956. 17 See Maiholzer, ※Die Berliner Allianz-Betriebe,§ p. 199, FHA. 
and the DAF pressured him to join the Party. He decided to join at this time, rather than run into trouble with the Party once again and possibly have the DAF (or President Amend of the RAA) insist on his dismissal on grounds of nonmem-bership and then dictate who should take his place. In his letter to Weber, Krause insisted that he joined in a purely formal sense, kept aloof from Party activities and demonstrations of support as much as possible, and also claimed contacts with members of the Resistance, especially State Secretary Erwin Planck, who kept him informed about the high military offcers involved. Krause claimed that he knew of the July 20 plot over a week before it happened and that General Di-rector He. could confrm this. He also insisted that he stood up for a colleague married to a Jew who had been arrested for making what Krause described to the Gestapo as ※incautious§ remarks. This was found ※interesting§ by the Gestapo offcials and was, of course, quite ※incautious§ of Krause.18 
Krause＊s letter of testimony to Weber was remarkably detailed and precise, but also frank and blunt in recognizing that he was hardly alone in denying that he was really a Nazi while insisting he would have to be judged by his record. Convincing as his statement was, the most extraordinary supporting evidence Krause provided was that given by Gther Klein, who had directed the Warthe-gau branch in Posen. He and Krause had a great deal of social and business contact between 1940 and 1945, with Krause often Klein＊s hunting guest and the latter often visiting Krause＊s Berlin residence. They felt they could speak freely with one another in private and, as Klein reported: 
We very often discussed political questions occasioned by the Polish evacuation in Posen in 1940, the persecution of the Jews in Litzmannstadt and later events. I was able to fnd complete agreement with Herr Krause in our views with respect to the condemnation of National Socialist methods, especially in the question of the Gestapo terror and the racial theories of the NSDAP. 
Thus, ※Herr Krause always expressed revulsion over the treatment of the Jews in general and especially in the former district of the Wartheland.§19 What makes this testimony notable is that Klein admitted that they both were aware of the crimes being committed in Poland. Indeed, the ※later events§ could only mean the Holocaust. This was not knowledge that Germans readily confessed to 每 either in August 1945 or later 每 and Klein could easily have rested with a re-counting of Krause＊s good deeds in Berlin. It is rare evidence that at least a few civilians working in the East were revolted by the crimes being committed there. Whatever the case, Weber 每 writing on behalf of the employer representation at the Allianz 每 protested Krause＊s dismissal to the military commander in the district of Berlin-Scheberg, pointing out that Krause was highly regarded by those who worked under him, had never behaved like a Nazi, and had indeed 
18 Krause an Weber, 17. Sept. 1945, FHA, S 17.13/163. 19 Gther Klein, ※Stellungnahme zu dem Antrag des Herrn Werner Krause ... zu seiner Zuge-
higkeit zur NSDAP,§ 17. Aug. 1945, ibid. 
been rather open about his distaste for the movement.20 Apparently, the Ameri-can military authorities had promised to review his case but had still not come up with a decision by the end of 1945. Allianz appeared very anxious to reemploy him and appealed to the anti-Fascist Committee in the community of Hoppe-garten, where Krause lived, to consider his case as well. Ultimately, however, the matter was settled by a decision on Krause＊s part to retire.21 
Berlin was in any case losing in importance and, as Goudefroy and Mler were to show, their future (and, indeed, that of Allianz) lay in the West. It was there rather than in Berlin that the most important denazifcation cases are to be found. To be sure, General Director He. took personal charge of the central headquarters in Berlin and assumed authority over the various Berlin branches of the concern in February 1946, and Berlin remained the seat of the concern in a formal sense for the next few years. Berlin, however, had become an island in-conveniently separated from the active reopened branches in the West. This was because its branches in the Soviet zone had been closed down and their assets taken over by public provincial insurance companies by the end of 1946.The East Berlin branches of Allianz continued to function until the currency reform of June 1948 and were then taken over as well. The actual business of Allianz in Berlin had thus been radically reduced, and the Berlin blockade that followed led to a formal decision to make Munich the seat of the concern in West Germany in 1949. 
The Russian brand of ※denazifcation§ was ideologically based not on indi-vidual responsibility but on the proposition that capitalism was responsible for Nazism. It thus denied Allianz or the private insurance business any sort of fu-ture wherever possible. Within Berlin itself, the concern had to tread warily, as did the other private insurers, since both commercial and organizational activ-ity on their part led to attacks from the Communist press charging that ※Nazi organizations§ were being revived by the ※concerns§ that allegedly stood behind them. For example, the effort to create a working community of private insur-ance companies in Berlin (under the leadership of Victoria, Gerling, and Allianz) was constantly attacked on such grounds.22 
This did not mean, however, that the situation of the private insurance busi-ness in the ideologically more friendly West was an easy one, although it certainly was much more pleasant in the English than in the American zone. The Ameri-cans were particularly suspicious of German fnancial institutions, believing that the universal banks (with their combination of investment and commercial func-tions) and insurance companies 每 to whom they attributed a role in industrial fnance comparable to that exercised in the United States 每 were an especially dangerous fnancial sector. The two were thus lumped together in this category, and special regulations were issued mandating suspension of leading persons in 
20 Weber an die Milit.rkommandantur, 26. Sept. 1945, ibid. 21 Maiholzer, ※Die Berliner Allianz-Betriebe,§ pp. 199每200, FHA. 22 Ibid., pp. 148每50, 234每8, 264每82,FHA. 
the larger concerns, immediate dismissal of certain categories (above all, Party members) among them, and the requirement that all company offcials of rank fll out questionnaires. To be sure, the English and French dismissed many such persons as well. Nevertheless, the Americans tended to be quick to dismiss and slow to reinstate directors, and many more tribunal hearings were held in the American zone.23 Even one so confdent of exoneration (because of the strong support he was receiving) as Director Hans Parthier of Allianz Leben in Stuttgart faced over a year of uncertainty and unemployment. Dismissed in September 1945, he complained to a colleague in January 1946 that he still had not been reinstated, 
despite the fact that I was only a nominal party member, that is so to speak, a follower because of my employment position .... In the American zone the leading persons are evaluated very strictly. Happily in my case a number of outstanding references have been assembled, also with regard to my political position and the company has petitioned for my reinstatement.24 
Parthier was very experienced, and Allianz Leben needed his assistance badly. This was one of many instances in which denazifcation posed considerable dif-fculties in the reconstruction of the Allianz concern because it frequently pre-vented potential successors of the top leaders from taking immediate command. Another illustration was Alfred Haase, who was to become head of Frankfurter Versicherungs-AG in 1948 and head of the organization section in Munich in 1952, and to succeed Goudefroy as general director in 1962. In March 1947,at a time when Wiesbaden was being considered as a possible headquarters for Al-lianz (before the decision was fnally made for Munich in 1949), Haase was slated to become head of the organization section. He was, however, undergoing de-nazifcation, although it seemed obvious that he would be fully exonerated since he had not been a Party member and had become an SA member only because his horseback riding association was asked to have its members join the SA Rid-ing Association. Haase had served in the army from the beginning to the end of the war, when he became a prisoner of the Americans. He had excellent tes-timonials on his behalf, including one from the factory council and one from Allianz＊s former Jewish insurance agent Ludwig Pototzky, who was in London. Under these circumstances, Allianz petitioned for a speeding up of his case as 
23 See the manuscript, ※Zur Entwicklung der Bayerische Versicherungsbank seit Kriegsausbruch 1. 
September 1939,§ FHA, S 17.13/177, pp. 8每9. The American requirements for the denazifca-
tion in Wttemberg-Baden were circulated by the Versicherungsausschu. f die amerikanische 
Zone in Wttemberg-Baden, 26.Feb. 1946; this and related instructions are to be found in FHA, 
S 17.3/5. For the situation in Frankfurt, where the military authorities simply installed a Director 
Kettner to head the company, see the Niederschrift er die Abteilungsleitersitzung am 14.Mai 
1945, FHA, S 17.18/124. For a comparison of the zones, see Zink, United States in Germany, pp. 
15每167. 24 Parthier an Hermann Hitzler, 7. Jan. 1946, HM, A0001-00056, Bd. 3; Parthier an Hitzler, 5. Okt. 
1946, ibid., Bd. 6. 
one of great importance to reconstruction of the concern. Apparently, however, it took until 1948 for the matter to be settled.25 
As had been the case in Berlin, so in the West: denazifcation involved the middle management level and affected staffng. In Bavaria, which had the most insurance companies and personnel in the American zone, those subject to the law were screened at the company level while more important or complicated cases were reviewed by a screening committee for the Bavarian insurance busi-ness under the chairmanship of Director Georg Obermayer of Munich Re. The cases handled at the company level are interesting because of the light they shed on the more everyday circumstances that led to Party, SA, or SS membership among the less exalted (though by no means unimportant) members of the con-cern and also because they suggest how diffcult was the task of establishing motives and meeting the confused goals of the denazifcation program. At Bay-erische Versicherungsbank, no fewer than seventeen of the managerial personnel below the level of the managing board and its deputies had been dismissed in the summer of 1945, out of a total of 51 persons. Since three had retired, one had died, and one had not come back from the front, this meant that the dismissals had cut heavily into the company＊s offcialdom.26 
How complicated and laborious such denazifcation procedures could be is il-lustrated by the case of Michael Wispelsberger, who headed the fre insurance section of Bayerische Versicherungsbank. Wispelsberger was dismissed by the military government in July 1945 because of his Party membership. As he tried to explain in his effort to get reinstated, he had only joined the Party in 1938 (al-though his membership was backdated to 1937) and had done so because of his long-standing membership in the Munich Voluntary Fire Department, in whose development he had played a very important role and which he wanted to head in 1938 in order to ensure that it would not be given to an inexperienced Party person. Additionally, there had been constant agitation within the company em-anating from new employees who had been brought into the company as part of the effort to reduce unemployment, and Wispelsberger felt joining was the only way to keep things under control and promote those who deserved promo-tion. There was no evidence of his ever having been a Party activist, although he had distinguished himself as a frefghter 每 though gaining distinction at one＊s work during the war was normally viewed as negative evidence by the occupa-tion military government. In any case, he certainly was able to bring to bear strong support from his co-workers at Allianz, including a touching and prob-ably spontaneous letter of support by a ※non-Aryan§ insurance adviser whose 
25 Schreiben Allianz an das Aufsichtsamt f Versicherung, Gro.-Hessisches Finanzministerium, 
26. M.rz 1947; Aufsichtsamt an das Ministerium f politische Befreiung, 27. M.rz 1947; Alfred Haase an die Spruchkammer Friedberg/Hessen, 24. M.rz 1947, BAK, B 280/1707. On Pototzky, see Chapter 3,p. 135, and also pp. 504每5 in this chapter. 
26 See the lists in FHA, S 17.13/132. Five members of the managing board, including General Direc-tor Arendts, had also been dismissed. 
job often involved doing things contrary to Wispelsberger＊s interests and who praised the latter for not, like so many others, taking advantage of the situation to eliminate a competitor. Finally, the management of Bayerische Versicherungs-bank was particularly anxious to get Wispelsberger back since the latter, himself 60 years old, had been replaced by a pensioner who could only remain for a lim-ited time and since younger replacements with the necessary expertise in the fre insurance branch were either sick or dead. Wispelsberger was reinstated with the approval of the American authorities in May 1946. 27 
The screening commission for the Bavarian insurance business (headed by Obermayer) usually dealt with higher-level cases, often referred to it by the in-dividual company screening committees, and was called on to judge not only the degree of activism of the suspects but also the motives of those who had joined the Party or other condemned organizations. He found the job quite ex-hausting, which is understandable since between February and the end of August 1946 they had to review some 399 cases and seriously consider 147. Final deci-sions were made in 84 cases; the remainder were referred to the tribunals. Out of every hundred cases, well over half could be classifed as mere ※followers.§ This does not mean that the commission was not diligent. At its May 14 meeting, for example, it could fnd no positive evidence on behalf of a health insurance ex-ecutive and deemed him ※unworthy of professional employment.§ Similarly, it refused to overturn the classifcation of a Bayerische Versicherungsbank offcial because it had no positive evidence on his behalf. It did classify a second Bay-erische Versicherungsbank offcial as a follower who should be returned to his old position.28 
More generally, denazifcation meant that some of the leading general di-rectors and directors of the Allianz concern and of Munich Re were summarily dismissed and faced investigation, hearings by tribunal, and potential penalties 每 among them Wilhelm Arendts at Bayerische Versicherungsbank, Alfred Wiede-mann in Frankfurt, Arno Eberhard from Allianz Leben in Stuttgart, Wilhelm Leicher from the Allianz branch in Stuttgart, and Karl Otto Meyer in Cologne. Finally, there were the cases at the very summit of the industry: Adolf Samwer, Alois Alzheimer, August von Finck, Eduard Hilgard, and Kurt Schmitt. Hence 
27 The relevant correspondence is to be found in FHA, S 17.13/140. Some other cases are to be found 
in FHA, S 17.13/133 and 138, although their ultimate disposition is unclear. Especially curious 
is the case of an insurance representative who had been a member of the SS between 1933 and 
1935 and then married a non-Aryan woman in 1940, seemed to have enjoyed the protection of his 
military superiors, including General von Rundstedt, and ended up dismissed from the army as 
unworthy of service and returned to the company in 1942. 28 See FHA, S 17.13/132 for the minutes of the meeting of Aug. 27, 1946, for the summary of ac-
tivity; see the minutes of the May 14, 1946, meeting for the cases discussed. Another interesting 
case was that of General Director Tiedke＊s successor at Alte Leipziger, August Walz, who was re-
instated because of a speech he gave appreciating Tiedke＊s services after taking over his job. See 
the minutes of Feb. 21, 1946, ibid. 
the insurance leaders (with Allianz and Munich Re at the forefront) were forced, albeit certainly under more promising circumstances than in the East, to face a dual task. They had to exonerate themselves in denazifcation proceedings and also persuade the Western Allies that neither their enterprises nor the particu-lar forms private capitalism had taken in Germany were responsible for Nazism and, indeed, to convince critics at home and abroad that German capitalism was antithetical to National Socialism. Ultimately the leaders of the German insurance business, and especially those coming from the Allianz and Munich Re concerns, were quite successful in these efforts. By studying their cases, one can gain some sense of the different ways in which Allianz leaders dealt with the Third Reich 每 or at least how they perceived their roles and actions. 
There were, to be sure, rare individuals at the top of the German insurance business who could face neither the past nor the future, like Ernst Drumm, chair-man of the supervisory board of Bayerische Rkversicherung AG. The major shareholder of this company was Swiss Re, and when one of the latter＊s directors visited Munich in July 1945, Drumm was in a foul mood, insisting that he was completely guiltless and knew nothing about the atrocities. He complained that the Swiss were leaving him in the lurch and found the lack of Swiss sympathy for the Germans an outrage. Drumm went on to insist that, if the Germans had the superiority in equipment enjoyed by the Americans, then the war would have ended differently. Indeed, he was not shy about saying that he wished that the Germans had won the war and, when reminded that this would have meant a con-tinuation of the atrocities in the concentration camps, apparently did not think that a matter of consequence. His Swiss colleague felt differently and concluded that ※despite his extraordinary intelligence, he continues to hold, without notic-ing it, the incomprehensible ideas of the Third Reich.§29 Nevertheless, Drumm had never been known as a Nazi and had tried to keep his Jewish General Direc-tor Simon Wertheimer until this became impossible in 1937. 30 Both his attitude and his end, therefore, came as something of a shock. In August, fearing im-prisonment by the Allies in the wave of arrests of high-ranking executives then taking place, Drumm, who was 73 years old, committed suicide. 
Drumm＊s ten-year-younger colleague in Munich, General Director Wilhelm Arendts of Bayerische Versicherungsbank, was obviously reaching the end of his career in any case and had spent most of the war in military service as a general staff offcer with the rank of colonel. He had joined the Party in 1933, however, and was not only a plant leader of the Bayerische Versicherungsbank but also the treasurer of the Academy of German Law; he also held an appointed position in the DAF dealing with insurance. All this made him unacceptable to the Amer-ican military government, which ordered his dismissal on August 4, 1945.The 
29 Vertraulicher Bericht, 1.每5. Juli 1945,SR, FA A7.3-03. 30 Ausschu. Protokoll, 22. M.rz 1937, SR; Ausschu.-Protokolle, Bd. XI, pp. 208每10; Ausschu. Pro-
tokoll, 24. Sept. 1945, SR; Ausschu.-Protokolle, Bd. XII, pp. 193f. 
position was a crucial one because Bayerische Versicherungsbank was becoming a point of crystallization for the entire Allianz concern. The chief shareholders, Allianz and Munich Re, therefore acted rapidly and put Eberhard von Reining-haus, whose political credentials were satisfactory and whose person had indeed been protected by his position at Munich Re since 1938, into the leading direc-tor position at Bayerische Versicherungsbank. Von Reininghaus remained in this position until September 1946, when he returned to the rather leaderless Munich Re as chairman of the managing board, since both Schmitt and Alzheimer had been barred from service because of their denazifcation. Hans Dmler then took over as chairman of the managing board of Bayerische Versicherungsbank. 
Arendts, who intended to retire in any case, turned out to have much better political credentials than one would have thought. He was held in an American POW camp from September 7, 1945, to July 5, 1946, after which he began the process of trying to clear his name. Since he had held both a high position in the Bavarian business world and in the Army and since he belonged to a number of Nazi organizations aside from the Party, the public prosecutor placed him in cat-egory II as an offender. Arendts himself argued that he belonged in category V 每 that is, among the exonerated. In the Munich tribunal decision that fnally came down on June 18, 1948, Arendts was both exonerated and praised for his role as a resister.31 The tribunal accepted Arendts＊s explanation of his decision to join the Party. Although a member of the Bavarian People＊s Party before 1933 and a practicing Catholic, he had joined the Party for the sake of his company, which employed some 850 persons. He believed that ※it was the obligation of all cor-rect upstanding persons to join the Party in order to prevent the radical rowdies to run the government here.§ Having lived in Munich, he knew the kind of peo-ple running the Party but nevertheless ※made the sacrifce,§ well knowing that he would be viewed as an enemy and that he was dealing with a particularly radical Nazi factory council. Arendts confessed to entertaining the hope that the Party might move in a constructive direction if it came into the ※right hands,§ but he was rapidly disabused of this illusion. The tribunal also accepted Arendts＊s claim that his support of the regime in offcial speeches and in other activities was done for show. He was known to have protected Jews, half-Jews, and political op-ponents of the regime. The Nazi organization in Bayerische Versicherungsbank had formally complained to Gauleiter Adolf Wagner about Arendts＊s behavior in this respect and also about his Catholicism. All those who testifed on his be-half were either known enemies of the regime or at least untainted. Given these facts, it was hard not to conclude that Arendts, his early illusions notwithstand-ing, was never a Nazi at heart and had used his power as general director to do what he could to mitigate Nazi abuses. 
However, what really made the case for Arendts and saved him from being classifed as a ※follower§ was that he was not simply aware of the Resistance 
31 The materials on Arendts＊s denazifcation are to be found in AM, Spruchkammerakten Wilhelm Arendts. See the lengthy fnal decision of June 18, 1948, with which the fle begins. 
but actually acted on its behalf once he went on active military duty in 1939. Arendts had planned a military career and was a staff offcer in the First World War. He left the military after that war (because of lack of opportunity) but maintained his military connections, among them General Franz Halder, and served at a high rank when called up in 1939. Whereas Arendts only briefy men-tioned his service in Poland, where he noted the dominating role of the Party but not his involvement with restructuring the insurance business there, he had a great deal to say about his service in France. This was with good reason, since he had been assigned to the headquarters in Paris, where he worked closely after the spring of 1942 with one of the chief conspirators, General Heinrich von Stp-nagel, and served as a liaison with other high-ranking offcers willing to support or participate in a plot to overthrow Hitler. Stpnagel was one of those con-vinced that Hitler had to be killed, and he informed Arendts rather precisely about the different attitudes of the military men with respect to taking action against the regime. Arendts thus also came to know who was not willing to par-ticipate in such a venture and who was willing to do so only after it succeeded, and the account he provided the tribunal is a remarkably precise and important source on this subject that deserves the attention of students of the Resistance and events of July 20. Stpnagel also informed Arendts of the role to be played by the military staff in Paris in acting against the SS, Gestapo, and police in the event of an attempted assassination, and in September 1943 he assigned Arendts the task of keeping him informed about changes in the staff and the attitudes of persons newly assigned to it. Arendts＊s own role in the most crucial events was limited, however, by two factors that also probably saved his life: a bad heart, which compelled him to return to Germany for treatment in 1943, where he be-came involved in trying to recruit potential support in Bavaria (especially the popular Ritter von Epp, an old Nazi who was now having second thoughts); and then, after his return to duty, his reassignment to southern France, then under the command of General Johannes Blaskowitz, where Stpnagel wanted him to assist if and when the plot succeeded. He thus ※missed§ the disastrous events of July 20 in Paris and, in the subsequent retreat of the German armies from the South, was able to prevent atrocities and undermine the scorched-earth tactics ordered in Berlin. Not only fellow German offcers but also a French resistance offcer were able to substantiate that he had saved the offcer and his wife (along with eighteen French prisoners) from execution and had prevented the destruc-tion of the Schneider Works in Le Creusot, one of France＊s greatest steelworks. Finally released from service in January 1945, Arendts was able to return to his position in Munich until he was arrested by the Americans.32 
Arendts had obviously been in grave danger, and he was well aware of it. For this reason he had confded in two close friends from Munich Re, Kisskalt and 
32 See his 15-page Niederschrift of March 28, 1948, in ibid. See also the statement on his behalf by 
Comte Bernard de B谷arn of July 10, 1946, as well as letters of attestation by Generals Halder and 
Speidel and by the Bonn historian who had served in France, Max Braubach. 
Director Walther Meuschel, so that they could explain the situation to his wife in case something happened to him. In addition to the aforementioned circum-stances connected with his health and location on July 20, he attributed his good fortune to the destruction of incriminating evidence by the plotters in Paris, the self-interested dragging out of the army investigation in Paris, and the unener-getic handling of an investigation launched by the Munich Gestapo. Thus, given the impressive evidence in his favor and the repeated risks Arendts took, the tri-bunal in Munich felt justifed in fully exonerating him. As the tribunal correctly pointed out, such full exonerations were rare, a quality that it chose to charac-terize as a demonstration of the ※recognition of the new democratic state.§ In reality, the tribunals 每 thanks to the absurdities and contradictions of the denaz-ifcation procedure 每 had turned into what one historian has called a ※followers factory§33 whereby the majority of those considered were more or less dumped into the least serious category of culprit, so that they were neither subject to sig-nifcant penalty nor exonerated. The Arendts case, however, defed such homog-enization, andfrom itthetribunal milked asmuch generalsignifcanceas itcould: 
His collaboration in a decisive position in the preparations for the assassination also gives the outside world a picture of the diffculties of German life in the Hitler State, as it only can be judged by persons who were at this time in the midst of life in Germany as op-ponents [of the regime] and as soldiers. It is a refutation of German collective guilt and a demonstration that broad circles were active in trying to eliminate the regime at risk of their lives in order to prevent further shedding of blood and saving the honor of the German people and soldiers. If they did not succeed, this was not their fault.34 
Although this may have put more freight on the Arendts case than was justifable, the honoring of the men of July 20 was uncommon at this time and remained so for a number of years. From the perspective of this study, what is most ex-ceptional is an aspect of Arendts＊s exoneration effort distinguishing it from that of his colleagues at Allianz and Munich Re. As devoted as he was to his work and his company, Arendts makes no mention whatever of his role or his desire to save the German insurance industry from the clutches of Schwede-Coburg and the publicly chartered or DAF companies. Rather, he described his acts of resis-tance in humane and political terms. Undoubtedly his religious engagement and the traditionalist sense of honor and responsibility played an important role in this attitude, but it refected a markedly different self-understanding from that to be found in the other denazifcation cases now to be considered. 
Needless to say, Arendts was a high-ranking offcer with direct connection to many of the persons involved in the July 20 plot, and it can hardly be ex-pected that other Allianz directors would have been in a position to compensate in the same way for their Party membership and public support of the regime and its works. This certainly was true of Arno Eberhard, the director of Allianz 
33 Niethammer, Mitl.uferfabrik, Kap. 5. 34 Decision of the Tribunal, June 18, 1948, AM, Spruchkammerakten Wilhelm Arendts. 
Leben in Stuttgart, whom the tribunal there found to be a follower who was not really a convinced National Socialist or militarist. Apparently his speeches at plant assemblages were not considered true expressions of his convictions, and if the powerful testimony to his ※Swabian§ (and thus purportedly individualist and democratic) behavior is to be believed, then the speeches were of no ac-count. Eberhard was able to provide a decent collection of attestations to the fact that he had given employment to known political opponents of the regime, Jews, and persons married to Jews, and the factory council confrmed that he did not support National Socialism. Apparently, he had also made rather im-politic comments in front of Party members opposing the war and criticizing the regime. He was placed in the follower category, fned 2,000 RM in October 1946, and charged for court costs.35 
However, his explanations for applying in May 1933 for Party membership had certain peculiarities worth noting. On the one hand, he claimed that he was under great pressure from the company NSBO cell in Stuttgart, which warned that the directors should not be surprised if the movement took a radical turn if they did not join. Another consideration, according to Eberhard, was that the Stuttgart branch was constantly being threatened from Berlin with further cen-tralization and losing its independent sales organization. The continued right of Stuttgart to have its own sales organization was fnally confrmed in 1936, but Eberhard rather lamely asserted that this was the largest such organization in South Germany, that many jobs were at stake, and that joining the Party was viewed as giving the Stuttgart directors some leverage in appealing to po-litical authorities if worse came to worst. On the other hand, it was precisely the central headquarters in Berlin to whom Eberhard attributed his decision to join the Party, a point reinforced by a letter of support from Schloe.mann on Eberhard＊s behalf.36 Apparently, there had been much calling back and forth be-tween the directors in Stuttgart and Berlin, as those in Stuttgart tried to fgure out whether or not to join and what the directors in Berlin thought. According to Schloe.mann, who never joined the Party himself, the facts that Hindenburg had appointed Hitler chancellor and that Schmitt was contemplating becoming economics minister proved crucial in Eberhard＊s decision 每 along with the fact that Hitler received international recognition. Both Schloe.mann and Eberhard admitted that the directors in Berlin left the decision about joining the Party to in-dividuals themselves, but Eberhard claimed in his statement for the tribunal that the Berlin directors suggested that one had to take appropriate account of the fact that Schmitt was taking over the RWM. According to Eberhard, the Berlin 
35 See Chapter 3,p. 113, for Eberhard＊s speeches. For the council statement of June 12, 1946, see 
the denazifcation proceedings held by the Stuttgart Tribunal, which handed down its judgment 
on Oct. 21, 1946, Staatsarchiv Ludwigsburg, EL 902/20,AZ 17/8068. Eberhard decided to retire 
for reasons of age. 36 See Eberhard＊s ※Grde f meinen Beitritt zur Partei§ and Schloe.mann an Eberhard, 8. Okt. 
1945, ibid. 
directors indicated that they were going to join the Party but then changed their minds without informing their colleagues in Stuttgart. The trouble with all this is that 每 while Schmitt and the Berlin offces certainly were advising the concern to take a positive attitude toward the regime 每 Schmitt himself was not asked by Ging to be economics minister until the end of June, yet Eberhard applied for membership in May. Amusingly, just as the blame for infuencing directors to join the Party was attributed to Schmitt by Schloe.mann, so too was the in-creased criticism of the Party among Allianz directors, since Schmitt made them aware of his growing disaffection after assuming the post of economics minister. In the last analysis, the simplest explanation for Eberhard＊s joining the Party is that he got on the bandwagon for opportunistic reasons, along with a host of other businessmen, and certainly never was a Nazi by conviction. Apparently, he did contemplate leaving the Party later on and discussed the matter a number of times with Schloe.mann, but they both agreed, according to the latter, that staying in the Party was in the best interests of the company and also a way to prevent radical infuences from gaining hold. 
Compared to the painful efforts and gyrations of Eberhard in explaining his Party membership, the denazifcation of Wilhelm Leicher (the deputy director at Stuttgart since 1937) was a model of simplicity itself. He had joined the Party because, as he honestly admitted, he believed that one had to give the new po-litical movement a chance to prove itself. Subsequently, he turned against the Party and could provide credible testimony that he had helped Jews and politi-cal opponents of the regime and had criticized the regime on various occasions. He was held to be a follower in July 1947, fned 1,000 RM, and went back to work. One has the impression that his denazifcation caused him disproportion-ate suffering, since he had been kept out of work since September 1945 and had considerable fnancial diffculties.37 
The case of the head of the Cologne branch, Karl Otto Meyer, was another that, like many others, seemed to drag on 每 until 1948, in fact 每 although Meyer did not want to return to his old position because of his age and health and was quite content to be employed as an insurance representative. The denazif-cation subcommittee of the Allianz branch in Cologne had already decided in December 1946 that employees would not understand Meyer＊s reappointment to a leading position but had no objection to his working as a representative. Their judgment of him was anything but fattering, which may have had something to do with the fact that he was known as a left-winger prior to 1933 and had then changed his political position. In their view, he was a ※one hundred percent Na-tional Socialist.§ In contrast to the Eberhard case, Meyer＊s speeches as ※plant leader§ were taken seriously as aiding the National Socialist cause, although the committee did voice its doubts about the sincerity of his convictions at the time. In summary, according to the subcommittee, ※it is questionable whether he was 
37 Spruchkammerakte Wilhelm Leicher, Staatsarchiv Ludwigsburg, E 902 /20,AZ 6/14661. 
a real convinced Nazi, and it is far more likely that the term ＆time server＊ is on the mark in the case of M. In his case, one is dealing with one of the typical ＆March fallen＊ who did not want to miss any advantages or wanted to ＆be on the right side＊.§38 At the same time, the subcommittee noted that Meyer had never put political pressure on non-Nazis, and Meyer himself was able to present an impressive array of testimonies to the help he gave to Jews and critics of the regime. The case was fnally settled in 1948, when Meyer was put in the follower category. As a result, his assets were unblocked so that his bombed-out house could be restored. By this time he had reached 60, and General Director He. in-structed that Meyer＊s temporary pensioning since 1946 be made permanent and that his further services as a representative of Allianz be negotiated.39 
LikeMeyer, the Frankfurtbranch head AlfredWiedemann 每 whowasgenerally regarded as one of the more formidable and important directors in the Allianz concern and, indeed, in the German insurance business in general 每 was charac-terized as a ※time server.§ In his case, the phrase was used in the charge against him, which placed him in the offender category.40 Wiedemann had joined the PartyinMay 1933, was a member of several other National Socialist organiza-tions and of the Academy for German Law, and also held a variety of positions in regional economic and business organizations. In short, he was extremely prominent and was characterized as a ※willing instrument of National Social-ism, for whom every means was justifed in order to have a good relationship with the NSDAP.§ 
Wiedemann＊s lawyer strongly objected to these characterizations, especially the claim that he was a ※time server,§ which his client considered an ※insult.§ Wiedemann had a distinguished reputation in his feld and did not need the Party to gain promotion, which most certainly was true, and his propriety dur-ing the Nazi period could be attested to by a variety of impeccable persons, among them Artur Lauinger (of the Frankfurter Zeitung), with whom Wiede-mann maintained very close relations even though Lauinger was a Jew and under constant surveillance.41 Wiedemann＊s goal all along was to have himself classi-fed as a follower and, because of his age and health, he did not wish to return to a director position but rather to act as a consultant for the concern. He was in charge of the regional headquarters in Saxony and Silesia when he joined the PartyinMay 1933, and he did so in response to the general summons to join (coming from the Allianz headquarters in Berlin) and to the fact that some of the leading persons in the concern were taking this step. He would have had to join in any case if he wished to be a factory leader. Typically, he argued that he had never supported the Nazis but hoped that they would prove responsible. 
38 Entnazifzierungs-Unterausschu. der Allianz an den Berufungsausschu. f Entnazifzierung des 
Stadtkreises Kn, 17. Dez. 1946, Nordrhein-Westf.lisches Hauptstaatsarchiv, NW 1049/21108. 39 Mayer an Entnazifzierungs Hauptausschu., 3. April 1948, ibid. 40 Klageschrift, 14. M.rz 1947, HessHStA, Abt. 520-F, Nr. 248312 (Dr. Alfred Wiedemann). 41 See the letter of the law frm in question to the Gro.hessischer Staatsminister, April 1, 1947, ibid. 
Whatever the case, his appointment to Frankfurt with the task of creating a sin-gle organization there in 1935 gave him a position of exceptional importance, and Wiedemann considered his Party membership not only a ※service§ to his concern but also to the entire German insurance business, which was threatened by the Party. Wiedemann claimed never to have believed in National Socialism and that his opposition took hold after the Rm affair and increased when the war started. He credited himself with appointing non-Nazis to high positions in the company despite attacks from Das Schwarze Korps and insisted that he had no other motives in joining or staying in the Party than service to his profession.42 He., who had been a friend of Wiedemann since their youth, came strongly to Wiedemann＊s defense, pointing out that they had both detested the Nazis and that he was initially very upset that Wiedemann had let others persuade him to join. He accepted Wiedemann＊s explanation, however, and believed his motives were honorable. He. insisted that it was Wiedemann＊s talent and capability 每 not his membership in the Party 每 that were responsible for his promotion to the post in Frankfurt. Furthermore, according to He., Wiedemann had a close re-lationship with James Freudenburg and was certainly no anti-Semite. He. also stated that he had informed Wiedemann about the plot against Hitler in 1944, claiming in a rather exaggerated way that he (He.) was himself a participant in the plot. More convincingly, He. argued that, given Wiedemann＊s prominent position, it would have been dangerous for him to leave the Party. It is hard not to conclude that He.＊s defense of his old friend was somewhat embellished to make Wiedemann into a virtual resister.43 
To be sure, Wiedemann was able to produce an impressive attestation to his rejection of anti-Semitism, revulsion at the November 1938 Pogrom, and assis-tance to opponents of the regime. The other side of the coin, however, was that it was precisely his prominence that made his example so important, and while the factory council in Frankfurt praised him for his being a model director 每 treating people equally without regard to their political position, and openly thanking James Freudenburg for his services 每 it also made a very telling comment about his political and personal performance: ※In his being, Herr Dr. Wiedemann was no Nazi, even if externally in view of his position and the various honorary offces given him he became too obligated at public company rallies, from which he certainly should have abstained as a human being.§44 Thus, in the context of National Socialism, Wiedemann＊s ferocious professionalism became a vice rather than a virtue and came into confict with his certainly strong ethical in-stincts. Although Wiedemann could clear himself of one of the charges levelled against him 每 fring persons who had been denounced for making anti-Nazi or antiwar comments 每 it was precisely his position that made it impossible for him 
42 Statement by Wiedemann, Sept. 25, 1946, ibid. 
43 
Ibid. 44 See the Betriebsrat statement, ※Herr Dr. Wiedemann als Mensch in seinem Amt als Betriebs-
frer,§ 21. M.rz 1946, ibid. 
to avoid becoming implicated in serving the regime. In 1947, because of his ※op-portunistic attitude§ and the fact that his turning away from National Socialism found no overt expression, he was placed in the category of ※lesser offenders,§ obligated to pay 10,000 RM into the restitution funds plus court costs of 29,043 RM, and barred for two years from holding a high position in business, from performing work entailing responsibility or authority, and from working as a teacher, editor, writer, or radio commentator.45 A year later, Wiedemann suc-cessfully asked for reduction of the two-year limitation on his activities and thus became eligible to act as a consultant for the Allianz concern. 
In the case of Adolf Samwer, General Director of Karlsruher Leben, overween-ing ambition probably played a greater role than professionalism in explaining his behavior; this led him to formulate a lengthy and quite revealing self-defense. Known for his capacity and intelligence 每 but also for his cultivation of the Nazi bigwigs in Baden, his unscrupulous behavior as trustee for the Rhein und Mosel corporation, and the arrest of its former General Director Andr谷 Mouchard 每 Samwer was not in very good standing with some of his colleagues. At the end of the war he had been almost immediately suspended from his position in Karls-ruhe and expected to be dismissed, but in the meantime he had petitioned to be pensioned off because of his illness. The status of that request was uncer-tain, however, and Samwer was only 50 years old and anxious to return to the insurance business. This led him to turn to General Director Hermann Hitzler of Hamburg-Mannheimer, who assumed a position as leader of the insurance business in the English-controlled city. Samwer had heard that the British mea-sures were ※more reasonable§ than those taken by the Americans in the South. He pointed out to Hitzler that 
you know that I have done a great deal for the private insurance business and that it is just this work which I performed for the general good that brings me into the present diffcul-ties. It is for these reasons that I believe also to be justifed to turn in confdence to you, without wanting to be burdensome to you. One is today dependent on the understanding of leading colleagues if one does not want to be crushed. 
Samwer had only joined the Party in 1936 (although his membership was back-dated to May 1, 1933), and he claimed that Hitzler knew from their conversations that he was never a ※convinced National Socialist.§46 
Whatever Hitzler may have known about Samwer＊s views, Samwer was anx-ious to provide him with as strong a case, and as much information, as possible; he thus appended an eighteen-page account of his career and another twelve-page explanation of his role as trustee of the Rhein und Mosel Company.47 The 
45 Spruch vom 6. Sept. 1947, ibid. 46 Samwer an Hitzler, 30. Aug. 1945, HM, A0001-00056, Bd. 2. 47 The two documents, ※Erg.nzende Mitteilungen§ and ※Aktennotiz: Meine T.tigkeit f die Rhein 
& Mosel Versicherungs-Gesellschaft-Stra.burg. Niederschrift von Adolf Samwer,§ are appended 
to his letter to Hitzler, ibid., and are the basis of the discussion that follows. 
frst was composed to serve as an appendix to his questionnaire, which he had not yet actually flled out. The purpose of the second went unstated, but the ob-vious goal was to set down a self-defense for his actions in Alsace, either for his colleagues or in connection with the questionnaire. The main thrust of the frst appendix was to insist that he was a businessman with a liberal commitment, like his father Karl Samwer, and had a similar commitment to private enterprise.48 He was not a politician, had belonged to no political party, and had been a Ro-tarian for as long as that organization was not banned by the Nazis. When not engaged in his company＊s affairs, he was deeply involved in the struggle against the political instrumentalization of the publicly chartered companies; it could be demonstated that he was one of the chief opponents of Schwede-Coburg, Hans Goebbels, and Bra. and that he provided some of the most important intellectual ammunition against the writings of Rath. What he defned as his idealistic en-gagement in this cause was well known to his friend and supporter He., whom he described as ※a fanatic opponent of the Nazi regime.§ Although asked by the NSDAP district leader to join the Party in May 1933, and though he agreed to join because he liked the Party＊s anti-depression measures and the breaking of the ※rigid§ system of collective bargaining contracts, Samwer had refrained from pursuing the matter until 1936, when he found it politic to join and thus re-duce his exposure to criticism. Insofar as his political attitudes were concerned, he boasted of helping out enemies of the regime 每 such as former SPD Land-tag Deputy Alex Mler, who was a director of Karlsruher Leben (and would indeed replace Samwer and go on to a major career in the Federal Republic). He opposed the treatment of the Jews, and he claimed to have helped a number of them and to have found the Pogrom of November 1938 repugnant. Samwer constantly rejected appeals from the local authorities to give money to Julius Streicher＊s anti-Semitic and obscene Der Stmer. Most interesting, however, is that Samwer is the only insurance director among those being considered who mentions the confscation of Jewish property, which 
I considered to be an injustice. If the Karlsruher could not place itself against govern-ment orders, I still tried to make diffculties in individual cases in carrying them out. I remember in this connection a mortgage case of 1945 in which the Reich tried to get us to renounce a personal debt liability so that the State could get hold of the property in question. I refused to do so. 
What is signifcant about this remark is not that it refects some extraordinary moment in the protection of Jewish assets. Rather, it supplies evidence that at least this insurance industry leader was prepared not only to comment on the issue but also to suggest that it was indeed possible to do something to under-mine the process. 
Although Samwer was willing to touch on the Jewish asset question, where he seemed to feel he had a clearer conscience, he studiously avoided any mention of 
48 See Chapter 4,p. 160. 
his cultivation of Gauleiter Robert Wagner and Minister-President Walter Kler in Baden, although this was widely known among his colleagues.49 Samwer in-sisted that, insofar as he maintained contacts with the Party leadership in Baden, it was for the beneft of his company. At the same time, he willingly confessed to considerable cooperation with the social and educational programs of the DAF and was quite proud that it had designated Karlsruher a ※model company.§ In-deed, his lengthy description of all the wonderful things done for his employees made it sound as if he were competing once again for DAF recognition. While Samwer had to admit to a positive attitude toward the ※calm§ brought by Ger-many＊s control of Europe from Norway to France, his wife was witness to his distress at the treatment of Czechoslovakia and the war against the Soviet Union, which he thought would lead to an ※eastern Marne§ 每 that is, a great offensive that would end in defeat, as had been the case in the First World War. He did ad-mit to taking a more positive view of the regime prior to 1938, primarily because of the economic reconstruction he attributed to it. In sum, Samwer presented himself as an opponent of the persecution of the Jews and other designated op-ponents of National Socialism and as someone who cooperated with the regime only insofar as it promised economically positive results and promoted the well-being of Karlsruher and its employees. When turning to his role in the Rhein und Mosel affair and the arrest of Mouchard, however, Samwer claimed that he did all he could to beneft the company placed under his trusteeship and that Mouchard had presented him with forged documents claiming that Petain had confrmed his leadership of the company. Samwer argued that he had no choice but to report the situation to the authorities, and he noted that Mouchard was eventually released and held a high position in the Vichy regime without any opposition from himself. 
There is no record of what Hitzler actually thought of all this self-defense, but he responded positively to Samwer as a person, pointing out that the insurance business needed active and energetic individuals while at the same time indicat-ing that he could do nothing for him, since the British tended only to take care of their own subjects (except for persons coming from the Soviet zone) and rejected licensing persons from the American and French zones. It was indeed to be a long time before Samwer found a high position in the insurance business, although his colleagues at Allianz were trying to fnd a place for him at other companies. Thus, in August 1950, Allianz General Director Hans-Hermann Goudefroy was pessimistic about Samwer＊s chances. Ultimately, Samwer climbed back up the ladder in politics rather than in business, a rather surprising career for some-one who claimed to be a businessman rather than a politician. He became a city councilman in Karlsruhe, a member of the Constitutional Parliamentary Assembly of Baden-Wttemberg, and then a member of the Bundestag 每 frst as a representative of the All-German Block/Refugee Party in 1953 and then as a 
49 See Chapter 8, pp. 337每8. 
CDU/CSU deputy in 1955每1956. Unsurprisingly, he specialized in looking after the interests of the insurance industry. In 1957, with the help of Alzheimer, he became general director of the Deutsche Krankenversicherung AG in Cologne, Germany＊s largest private health insurance company. He died in an automobile accident in September 1958. Signifcantly, he viewed his appointment, which was intended to be transitional in any case because of his political career, as ※reha-bilitation§ and was very grateful for it.50 
Samwer undoubtedly did have some of the requisite qualities for replacing Hilgard, although his road back to the top levels of the insurance business ap-pears to have been circuitous and limited. It suggests that, among leaders of the insurance business, there was a certain line in collaboration that was not to be crossed; Samwer had crossed it, and he had to work his way back into the good graces of his colleagues. A much sharper attitude was taken in the top echelons of Allianz toward Wilhelm Kner, a Party member before 1933, who assumed the position of deputy director of the machine insurance section of Allianz dur-ing the war. Kner seems to have been extremely profcient technically and a frst-rate organizer, but he was also the National Socialist commissioner assigned to the direction of Allianz and regularly checked He.＊s correspondence. When this last fact became known, He. dismissed him from his executive position. He was utterly despised by the leading Allianz persons, especially Goudefroy, who would have nothing to do with him. In 1953, Munich Re hired him in order to build up their own machine reinsurance business abroad, but they had to as-sure Allianz that no contact or dealings between Allianz and Kner would be 
51
involved. Kner worked for Munich Re until 1964 and died in 1981. 
Hilgard, in contrast to Kner, was much admired for his loyalty and service to Allianz and the insurance industry. Nevertheless, Hilgard faced serious prob-lems after the war. Although he had formally retired, Hilgard had played too prominent a role not to be called to account for his actions. Although he was later to fnd it somewhat discouraging that his retirement was announced by the management of Allianz without a word being said about his long years of service to the concern, his resignation may have proven very useful when the U.S. Army entered the Bavarian town of Feldkirchen and arrived at his estate of Irnberg on May 1. He was quite astonished to fnd that the American serving as translator (for the offcers who came to his home) knew precisely who he was, and Hilgard thought the only thing that had saved him from immediate arrest was the infor-mation that he had already stepped down from the managing board of Allianz. He. arrived at Irnberg a few days later, but the two men found it hard to fathom 
50 For Goudefroy＊s pessimism in 1950, when apparently an effort to place Samwer with Iduna-
Germania was notworking, seeMler anHe., 9.Aug. 1950,FHA,B 1.3.1/27; for Samwer＊s subse-
quent employment, see Aktenvermerk Hitzler, Besprechung mit Herrn Samwer in Kn, 19. M.rz 
1957 and related correspondence, HM, E0001-00027, and the Nachruf in Versicherungswirtschaft 
13 (1958), p. 651. 51 Walther Meuschel, ※Traumbuch,§ MR, D/6;FHA,AVK/53 (Wilhelm Kner). 
what the future would bring, either for themselves or for Allianz. Their spirits seemed to pick up shortly afterward, however, as an effort was made to start up Allianz＊s business again in Bavaria at Bayerische Versicherungsbank, which had escaped the worst of the bombing, and they were soon joined by Schloe.mann with whom they discussed the problems of Allianz Leben.52 Hilgard＊s engage-ment can be interpreted as a refection of his loyalty to the concern and also the reasonable expectation that he would be given a position on the supervisory board if circumstances permitted. He believed in any case that the time had come for a new generation to take charge of the concern＊s boards of management. 
He took a similar attitude with respect to reconstruction of insurance indus-try organizations. Travel and communication across Germany were, of course, quite diffcult in the months following the war＊s end, and Hilgard was heart-ened by the news brought to him by the past and future executive director of the Association of Private Insurers (Edgar Gambke, who was effectively acting as a courier among the various large insurers) that organizational efforts were start-ing up again in Hamburg. Conditions for such activities appeared much better in the British occupation zone, where denazifcation was handled very pragmat-ically, and in late August Hilgard urged Hitzler to take charge, pointing out that ※fundamentally, I am of the opinion that it is the youth 每 insofar as it is available and suitable 每 that must go to the front now ....§ Hilgard certainly was glad to provide such assistance as he could, but, as he wrote Hitzler: ※Everyone who knows the huge burden that has been upon my shoulders over the years will em-pathize with the fact that I do not have any more desire to step into the public limelight.§53 Hilgard urged that steps be taken in the direction of a preliminary organization and that a courier service be established to run between Hamburg, Cologne, Stuttgart, Frankfurt, and Munich so as to facilitate communication in the American and British zones. Hitzler did indeed help to create a preliminary organization and in September held a meeting among the insurers in Hamburg, but he continued to feel that Hilgard had the confdence of the insurance indus-try and should take a permanent chairmanship. However, as Hilgard explained in a moody letter of early November 1945, he felt bound to stay near his family because of the insecurity of his situation and also because every further activity on his part in the insurance feld depended on the permission of the military au-thorities.54 Indeed, Hilgard now entered the ※gloomiest chapter§ of his career, his denazifcation: 
a time of the greatest personal disappointment and most painful renunciation. Shut out, indeed, thrust out of the circle for which I gave the best years of my life [and] still in the full possession of my mental and physical capacity, I had to stand idly by and observe how the severely injured house of Allianz was slowly brought back into order.55 
52 Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2/7, pp. 133每7. 53 Hilgard an Hitzler, 25. Aug. 1945, HM, A0001-00056, Bd. 2. 54 Hitzler an Hilgard, 8. Okt. 1945, Hilgard an Hitzler, 11.Nov. 1945, ibid., Bd. 3. 55 Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2/7,p. 138. 
Hilgard had frst heard the term ※denazifcation§ from Baron Uexkl, who had visited him in Irnberg just after the capitulation and who, thanks to his con-nections, had already been at the American headquarters in Frankfurt, where he had stumbled upon the denazifcation offce. Hilgard was deeply critical of the process 每 not only with respect to his own case but also more generally 每 and certainly many of his criticisms were well founded. Denazifcation varied from zone to zone, and in his view the American practice was especially problematic because it made Party membership the touchstone of whether or not to launch proceedings. It thereby overlooked the fact that some of the worst culprits were not Party members and operated in an excessively schematic way.56 He was also highly critical of the staffng of the denazifcation tribunals, as exemplifed in his own case by the frst such tribunal to hear his case in Bad Aibling, whose chair-man was subsequently arrested and sent to jail on moral charges, and by the prosecutor in the second tribunal in Rosenheim, who ended up in jail for embez-zlement. In Hilgard＊s view, the presence of such ※inferior material§ as offcers of the court made correct judgments 每 especially in cases like his 每 virtually impos-sible. That he had been classifed as a major offender (i.e., placed in category I) undoubtedly reinforced such feelings, especially since he responded by asking to be placed in category V, that is, exonerated. Last but not least, he felt it im-proper that the tribunals could take up cases as the spirit moved them, so that one was not only kept on tenterhooks for a long time but, in his case, received a fnal judgment after the currency reform and thus was charged a fne in DM rather than RM.57 
Hilgard＊s real animus, however, was for the case that had been made against him. He expressed his contempt in April 1946, when he wrote to General Di-rector Hans Koenig of Schweizerische Rentenanstalt, asking if Koenig and other Swiss colleagues could bear witness on his behalf: 
Things are going especially badly for me as you have perhaps already heard. I have, be-cause I did battle for 12 long years with the Nazis and thereby risked my life and freedom more than once, been placed in the class of the especially guilty because of my leading economic position, and this is determining my prospects for the future.58 
He continued to feel that way when, two years later, the tribunal classifed him as a follower deserving of a signifcant fnancial penalty 每 despite the host of German and foreign (among them, Swiss) attestations to his anti-Nazi position and his struggle against the regime＊s threat to the insurance business as well as his efforts to treat his foreign colleagues decently in the occupied areas and his 
56 This was especially notorious in the case of military offcers. Many actual war criminals in this 
category were not even Party members; see Niethammer, Mitl.uferfabrik, esp. Ch. 5. 57 Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7, pp. 138每40. See also the Klageschrift of Aug. 2, 1948, and Hil-
gard＊s response of Aug. 20, 1948, in FHA, NL 2 /3. 58 Hilgard an Generaldirektor H. Koenig, 5. April 1946, Nachla. Heinrich Fehlmann, Privatbesitz. 
alleged contribution to the Resistance through Jessen. Indeed, Hilgard＊s entire conception of what he had done between 1933 and 1945 was well summed up by his old ally in the Justice Ministry, Hans Thees, to whom he had offered a job at Allianz in 1942 if Thees found working in the increasingly Nazifed ministry too diffcult. Hilgard had urged him to stay on, however, just as he was staying on as head of the Reich Group 每 to prevent the worst. As Thees argued in his statement for the tribunal, ※[t]he example of Hilgard is one of many that one had to carry on the fght against the Nazis not in submersion but rather in the lions＊ den.§59 
A major question in Hilgard＊s denazifcation, however, was whether or not he was one of the lions (albeit a tamer one) himself. It was none other than Schwede-Coburg who provided testimony against Hilgard along these lines, so that perhaps a more appropriate analogy would have been with the snake pit rather than the lions＊ den. Schwede-Coburg, like all the major fgures involved in the insurance business, was interrogated by the American authorities in the summer of 1947 and was asked about the attitudes of Schmitt and Hilgard to-ward National Socialism. Schwede-Coburg＊s response was that Hilgard was just like Schmitt: ※In economic questions, especially concerning insurance themes, we were often of different opinion; but insofar as the basic goals of National Socialism were concerned, Hilgard promoted these in a positive way.§ Origi-nally, Schwede-Coburg said that ※Hilgard promoted them with all his might,§ but then used the milder expression. Nevertheless, Schwede-Coburg fatly de-nied ever having denounced Hilgard to the Gestapo or SD: 
According to my memory, he did not provide any reason for doing so, for Hilgard＊s posi-tion to the general political principles of the NSDAP was always positive. He emphasized this often enough when I on occasion was rather sharp with him in our disputes about in-surance questions, when he always emphasized that he also was a good National Socialist even if he was of a different view on insurance questions.60 
When Harald Mandt 每 who had worked closely with Hilgard in the Reich Group and who had become chairman of the presidium of the Association of the Insur-ance Business after the war 每 heard of this charge by Schwede-Coburg, he rallied toHilgard＊sdefense, insistingthatSchwede-Coburg＊sclaimwasa ※grotesqueper-version of the truth§61 and citing various examples of Hilgard＊s anti-Nazi posi-tion. A particularly strong attestation was provided by the Social Democratic 
59 Eidesstattliche Versicherung Hans Thees, 10. Juni 1946,FHA, NL 2 /1, Anlage 9. Thees himself 
seems to have emerged politically unscathed from his service in the Justice Ministry, since he is 
to be found at a meeting of insurance supervisory offcials in August 1948 as representative of the 
zone offce for Hamburg, FHA, S 17.21/179. 60 Verh von Franz Schwede-Coburg, 24. Juni 1947, Amtsgericht Rosenheim, Spruchkammer Bad 
Aibling, Spruchkammerakten Eduard Hilgard. 61 Eidesstattliche Erkl.rung Mandt, 14. Juli 1948, ibid. 
general director of Karlsruher Lebensversicherung (and later Federal Minister of Finance) Alex Mler, who claimed to be a strong supporter of denazifca-tion but felt compelled to speak out in ※the few cases, in which I could convince myself ... of the political cleanliness and compelling objective motives for the actions of a person ....§62 In Mler＊s view, Hilgard had run the Reich Group in such a way as to preserve the private insurance business from the clutches of the Party and had managed through his skillful negotiating capacity to keep the holdings of the private insurance industry in Reich bonds down to a purportedly bearable level. He could only contain a politically powerful and ruthless charac-ter like Schwede-Coburg by letting the Reich Group appear as loyal as possible to the regime in an external sense. Mler praised him particularly for staying on in offce at the behest of his colleagues despite all the miseries and diffculties of his job. In sum, Hilgard＊s show of support for the regime was pure tactics, and it was important not to allow appearance to be taken for reality in Hilgard＊s case. 
It is diffcult not to have the impression that Schwede-Coburg, whose potential for brutality and acts of revenge had become rather limited after 1945, was exer-cising his proclivities as best he could in responding to questions about Hilgard and Schmitt. Furthermore, Mler＊s was a particularly heavy-duty Persilschein, and the array of support Hilgard received on his behalf was impressive. At the same time, the minutes of the meeting in the Reich Air Ministry of November 12, 1938, gave Hilgard the appearance of having annoyed Ging and other Nazi leaders at the meeting, and his ※Aha!§ 每 in response to Ging＊s announcement that the money Hilgard was allegedly willing to pay to the Jews would instead go to the Finance Ministry 每 was interpreted in his favor. To this was added his support of Jessen, which in a sense linked the battle for private insurance with the larger cause of the Resistance. 
Given these favorable factors, it is quite remarkable that the tribunal, however ※inferior§ the ※material§ of which it may have been composed in Hilgard＊s eyes, managed to produce so effective an affrmation of its basic lines of argument in supporting the judgment it handed down on October 28, 1948. 63 To begin with, the tribunal was sensitive to the fact that Hilgard＊s opposition to National So-cialism was primarily grounded in differences with respect to political economy: ※His struggle to maintain private insurance or industrial insurance in opposi-tion to the nationalizing tendencies of the NSDAP runs like a red thread through all the statements of the witnesses.§ Certainly it was true that the socialization ideas of the NSDAP were really nothing more than a ※Partyfcation§ of the in-surance business, designed to give the Party control of insurance assets rather than to beneft the insured. It was not the business of the tribunal, however, to 
62 Alex Mler an den Vorsitzenden der Abwicklungsstelle der Spruchkammer Aibling bei der 
Spruchkammer Rosenheim, 25. Okt. 1948, ibid. 63 A copy is to be found in ibid., as well as in FHA, NL 2 /2. The quotations and discussions that 
follow come from it. 
come to conclusions about the structure of the insurance business but rather to make a determination about Hilgard, who was manifestly successful in keeping the insurance business in private hands. Needless to say, this fght for the private insurance business in no way constituted a principled opposition to the regime itself. 
The tribunal was prepared to give only limited credence to Schwede-Coburg＊s testimony and to accept the proposition that Hilgard was compelled to join the Party and demonstrate external loyalty. Nonetheless, his pro-regime and pro-Hitler speeches 每 even if, as he claimed, he did not write them himself 每 were statements for which he had to take responsibility and that did have an effect on those who heard them. While fnding the testimony of Mler important, the most the tribunal would grant is that the speeches were made because of his position and were thus to be judged more mildly than would otherwise have been the case. Certainly Hilgard was no supporter of the brutal measures em-ployed by the regime and its anti-Semitic policies. The favorable testimony of Scholber and others was accepted, as was evidence that Hilgard fought against putting any more insurance industry funds than was absolutely necessary into government bonds or into investment in war production, especially the Messer-schmidt works. The tribunal refused, however, to treat the extra payment to Jessen as ※an extraordinary anti-Fascist deed§ and an act justifying Hilgard＊s ex-oneration. The payment was placed on the Allianz books, and the tribunal did not believe that even the National Socialist courts would have felt justifed in charging Hilgard with supporting the July 20 plot on such a basis. Concerning Hilgard＊s behavior with respect to the Pogrom of November 9, 1938, the tribunal placed great weight on Hilgard＊s statement to Ging that the insurance indus-try wished to fulfll its obligations at the Air Ministry conference and also was impressed by Thees＊s testimony that Hilgard described the Pogrom as a public disturbance at a meeting in the Justice Ministry and thereby irritated the rep-resentatives of Ging and the Party. However, the tribunal members also took note of other information casually provided by Thees that between 80% and 85% of Germany＊s insurance business was private and only 15% was publicly chartered; they came to the conclusion that Hilgard was kept on by Ging as head of the Reich Group because of ※the strong power of the private insurance industry.§ It thus seemed reasonable to conclude that 
the defendant had to struggle against a certain circle of persons in the NSDAP. His strug-gle, however, was not absolutely against the totality of the National Socialist rule by force, even if he also was personally not a supporter .... If one is to form a just view of the defendant in his political attitude, then the tribunal must state that H., aside from the proclamations for which he takes responsibility, cannot be charged with a Nazi atti-tude. H. was not a typical Party person, but a man concerned solely with his professional and positional interests. He devoted himself fully to this work; he was an insurance ex-pert and known as such and tirelessly active as a leader for these interests, especially the private insurance business .... He was a man of business and was not a supporter of a National Socialist rule of force .... Hilgard had exclusively in an outstanding manner devoted himself to the interests of the private insurance business and fought against a ＆Partyfcation＊ of these institutions. 
The tribunal thus found Hilgard to be a follower, fned him 1,000 DM, and or-dered that he pay the costs of the proceedings. The latter were calculated on the basis of his estimated assets of 210,000 and so amounted to 11,500 DM.64 
Hilgard was extraordinarily angry about the decision. He considered the judg-ment unfair, but he found outrageous what was in effect a serious increase of his fne because the court costs had to be paid in the new currency. To make matters worse, his assets had been blocked so that the monies he had at Merck, Finck & Co. had depreciated and would be redeemed at the rate of 10 RM to 1 DM when he fnally gained access to the accounts. Still, Hilgard had connections on which he could call. On the one hand, he could get a credit of 10,000 DM from Allianz. Naturally, he did not expect to pay it back, given that he had joined the Party and accepted the leadership of the Reich Group to aid the insurance busi-ness and Allianz. As it turned out, however, Allianz disappointed Hilgard and demanded every cent of the money back. On the other hand, it turned out that one of the state secretaries dealing with Hilgard＊s effort to have his court costs re-duced was Camille Sachs, who was the son of a Jewish family in Wzburg who were neighbors of Hilgard and his wife when they were frst married. Hilgard and Henry Sachs, Camille＊s father, had served in the army together, and Camille recognized the connection and helped to reduce the court costs to 3,001 DM. The alternative, as Sachs told Hilgard, was to reopen the case and try to be clas-sifed as ※exonerated,§ but this was something for which Hilgard apparently had no stomach.65 It is most unlikely, however, that the deplorable anti-Semitic ar-gumentation employed by Hilgard and Goudefroy (in connection with Ging＊s demand for 20 million RM after the November Pogrom) was what stopped him. He had shed his speeches and writings of the past twelve years as if they were nothing more than distasteful and best forgotten by-products of his sacrifce for the German private insurance industry. 
What really added insult to injury for Hilgard was that Georg Amend had also been classifed as a follower by the tribunal in Munich but only had to pay 701 DM: a 200 DM fne and 501 DM in court costs.66 Amend had pre-sented himself as nothing more than an insurance offcial and expert who had always followed the laws and who ※sharply condemned the crimes committed.§67 
64 Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7,p. 140, claims that the amount was based on his peacetime 
income, but in his appeal to the Bayerisches Staatsministerium f Sonderaufgaben of Dec. 16, 
1948, the amount stated is based on his net worth. See FHA, NL 2/12. 65 Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7, pp. 143每5, and the documentation on the payment and Sachs＊s 
letter to Hilgard of Jan. 28, 1949, in FHA, NL 2/2. 66 Hilgard thought Amend was fned only 50 DM. See his letter to the Bayerisches Staatsminis-
terium f Sonderaufgaben, 16. Dez. 1948, ibid. 67 See his questionnaire, AM, Spruchkammerakten Georg-Thomas Amend. 
Amend, as it turned out, had not joined the Party until April 1933 and the SA until 1937. Hilgard may have been terribly exercised by the facts that Amend had worked for the Party treasurer for years, had won the Party Golden Badge of Honor (in 1943), would never have received the position as president of the RAA were it not for his Party connections, and had done everything in his power to squeeze money from the insurance business to support the war effort, but the re-alitywasthattherewasverylittleleftofAmendhimselftosqueeze. In 1948, when he returned home, he had spent almost three years in an internment camp, had a wife and two small children, had been bombed out, and had heart trouble.68 
His experiences had not improved his character, however. On March 23, 1949, having found a job as an insurance mathematician and expert for the adminis-trative division of the Bavarian Insurance Supervisory Authority, he wrote to Schmitt on stationery that not only sported his new titles but also presented himself as ※President of the Reich Supervisory Offce for Insurance, retired.§ Amend asked for an opportunity to see Schmitt 每 indeed, to visit him at Tiefen-brunn if possible 每 to tell him about his interrogation in the internment camp at Regensburg back in 1947. He claimed that his interrogators had tried as hard as possible to get him to denounce Schmitt, along with von Finck and Hilgard, for their Nazi connections. According to Amend, the Americans wanted Schmitt to ※confrm§ all kinds of ※absurd combinations§ as well as that the large growth of Allianz business 每 especially with Party organizations 每 after 1933 owed it-self to Schmitt＊s connections with Ging and to the NSDAP treasurer Franz Xaver Schwarz. Amend assured Schmitt that he strongly contradicted such no-tions and ※that such behavior would be beneath your dignity§ and suggested that he might well have thereby done Allianz ※a small service.§ Lastly, Amend also claimed that he had assured his skeptical interrogators that the Party was aware of Schmitt＊s anti-Nazi statements to Ambassador Dodd, as recorded in the latter＊s diary.69 
But Amend was a liar. In his interrogation on July 7, 1947, Amend did in-deed specifcally attribute some of Allianz＊s contracts to Schmitt＊s connections with Hans Frank, Ging, and Schwarz. He also claimed that Schmitt had of-fered him the leadership of the Reich Group and a high position in the insurance business in 1940, which was absurd. Amend denied that he ever wanted to na-tionalize anything but hail and building insurance; he claimed that he had no differences with Schmitt on basic questions and that it was only Schwede-Coburg and Hans Goebbels who were lonely supporters of nationalization. Lastly, in complete contradiction to what he told Schmitt about the interrogation, Amend had denied ever hearing that Schmitt had made anti-Nazi comments to Dodd or knowing anything about the Dodd diaries.70 There is no evidence that Schmitt ever answered Amend＊s 1949 letter or that he ever met him again to discuss what 
68 See his letter of Aug. 31, 1948, to the Spruchkammer Mchen VIII, ibid. 69 Amend an Schmitt, 23. M.rz 1949,FHA,NL 1/17. 70 Interrogation of Georg Amend, July 2, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /56/2. 
was Amend＊s transparent effort to procure a job in the private insurance industry as a reward for his ※services.§ It is also doubtful that Schmitt appreciated be-ing written to by Amend as one ※follower§ to another ※follower§ who had also suffered the slings and arrows of an allegedly outrageous denazifcation. 
Schmitt did indeed have a long, drawn-out denazifcation that lasted four years (between 1945 and 1949) and caused him great anguish before he was fnally classifed as a follower. He had been removed from all his positions and was not allowed to practice his profession beginning in the summer of 1945, and he was thus condemned to four years of professional idleness, which weighed heavily on him. Also, during most of this period, his assets were blocked except for a very limited allowance. While Schmitt could not pitifully claim anything comparable to Amend＊s three years of well-deserved internment, Schmitt had himself been in-terned twice for brief periods: from August 15 to September 1, 1945, in the intern-ment camp at Moosburg, because he was in the category of those to be automati-cally arrested; and fromNovember 11, 1946, to March 21, 1947, in the internment camp at Dachau. He was nearly arrested and interned again in connection with testimony he gave at the tribunal hearings on Hjalmar Schacht, but he managed to avoid it by putting up 50,000 RM in bail to guarantee that he would not fee. At the same time, he and his wife were quite fearful in 1947 每 a year during which he, like Hilgard, underwent many American interrogations 每 that he would end up being tried in the so-called Wilhelmstra.e successor trials at Nuremberg.71 
The saga of Schmitt＊s denazifcation, however, was all played out in Bavaria, where he fought tooth and nail to be placed in the exonerated category after the public prosecutor charged him with being a major offender on June 27, 1946. His case was frst heard by the tribunal in Starnberg, which 每 in a decision of Septem-ber 17, 1947 每 placed him in category III as a lesser offender and sentenced him to two years＊ probation, the loss of 15% of his assets, and an increase in the delivery requirements for agricultural products from his estate for two years. Schmitt con-tested the decision, and the appeals tribunal for Upper Bavaria rejected both the indictment of the public prosecutor and the decision of the Starnberg tribunal, declaring Schmitt to be in category V and thus exonerated on November 18, 1948. Schmitt was reported by General Director Hans Dmler of Bayerische Versicherungsbank AG as having ※absolutely beamed§ at the news and ※was es-pecially happy to be able to hang up the house fag of Tiefenbrunn as an external sign of his ＆seizure of power.＊ § Dmler and his colleagues were also over-joyed that ※again an Allianzer in the widest sense has, by all human measure, come out of the denazifcation machine.§72 The celebrations were premature, 
71 See the Spruch der Berufungskammer Mchen, 27. Juni 1949, pp. 2每3 for the record of his 
incarcerations and hearings, AM, Spruchkammerakten Kurt Schmitt, Akten der Spruchkammer 
Starnberg, Teil 1. On his possible re-arrest, see Spruchkammer Stuttgart an Spurchkammer Starn-
berg, 20. M.rz 1947 and related correspondence, ibid., Bl. 55每8. On his anxieties about being 
tried in Nuremberg, see Fritz Sarter an Schmitt, 24. Juli 1949,FHA,NL 1/17. 72 Dmler an He., 19.Nov. 1948,FHA,NL 3/7. 

Kurt Schmitt and his lawyer, Oscar Maron, at the denazifcation tribunal in Starnberg, September 16, 1947. 
however. On December 13, the general prosecutor formally protested the deci-sion as being legally in error; the matter was then taken up by the supreme court of appeal, which rejected the ruling of the appeals tribunal exonerating Schmitt and on February 28, 1949, ordered a new hearing of the case. The appeals tri-bunal of Munich then heard the case and rendered its decision on June 27, 1949, declaring Schmitt a follower, fning him 1,500 DM, and ordering that he pay two thirds of the court costs (approximately 9,400 DM). 
Schmitt, therefore, had almost succeeded in attaining full exoneration before ending up in the same category as a hard-boiled Nazi like Amend. This was, of course, testimony to the failure of the denazifcation program itself and the degree to which it had deteriorated by this time into a procedure that had lost its moral authority. This was well illustrated by Carl Goetz of Dresdner Bank, who wrote Schmitt to assure him about the overturning of his exoneration by telling him of a colleague who had recently written to him saying that ※he feared being exonerated and was striving to be stamped a follower, since he probably has to go to South America soon, and there one is not much appreciated as one of the exonerated ....§73 Nevertheless, Schmitt＊s near success in having himself totally exonerated was no mean achievement for a man who had considerable contact with Nazi leaders before they came to power, served as Reich Economics Min-ister, had worn his SS uniform on altogether too many occasions, maintained contact with the highest ranks of the Nazi leadership between 1933 and 1945, and remained one of the leading active fgures in the German and European busi-ness world between 1935 and 1945. 
Schmitt＊s achievement demonstrated the tenacity with which he fought to re-store his honor, regain his position, and secure the control of his assets, which were blocked through most of this period. It was also bought at the price of constant preoccupation with his denazifcation between 1945 and 1949. His vo-luminous case, which includes not only the tribunal records but also the bulk of his personal papers, provides rich sources of information on his own self-understanding as well as that of the numerous persons 每 many of them quite important in their own right 每 who became involved in one way or another with Schmitt＊s case or corresponded with him about it. Although a full rendition of his case would be impossible here, certain aspects are highly relevant to this his-tory and deserve consideration. 
As in his dealings with the Nazis, so in his dealings with the denazifcation authorities: Schmitt oscillated between optimism about his persuasive powers and the rationality of his case and pessimism that he was faced with something totally incalculable. This is already evident in the way he dealt with his intern-ment in Moosburg in the late summer of 1945. He had apparently been interned because of his rank as an SS Brigadefrer and placed in the civilian intern-ment camp at Moosburg, although he had never been in the active service of the SS. The evidence on his treatment and the conditions of his confnement is rather contradictory. In an account he wrote for his own records on Novem-ber 20, 1945, 74 he claimed that before being actually put in the camp he was able to speak to the two American offcers in the camp administration and show them Ambassador Dodd＊s book with its positive remarks about himself. As a result, they interrogated him immediately and then lodged him in an adminis-tration building rather than the camp. He greatly appreciated this ※honorable treatment,§ ※since in this way I did not have to live together with the active Party people I had been avoiding for years, among them for example my own local group leader.§ He also thought the interrogation went very well and con-sidered his interrogators very understanding, since one of them (a Lieutenant Levin) dismissed his honorary membership in the SS as something akin to being named to the Legion of Honor in France (!) and assured him that he had their complete confdence. The transcript of his interrogations was then sent on to 
73 Goetz an Schmitt, 3. M.rz 1949, FHA, NL 1/17. 74 Aktennote er meine Vernehmung, FHA, NL 1/94. 
various American headquarters, including Frankfurt, after which he was person-ally brought to Bad Tz on September 1 and was told he was a ※free man.§ A new round of interrogations began in late October and continued through early December, and Schmitt was periodically reassured that things would be settled soon. 
There is a second, briefer account of Schmitt＊s incarceration in a report by Director F. P. Zwicky of Swiss Re, who visited Schmitt on October 28. What Schmitt told Zwicky about his confnement was not as ※honorable§ as Schmitt described it in his personal records. Zwicky was told by Schmitt that he had been placed in a barracks with SS and Gestapo people, had to sleep on the foor, and received a very limited diet. Since he was worried about being arrested again at the time of his interview with Zwicky and was pleading that his Swiss friends write on his behalf, it is not impossible that Schmitt exaggerated the conditions of his confnement to Zwicky in order to increase the sympathy of his Swiss col-leagues. At the same time, there is good evidence that his actual release had little to do with the good impression he supposedly created with the Ameri-cans or their alleged belief that honorary SS membership was like being in the Legion of Honor. While it is not impossible that they did believe this and were extremely stupid, it is far more likely that they were using a shrewd interroga-tion technique: there was nothing more apt to bring out Schmitt＊s effusiveness than to tell him that he had done nothing wrong and that one had complete confdence in him. The evidence indicates that Schmitt was actually released at the behest of his wife, who apparently mobilized Schmitt＊s doctor and lawyer. The former claimed that Schmitt suffered from ※severe angina pectoris and vio-lent psychic excitements and depressions.§ The latter, Paul Schulze zur Wiesche, a Dseldorf lawyer with anti-Nazi credentials whom the American authorities were employing in an advisory role, argued that Schmitt＊s SS position was purely honorary, that the published diaries of U.S. Ambassador Dodd demonstrated that Schmitt never really was a Nazi, and that persons of known anti-Nazi con-viction like Pastor Martin Niemler would attest that Schmitt was an opponent of the late regime. Schmitt, in any case, could be expected to accept the con-ditions of house arrest and would certainly not try to fee. As a result of these efforts, Schmitt was released. It continued to be a diffcult time for Schmitt; in addition to receiving the shattering news of his son Klaus＊s death in November after months of uncertainty, he was in constant fear of being arrested again and having all his assets confscated.75 
75 See the medical certifcation of Dr. Theodor Struppler, Aug. 17, 1945, and the statements by Paul Schulze zur Wiesche of Aug. 20, 1948. The U.S. chief public safety offcer, Lt. Col. John W. Quirk, declared that he was willing to support the petition on Aug. 20. See FHA, NL 1/87. The formal order of release was only signed on Sept. 25, 1945; see AM, Spruchkammerakten Kurt Schmitt, Akten der Spruchkammer Starnberg, Teil 1, Bl. 7. For Schmitt＊s conditions in Moosburg, see the report by F. P. Zwicky of Swiss Re of Oct. 30, 1945, after having visited Schmitt two days before, SR, FA A7.3-03. For Schmitt＊s reaction to the news of Klaus＊s death, see his correspondence with his daughter and son-in-law Carl Otto Pape of Nov. 20 and 28, 1945, FHA, NL 1/15. 
Schmitt＊s chief activity now was working on his self-defense and above all gathering Persilscheine. Thus, he asked Director Zwicky of Swiss Re, who vis-ited him on October 28, to mobilize as many as possible of Schmitt＊s Swiss colleagues and friends to attest to the anti-Nazi sentiments he expressed dur-ing his visits to Switzerland and to his opposition to rearmament while eco-nomics minister. While there was some doubt about the value of such letters, Schmitt was convinced that ※spontaneous§ letters would help if they were de-tailed enough and used the correct language. When some Swiss colleagues visited him again at Tiefenbrunn in early May 1946, Schmitt cut a rather sad picture. He had visibly aged and was terribly concerned that he had only 300 RM a month at his disposal, had lost the services of the administrator of his estate, and was unable to secure any income from his farming activities. He urged that his Swiss friends write to him personally, saying that they heard things were going badly and that he faced imprisonment and confscation of his assets be-cause he had served as Reich Minister. Schmitt suggested that the letters express regret about these circumstances since he had been an opponent of National Socialism and then provide concrete examples of things he had said that were anti-Nazi. Finally, he suggested that the letters conclude by urging him not to despair since the American justice system functioned well and would certainly do what was right.76 
Schmitt was clearly mastering what might be called the politics of denazifca-tion, as he had once mastered conducting business politics in the Nazi regime. His classifcation as a chief offender certainly made matters much more diffcult. In Schmitt＊s case, it seemed to be viewed as an ※all or nothing§ situation. Thus, Director Georg Obermayer of Munich Re, who was then chairing the earlier dis-cussed denazifcation committee for the Bavarian insurance business, pointed out to Schmitt in mid-July that the Americans were well aware that Schmitt was no Nazi but that he would nevertheless have to go before a tribunal which could sentence him to 10每20 years imprisonment at hard labor and take his assets. The tribunals, Obermayer informed his Swiss colleagues, were composed of lay per-sons from the Starnberg area, many of whom were communists or socialists and regarded all capitalists as criminals anyway.77 Schmitt thus continued to want as many recommendations as possible. He remained optimistic, and Zwicky reported back to his Swiss colleagues that ※assuming his being cleared by the German People＊s Court he is being considered by the Americans as an adviser for German political and economic questions.§78 
This alternative between imprisonment at hard labor and a consultancy for the Americans was bizarre indeed, and it refected the peculiarities of the de-nazifcation system: on the basis of formal criteria, individuals were placed in a 
76 Report, probably by Zwicky, May 7, 1946; Nachla. Heinrich Fehlmann, Privatbesitz. 77 While there certainly were some communists and socialists on the tribunals, the real problem was 
the frequent absence of qualifed persons. See Niethammer, Mitl.uferfabrik, pp. 386每411. 78 Report of July 18, 1945, SR, FA A7.3-03. 
specifc category by the public prosecutor and then invited to prove they were as innocent as they claimed. At the same time, the stark alternative between con-demnation and exculpation arose logically from the peculiarities of Schmitt＊s personality and position. Schmitt suffered terribly from his enforced inactivity, and he yearned to get back to reconstructing the insurance business as well as to play a role in promoting a united Europe that would prevent a repetition of the wars that had torn the continent apart. The idea of a united Europe was very much in the air during and immediately after the war 每 used by Germans to cam-oufage their imperialism, by collaborationists to legitimize themselves, and by various wings of the Resistance to promote a happier world to come. Schmitt began to set down his own ideas on this subject in September 1945 after coming back from internment. He believed that economic unity was the only rational way to solve the problems of reconstruction and overcome the hatreds left by the war, although he was well aware that Germany＊s misdeeds had made reconcili-ation very diffcult. Nevertheless, he was convinced that there were many who lived through those years who recognized that the measures of the occupation government were not the sole reality and that ※the behavior of many upright per-sons in all countries also prepared the groundwork for mutual understanding and collaboration.§ In a passage remarkable for its combination of fantasy and disingenuousness, Schmitt painted his picture of the past four and a half years in the warmest possible hues: 
As a farmer in Upper Bavaria I saw during all the years of the war in the immediate and more distant surroundings thousands of foreign works and prisoners of war who moved about without any surveillance, who as industrious and reliable workers stood behind the plow, who shared the table with the German peasants and, in their free time, lived in completely natural, often in friendly relationship with the population. Tears often fowed when they took leave of one another. I also saw economic cooperation with one another, not ※collaboration,§ not egotistical quest for proft at the expense of an exploited, raped country, but rather sympathetic mutual cooperation of people from various countries who in the last analysis found themselves in the same want and oppression and who wanted to honorably help one another. I have seen celebrations where members of the most different countries and tongues respected one another and made friends. If we pro-mote this spirit, then it will be to the spiritual and economic advantage of all the peoples of all of Europe.79 
Manifestly this was nonsense. Germany was not Tiefenbrunn, where Schmitt did indeed treat the French POWs and the Ukranian and Polish foreign workers on his estate just as he did his German workers, celebrated Christmas with them, gave them presents, and gave speeches expressing his hope that the war would be over soon and they would be able to return to their homes.80 It certainly is true 
79 ※Vereinigte Staaten von Europa,§ Tiefenbrunn, 11. Sept. 1945,FHA,NL 1/77. 80 See the sworn statement of his chauffeur, Karl Rollbler, Nov. 20, 1946, AM, Spruchkammer-
akten Kurt Schmitt, Akten der Spruchkammer Starnberg, Teil 1, Bl. 119. 
that foreign workers in agriculture were often better off than their counterparts in industry, primarily because of access to food, and that some decent relation-ships did develop; it was also most likely that foreign employees in the insurance companies with which Schmitt was associated were treated well. Nonetheless, the workers, on the land and in the city, constituted forced labor. They were not in Germany for its bucolic attractions or to play the role of ※guest workers.§ In-deed, the war economy functioned only because of forced labor, and this was a reality known to all Germans with eyes to see. To suggest that the Germans and their prisoners were locked in a common fate was, to say the least, a pro-found distortion of reality. Similarly, Schmitt seemed oblivious to the fact that it was absurd to dignify business relations founded on political and military hege-mony as ※economic cooperation.§ Schmitt was nevertheless convinced 每 and remained so two years later 每 that he had long been an ardent supporter of a united Europe. As he told Artur Lauinger, who had returned from England to resume his career as an economic journalist and serve as editor of the insurance industry＊s journal Versicherungswirtschaft, ※if you study and follow the details of the spirit and practice of the so-called large risk association, then its ideal ful-fllment in the area of insurance took place in the middle of the war surrounded by force and terror.§81 
If Schmitt was able to maintain such notions, and believe that he had some-thing to contribute to the politics of reconstruction, and endure denazifcation confdently despite his bouts of anxiety, then it was not only because of his pri-vate fantasies but also because of an infectious personal conviction and because persons of considerable substance reinforced his self-image and were willing to bear witness on his behalf. A good illustration of both the positive impression Schmitt could make and his own self-understanding is an interview conducted with him by Harry Philippi, the public prosecutor of the district of Starnberg, on July 5, 1946. Philippi reported that 
I did not have the impression of a guilty or incriminated man. Herr Dr. Schmitt provides every possible information without even being asked and openly answers every question. I came away with a very respectable impression of Schmitt himself and of the atmosphere of his house [and] of his wife who suffered from his appointment as Reich Minister; [I] had the impression of an outspoken anti-National Socialist. Dr. Kurt Schmitt gave me the impression of being an idealist optimist, who in his entire career, as is so often the case, perhaps had so much fortune precisely because he did not always engage in sober judgment on the basis of the real facts. He does not deny his part in the collective respon-sibility of the German people, but answers my question, whether he feels himself in any way guilty, negatively and this with an unmistakable sense of honesty with himself, in that he points out the conditions under which he became Reich Minister, that he turned down later offers of appointment and that he personally did everything he could do that 
81 Schmitt an Lauinger, 27.Nov. 1947,NL 1/14. For Lauinger＊s role as editor and adviser to the in-
surance industry in the postwar years, see the important correspondence with Gerd Mler of 
Allianz Leben in FHA, B 1.3.1/49. 
the National Socialists at the minimum did not allow and actually forbade someone in his position.82 
This self-perception was massively reinforced by Schmitt＊s supporters and friends, of whom he had many at home and abroad, and the collection of Per-silscheine in his fle was quite exceptional. He had, of course, solicited a great many of them himself, especially from his Swiss colleagues like Fehlmann and Koenig. But he also seems to have left an impressive trail of good will abroad, even in the occupied areas: the head of the French Minerve Insurance Company, Jean B谷raud-Villars, wrote on his behalf, and President Gabriel Ch谷neaux de Leyritz of the Vichy Supervisory Offce for Insurance actually came to testify for him. It is easy enough to dismiss some of the more general testimonies of friends and neighbors or from colleagues within the same concerns. It was standard fare to present such documents and in no way remarkable that Alzheimer and Hil-gard should write for Schmitt or that he should write for them or that a host of persons should praise Schmitt for not being a Nazi and for making anti-Nazi comments 每 which is not to belittle the fact that he did make such comments.83 Most notable in this respect was the repeatedly mentioned concern 每 on the part of those who worked at Tiefenbrunn or were personally connected with Schmitt 每 that he would end up a victim of his own effusiveness owing to his tendency to criticize the regime rather openly. There also could be no question about the fact that Schmitt had helped and employed Jews, half-Jews, persons married to Jews, and political opponents of the regime and that some of this simply could not be hidden from the Nazis. 
Most impressive, however, were the detailed letters of support and engagement from persons whose testimony could certainly not be treated casually. One of these was Otto Jeidels, former manager of Berliner Handels-Gesellschaft, who had made a second distinguished career for himself in the United States and was a vice-president of the Bank of America in San Francisco when the war ended. The friendship between Schmitt and Jeidels was sincere and deep, and Jeidels began to help Schmitt out even before they could be in direct contact by mail. Writing to an American major he knew on August 5, 1945, he declared that 
[n]othing would be more welcome to me than to be requested by the American authori-ties to testify about, and on behalf of, a man who stands high in my appraisal of character and human qualities and who has tried his best to assist the better elements of the popu-lation in an unforgettably dismal period of my former country and my own life.84 
Again, at the end of 1945 he sought to make contact with Schmitt through Di-rector Zwicky to assure him that he would be happy to give information to the 
82 Philippi, Niederschrift, 3. Juli 1946, AM, Spruchkammerakten Kurt Schmitt, Akten der Spruch-
kammer Starnberg, Teil 1, Bl. 18. 83 There is an excellent discussion of the Persilscheine in Niethammer, Mitl.uferfabrik, pp. 613每17, 
although a great deal more work could be done with them. 84 Auszug aus einem Brief von Jeidels an Major Stewart Chaffee, 5. Aug. 1945,FHA,NL 1/73. 
American authorities and that he considered Schmitt＊s willingness to become economics minister in 1933 an ※almost heroic experiment for entirely unselfsh reasons.§85 It was only in May 1946 that U.S.每German mail service resumed and Schmitt and Jeidels were able to exchange letters and look forward to a time 每 never to come, because of Jeidels＊s sudden death on a trip while in Bgenstock, Switzerland 每 when he and his wife would visit the Schmitts at Tiefenbrunn.86 Nevertheless, Jeidels produced a sworn statement on Schmitt＊s behalf based on their long relationship in Germany in which he described Schmitt as ※what we in America would call a liberal, or perhaps best expressed, a progressive represen-tative of the bourgeois Mittelstand.§ He claimed that Schmitt had warned the supervisory board of Allianz, of which Jeidels had been a member, of the dan-gers of National Socialism in the early 1930s and praised him for trying to tame the movement by taking the risk of becoming economics minister. He was above all appreciative of Schmitt＊s open friendship with himself, a Jew, when minister and after he left offce, and he described their common efforts to regulate the af-fairs of the AEG and Dessauer Gas and to keep Party control at arm＊s length. Indeed, Jeidels saw himself and Schmitt as engaged in a common struggle before Jeidels found he had to leave Germany, concluding that ※[h]ere is a man before whom I take off my hat in thankfulness and high esteem and to whom I would extend the hand of friendship any time if fate gives me the opportunity.§87 
Jeidels seemed to have no knowledge of Schmitt＊s contacts with Ging be-fore 1933, but he must have been well aware of Schmitt＊s public support of the regime afterward. Jeidels was obviously prepared to discount such evidences of Schmitt＊s engagement and give more credence to what Schmitt said in private and the way he behaved in his business affairs. Schmitt received similarly strong support from Maximilian Eichbaum, who had established himself in Johannes-burg, South Africa, and with whom Schmitt resumed correspondence as soon as possible. Eichbaum, to be sure, had no desire to return to Germany after all that had happened, but he remembered the protection and support he received from Schmitt and He. with gratitude and said so. Artur Lauinger, with whom Schmitt corresponded about insurance questions throughout this period, was especially effusive; though he did have a personal debt to Schmitt for employing his son at a company associated with Munich Re in Argentina, Lauinger not only wrote and testifed on his behalf but also sent a letter to State Secretary Camille Sachs in October 1948 每 praising Schmitt for risking the wrath of the Nazi radicals as minister and for openly sending a signed and dedicated copy of his portrait to Lauinger, a Jew and Free Mason. As Schmitt had stood behind him in his most diffcult hour, so now Lauinger felt impelled to do the same 每 especially since, in his view, Germany needed economic leaders like Schmitt who (as he had already 
85 Auszug aus einem Schreiben von Otto Jeidels an F. P. Zwicky, 19. Dez. 1945, ibid. 86 The letters are to be found in FHA, NL 1/13 and 14. 87 Otto Jeidels, Erkl.rung betreffend Herrn Dr. Kurt Schmitt, 4. Sept. 1946, AM, Spruchkammer-
akten Kurt Schmitt, Akten der Spruchkammer Starnberg, Teil 1, Bl. 39每44. 
demonstrated in the Favag affair) had the experience and courage to act effec-tively in a crisis.88 
What is extraordinary about Schmitt＊s correspondence with these Jewish col-leagues driven into exile is the extent to which they shared what seemed to be a set of common values and agreement with Schmitt about his innocence. They did not reproach Schmitt for anything he had said or done and reinforced Schmitt＊s self-perception, as described by the prosecutor Philippi. There was only one ex-ception: the banker Hans Arnhold, who dug a bit deeper into Schmitt＊s past and present attitudes. The two men had business dealings with one another in the Weimar Republic, and Arnhold had asked Schmitt to become fnance minister on Chancellor Heinrich Bring＊s behalf in 1931. When Schmitt (in his endless quest for testimonials but probably also with a genuine desire to resume old con-tacts and relationships) heard that Arnhold was alive and active in business in New York City, he wrote to him in late January 1948 cautiously asking if Arn-hold remembered him and cared to let him know how he was or preferred to ※draw a line§ under the past. Schmitt told Arnhold that he was happy to learn that he was still active. It reminded him of his parting words to Jeidels in 1937: ※we will envy you all yet.§89 Schmitt had used this deplorable expression of self-pity in his correspondence with Jeidels and Eichbaum,90 but it was appar-ently only Arnhold who recognized or chose to recognize the self-centeredness behind it. He respected Schmitt enough to write to him but not enough to spare him deserved reproaches, however politely and modestly they were rendered: 
I say that I am made somewhat melancholy by the remembrance of you. Today we know how much better it perhaps would have been if you had responded with a ※yes§ instead of with the words ※it is too early,§ when I was commissioned in 1931 to contact you as to whether you would accept the position of Reich Finance Minister. Perhaps Germany would have been spared the fearful years about which you spoke if you had placed your-self at the disposal of the government then instead of only doing so under the Nazi regime in 1934. I know that you did so in the best faith and most complete love of the Father-land, but it must be said that you made a mistake. Do not take it ill if I write this and add to it that there is no one who has not made mistakes, including myself, and perhaps I would have also made some if I had not been one of the persecuted. I say that I was also astonished. You quote your words to Dr. Otto Jeidels ※we will envy you all some day,§ and believe that this case is now at hand. If you mean by that the peace that Dr. Jeidels has found in his quiet grave on the Bgenstock far ※from all partisan hate and favor,§ then you are right. But if you mean the fate of those driven from Germany, then you have a completely false picture. You only hear of the very few who have managed to gain a foothold here or in other parts of the world and believe that you can generalize their fate. Believe me, most of them, strewn over the entire world, fght hard from dawn to dusk for 
88 Lauinger an Sachs, 31. Aug. 1948,FHA,NL 1/80; Erkl.rung Eichbaum, 1. Sept. 1946,FHA,NL 
1/74. 89 Schmitt an Arnhold, 22. Jan. 1948,FHA,NL 1/16. For a published version of this exchange, see 
Feldman, ※Existenzk.mpfe,§ p. 5. 90 Arnhold an Jeidels, 23. Juli 1946, Schmitt an Eichbaum, 29. Aug. 1946,FHA,NL 1/13. 
their existence, and one hears daily about new misery on the part of many of those who once happily lived in Germany. I know that things are very, very bad for countless num-bers in Germany, and I try myself to help old friends there; but I believe, that things still are much worse for the largest portion of the refugees. Quite aside from [this is] the un-ending misery that has overtaken many through the cruel death that was the fate of many relations left behind in Europe. The one thing that the refugees have to be sure is their freedom of thought, and that is worth a great deal.91 
Schmitt replied to Arnhold in a chastened manner, recognizing that there were indeed greater sufferings than his own and, at the same time, recounting his ex-periences in the Third Reich. He claimed that he did not want the ministry under Bring because he preferred staying at his job and because of the hope-less political situation. He had taken Ging＊s offer of the RWM with the best of intentions and ended up totally frustrated. He claimed to appreciate Arnhold＊s criticism, concluding that ※to err is human. What I wanted and the views I rep-resented cannot be condemned by any American.§92 The thrust of his remarks, however, remained his own unhappy experiences with denazifcation since the end of the war and a self-defense based on all he had done to prevent the worst and help others. 
But could Americans (or, more importantly though left unmentioned, millions of Germans silenced by the Nazis) really not ※condemn§ what Schmitt wanted in 1933每1934 每 the views he expressed as he guided himself and his concern to-ward a positive attitude and proactive policy with Hitler＊s regime, the speeches he gave as Reich Economics Minister lauding the new regime? The prosecutors who charged Schmitt made a regular point of noting that he was the member of a Cabinet that produced all sorts of repressive and discriminatory legislation. He may not have been prepared to accept there was a ※Jewish question§ in the econ-omy, but he certainly did not object to there being such a ※question§ in law, the arts, and public life. As has been shown, he believed it to exist then and contin-ued to see the role of Jews in these areas as a problem even after 1945. This, to be sure, did not stop him from hiring a Jewish lawyer, Oscar Maron, who had been involved in insurance and whom Schmitt believed knew his record and views.93 The prosecutors also pointed out that legislation enacted under his aegis for organization of the economy installed the ※leadership principle§ and assumed suppression of the unions. As those who prosecuted Schmitt argued, the regime needed the services of precisely persons like himself 每 persons who would provide technical expertise, mold the instruments of the dictatorship, and give the Nazi governmentanaura ofrespectabilitywhenitwasmost vulnerableinternationally. 
Schmitt was willing to admit that he made ※mistakes,§ and he was also quite willing to deal with the question of ※guilt§ in general terms. This was evi-denced when one of his most outspoken defenders (and a strong critic of the 
91 Arnhold an Schmitt, 25. M.rz 1948, FHA, NL 1/16. 92 Schmitt an Arnhold, 1. April 1948, ibid. 93 Schmitt an Gther Quandt, 21.Nov. 1947,FHA,NL 1/14. 
denazifcation program), Martin Niemler, gave a speech at the University of Erlangen on January 23, 1946. Niemler took the position that the entire Ger-man people, even those like himself who had been in concentration camps, were responsible for the misery that had befallen Germany and thus had to choose the path of individual inner repentance and return to Christian values; he was jeered by students and placards accusing him of being an enemy of the Germans. Some members of the government were outraged and actually wanted to shut down the university, although the university rector 每 Schmitt＊s close friend and ardent supporter, Professor Theodor Ss, who had very close connections with the Bavarian government and the American military authorities 每 believed the entire matter would blow over despite the outrage in some quarters.94 Schmitt agreed that it was wrong to punish misguided young people who did not understand what Niemler was trying to say and took the liberty of writing to Niemler and telling him that he had been misunderstood. What Niemler was arguing, according to Schmitt, was that they all ※more or less at the cost of ... spiritual values made concessions and were opportunists.§95 It reminded him of their talk years before in his Berlin garden, where Niemler admitted that prior to 1934 he had hoped for a ※strong man§ to rule Germany but then drew the consequences of what had happened and decided to show his colors and take a stand, as was necessary for a man of the cloth 每 in contrast to a businessman, ※where one cor-rectly can win time and existence through evasion and concessions.§ Niemler was arguing, in Schmitt＊s view, that the entire people were guilty of indifference and self-concern, so that they were so preoccupied with their own fate that they were indifferent to what was happening to the victims of the regime or the areas occupied by Germany until the bombs began to fall on themselves. Finally, in Schmitt＊s view, in addition to the passivity of most people, Germany＊s lack of democratic values 每 in comparison to countries like Switzerland and England 每 made it vulnerable to Nazi intolerance. 
All this was as edifying as it was self-serving in that it placed Niemler and Schmitt together in the great community of the sinful that was to fnd its way back into the fold through individual self-redemption. As far as one can tell, Niemler in no way criticized Schmitt＊s interpretation and indeed showed com-plete sympathy with Schmitt＊s denazifcation travails. In January 1948,he ex-pressed the hope that Schmitt＊s problems would come to an end and praised the criticism being launched by the churches against the continued ※so called denazi-fcation§: ※There must fnally at long last be an end to this entire method and attitude, if self-laceration is not to have the last word.§96 The secular counterpart 
94 On the incident, see Niethammer, Mitl.uferfabrik, pp. 319每20; for Ss＊s response to Schmitt＊s 
inquiry about the matter of Feb. 15, 1946, and their extended correspondence, see FHA, NL 1/13. 95 Schmitt an Niemler, 19.Feb. 1946, FHA, NL 1/77. 96 Niemler an Schmitt, 14. Jan. 1948,FHA,NL 1/16. On the role of the churches as critics of de-
nazifcation, see Norbert Frei, Vergangenheitspolitik. Die Anf.nge der Bundesrepublik und die NS-Vergangenheit (Munich, 1996), pp. 137每59. 
to this was Schmitt＊s close friend Ss, who put him into contact with Ameri-cans potentially interested in Schmitt＊s ideas as well as Bavarian Government offcials, among them Ludwig Erhard (then the economics minister of Bavaria and future economics minister of the German Federal Republic), and who gave him strategic advice as to when it was best to push his cause and when it was best to wait until Bavarian government attitudes were more propitious. Ss＊s testimonial for Schmitt had many of the qualities of a laudatio for an honorary doctorate, containing among other things the absurd suggestion that one could almost believe that ※the ideal characteristics of Abraham Lincoln served him as a model.§97 Even more absurd, however, was Ss＊s exculpation of Schmitt and suggestion that he had been passive in the early Nazi period until summoned and had then sacrifced himself for the purpose of trying to make the situation more bearable. 
Given such support of both a spiritual and secular nature, it is therefore lit-tle wonder that Schmitt＊s proclivity toward a selective memory was regularly reinforced. Nevertheless, that memory was periodically jolted 每 not only by the public prosecutor, off whose necessarily adversarial position Schmitt and his lawyers could bounce a spirited defense, and not only by Arnhold＊s gen-tle reminders and refections, but by unfriendly interrogators who pointedly questioned Schmitt about the when and wherefore of Schmitt＊s early contacts with Ging, for example. Most disturbing, however, were those whom Schmitt thought were personal allies but who remembered things he did not. One of these was the Allianz director Walter Eggerss, who insisted that Schmitt＊s frst contacts with Ging were in the fall of 1930 and that Schmitt initially was en-thused about National Socialism. Schmitt＊s response to this was to suggest to their common interrogator Emil Lang that Eggerss was most defnitely mistaken and was perhaps suffering from senility, a claim that Lang brought to Eggerss＊s unappreciative attention. When Schmitt tried contacting Eggerss in late 1948 (through the latter＊s close friend Director Ernst-Justus Ruperti) to see if he could not persuade Eggerss that he had frst met Ging in 1932 and had never been an enthusiastic Nazi, Eggerss responded that it would be shameful for him not to tell the truth and that, if summoned to another hearing, he would tell the truth again. As we have shown, Eggerss had indeed told the truth.98 
Cruelest, however, were the blows that came from Schmitt＊s friend of thirty years, Hans He.. Certainly He., from his frst-hand knowledge, had pro-vided a defense of Schmitt＊s motives for becoming minister and had testifed about Schmitt＊s misery in that position, but both Hilgard and Schmitt felt that He.＊s testimony in Starnberg lacked the conviction and passion one would have 
97 Statement by Ss, Jan. 2, 1946, FHA, NL 1/77. Ss had once taught at Antioch College in Ohio 
and this may have provided the background for such extraordinary analogies with American his-
tory. See his extensive correspondence with Schmitt in FHA, NL 1/13 and 16. 98 See Chapter 1, pp. 51每6. See also Ruperti to Schmitt, Oct. 23, 1948, and Schmitt to Ruperti, Oct. 
26, 1948, FHA, NL 1/16. 
expected.99 The friendship was badly frayed by the end of the war and wrecked soon after. He. had already found Schmitt＊s self-pity and self-preoccupation insufferable in 1946. The personal losses of the Schmitts had certainly been terrible, but He. reminded Schmitt that there were millions of others who were worse off. He was even more distressed by his ※mimosa-like sensitivity§ that had reached the point where ※you treat every word that does not correspond with your memory or your position today as a personal affront.§100 Three years later the friendship was on the rocks, since He. had become convinced by conversa-tions with August von Finck that it was Schmitt who had been working to force him to retire, that Schmitt knew He. had taken his 1944 trip to Switzerland for political reasons but had nevertheless supported von Finck＊s summons to He. to return, and that Schmitt also supported the nonrenewal of He.＊s contract for 1945. When He. sought to remind Schmitt of this fact in personal conver-sation, Schmitt claimed not to remember. He. then suggested to Schmitt that there were altogether too many things that Schmitt could not remember. As He. told Goudefroy (his successor as general director of Allianz) in October 1949: 
On this occasion I expressed many a bitter word about his general memory weakness of the Nazi period, although I had for years let his protestations which contradicted the truth silently pass because I knew the distress of his soul and did not want to increase it through my contradictions. So, among other things, I was a witness to an incident which had taken place years ago in Tiefenbrunn, when his cousin Bohl 每 we were three alone in a room together 每 in the course of conversation in his quiet manner one time let fall the remark: ※Na, Kurt, but at the beginning you also were enthused!§ The blood rushed to Schmitt＊s face; he sprang up with a fery red visage, hissed at his cousin, and immediately left the room. And that in the presence of the old He., who daily experienced all the things that happened and kept them in his memory in all their details! In this conversa-tion [with Schmitt] I recalled into memory all the experiences relating to his enthusiasm, and he did not have the courage to contest them.101 
Whatever the complexities of the mutually painful confict between He. and Schmitt over the events of 1944, He. had torn away the veil of Schmitt＊s selective memory and obfuscation about his real culpability. Schmitt regularly told his correspondents that it was important never again to follow ※false prophets,§ and he hardly could be faulted for this sound message. As usual with Schmitt, how-ever, it was an evasion of the deeper issue. The problem was not simply that he had followed a false prophet but that he had supped 每 better said lunched 每 with the devil and had, for a considerable time, done so with a rather short spoon. If anything he was a false prophet 每 or at least false apostle 每 himself. Kurt Schmitt was, after all, the most prominent insurance executive in Germany and exercised immense authority and infuence 每 not only over his enterprises but over the en-tire feld and in public life more generally. His proactive policy of identifcation 
99 Hilgard, ※Leben,§ FHA, NL 2 /7,p. 146. 100 He. an Schmitt, 6.Nov. 1946, FHA, NL 1/20. 101 Schmitt an Goudefroy, 29. Okt. 1949, FHA, NL 1/19. 
and support for the National Socialist regime in the crucial early phase of its es-tablishment was a genuine contribution to its broader acceptance. To pass this off as a ※political mistake§ is to belittle the signifcance of politics.102 The busi-ness mistakes of some insurance leaders ruined their enterprises, and Schmitt rightly condemned them, but it is really a more serious matter to make mistakes that contribute to the ruining of one＊s country. From this perspective, and how-ever great the faws of the denazifcation program and the terrible personal losses suffered by Schmitt, it was anything but unjust that he and some others suffered the humiliation of being forced to defend their pasts, of being unable to practice their professions while doing so, and to experience their accounts being blocked and their assets frozen. 
Whether a personal understanding of the responsibility and guilt emerged from the entire experience is another question, and here the success rate was undoubtedly quite low, if existent at all. However valid some of the charges of the prosecutors may have been, those subjected to denazifcation came out convinced they were innocent. Matters were not helped by the homogenized manner in which the cases were terminated 每 so that, by 1949每1950, Hilgard, Schmitt, Kisskalt, August von Finck, and Alois Alzheimer had all been classifed as followers and were getting back (or trying to get back) into the supervisory or managing boards. Even Amend felt he could try for a better job. Whether one was a self-seeking opportunist like von Finck or a cosmopolitan internationalist who, like Alzheimer, had behaved quite decently in the occupied areas, it was time to get back to business.103 Furthermore, there was a business to go back to, which was also something of an achievement since by this time one had averted not only the worst possibilities inherent in denazifcation but also the danger presented by those advocating decartelization and socialization. Here, too, the insurance industry leaders had been compelled to stake out a position that in-volved their understanding not only of their personal role but also the role of their organizations in the National Socialist period. 
Of the twoconcerns, Allianz andMunich Re, the latter appearedtobethemost endangered. Alzheimer＊s internment, which lasted from September 14, 1946, un-til March 13, 1947, and his interrogations, which continued into the following year, were scarcely concerned with Alzheimer＊s Party membership or political views and much more concerned with his travels for Munich Re and his leader-ship of the economic group for reinsurance. Ironically, the American authorities shared some of the suspicions of the Party radicals and German military that the 
102 On the ※right to make a political mistake§ as the foundation of the early Federal Republic＊s way 
of dealing with the past, see Frei, Vergangenheitspolitik, p. 405. 103 For von Finck＊s denazifcation, see AM, Spruchkammerakten August von Finck. Von Finck＊s case was settled in 1949, and he beneftted from one of the repeated Christmas amnesties. For Alzheimer＊s fnal denazifcation, which apparently took place in Hannover, see von Reininghaus an Alzheimer, 9.Feb. 1948, MR, B 22 /36. 
reinsurance companies were really in the business of spying, shifting around for-eign exchange, and cloaking assets. To the Americans, Munich Re and its Swiss connections were out to corner the world reinsurance market and drive out the Americans. The Association for the Coverage of Large Risks was viewed with particular suspicion, thus vastly exaggerating its importance and success. More generally, of course, there was something to be suspicious about since Munich Re and other German insurers had been remarkably successful in establishing a special position for themselves with respect to foreign exchange and were most certainly involved in cloaking operations, which Alzheimer readily admitted. At the same time, they were obviously seeking to replace the British on the conti-nent. Within this context, however, Alzheimer could make a reasonable case that he and his concern had behaved in a decent and civilized manner in the occupied countries in the West 每 neither the Americans nor the Germans seemed much concerned about Poland 每 and received strong support in this claim, especially fromtheDutchinsurerJ.W. Gratama. Therealitywasthatthereinsurancebusi-ness was an international one and, whenever possible, tried to conduct business as usual.104 
The American suspicion of the Swiss insurers and their German connections was well grounded, but it missed the essential principle on which their rela-tions were based 每 namely, that theirs was a long-term relationship of mutual interest that transcended the vagaries of politics. Alzheimer＊s involvement in making a fnal transfer of funds for the Reichsbank account used to pay debts to Swiss insurers operating in Germany in early 1945 illustrated the collusion between the two insurance businesses. The tenacious and, by 1953, successful struggle of Hans Koenig in getting the funds in the Reichsbank drawing account (Girokonto I) released to the Swiss insurers 每 despite that it violated the Feb-ruary 1945 agreement between Switzerland and the United States to block such funds and have them turned over to the Allies 每 demonstrated, in Koenig＊s eyes, that contractual obligation had rightly triumphed over political considerations. One could only wish that the same principle had been followed with respect to Jewish insurance policies taken out with the branches of Swiss companies oper-ating in Germany.105 
Needless to say, the Americans were most suspicious of the German reinsur-ers, whose cloaking activities were regarded as a means of keeping money abroad to supply the Nazi regime with more resources. Actually, their chief concern, especially as the loss of the war became obvious, was to keep money abroad to maintain or later resume business. In anticipation that German accounts 
104 Report by Zwicky of Swiss Re, May 7, 1946; Nachla. Heinrich Fehlmann, Privatbesitz; interro-
gation of Alois Alzheimer, July 17, 1947,NA, RG 260, OMGUS, FINAD, 2 /56/1; Gratama an 
das Hauptquartier der III. Amerikanischen Armee, Bad Tz, 7. Jan. 1946,MR, D/2. 105 See Chapter 6, pp. 266每7, as well as Hans Koenig＊s unpublished ※Der Kampf um das Girokonto 
I§ (1954), BAR, E 6100 (B) 1981/96, Bd. 18. 
and assets might be blocked, and as Allied blockage of German payment to its creditors in Switzerland and Sweden became more effective, Munich Re sought to ensure the payment of obligations abroad by depositing shares that could be used for such payment with friendly companies. This practice was to bring the concern and some of its directors considerable grief in 1946 when it was ac-cused of failing to accurately report shares of the Pilot Insurance Company in the United States, in which it once had an interest, as well as in the El F谷nix Com-pany in Argentina and Plus Ultra in Spain. Because they were intended for use in payment of obligations, they were so reported on the forms provided by the American military authorities. As a result, Munich Re was charged on June 23, 1946, with deliberately falsifying the report and violating occupation authority orders. At the eleven-day trial ending with the rendering of a guilty judgment (except with respect to Plus Ultra) on August 8, the concern was fned 4 million RM. The directors who had signed the report, Franz Buchetmann and Willy Rei-chert, were sentenced to imprisonment for two and a half years; three others 每 Gustav Mattfeld, Georg Paul, and Hans Oldenburg 每 were sentenced to one and a half years with one year off because all were over 60 and not in good health. Since Schmitt and Alzheimer had, in this case, the good fortune to have been sus-pended from their positions and thus were not directly involved, they could not be formally charged; nonetheless, they were accused of being co-responsible by establishing the practices under which the allegedly deliberate effort to mislead the American authorities was carried out. The court ordered that they never be allowed to work for Munich Re again.106 
The case was most peculiar in many respects, and it had been pushed by the legal division of the military authorities in Berlin rather than in Bavaria. Those charged were part of a rump managing board left over after the top leadership of the concern had been suspended, and they all had been reinstated by the Ameri-can military authorities in Bavaria. The conditions under which those responsi-ble had to write their assets report were extremely diffcult because the Munich Re offces were occupied by the military authorities and only short-term access had been given to the materials. Reichert had not actually written the assets report but only signed it because he happened to be available. Franz Buchet-mann, who did write the report, had been employed as insurance commissioner for Bavaria to the great satisfaction of American authorities before he was re-instated at Munich Re. The concern probably made a mistake in not pleading guilty to an unintentional error and negotiating clemency, and it was certainly a mistake to hire only one lawyer to face an American team of lawyers. There is strong evidence, however, that the chief purpose of the American prosecution of this case was political. For example, it insisted that the fne not be paid by a bank transfer but rather in cash, with a camera crew present to flm the opening up of suitcases and turning over the money transported by hapless Munich Re 
106 The voluminous collection of documents relating to the case is to be found in MR, B 22 /35 and 36. 
employees in suitcases. The decision was widely held to be an error both in the insurance world and by the British authorities, and it was an embarrassment to the authorities in Bavaria. In August 1947, the military government court con-frmed the judgment against Munich Re but cancelled the ban on Alzheimer and Schmitt working for the concern. The Munich Re did contemplate pursuing the case for full exoneration and employing a neutral audit that would include Di-rector Zwicky of Swiss Re on its behalf, and it had also petitioned American Military Governor General Lucius D. Clay in this regard, but by late 1948 it decided to drop the matter. As General Director von Reininghaus wrote to a colleague, one could never be sure of full exoneration, the currency reform had made the fne paid ※signifcantly less interesting,§ and those with whom they did business regarded the entire matter as a mistake and, indeed, judged it as ※a politically motivated act of force of an era of the occupation.§107 
This, indeed, was how theMunichRecasewasviewedfromthe verybeginning, and it was immediately linked to other efforts 每 especially American 每 to attack the large concerns. As one insurance executive wrote in September 1946 after hearing about the ※tragedy§ from von Reininghaus: ※I include this whole affair among the measures which are being taken against IG-Farben, the steel works and the like .... The sad thing about it is that general legal insecurity continues to mark our postwar period.§108 Kisskalt took the same view, noting that his own arrest and interrogation was frst connected with his presence on the supervisory board ofthe DresdnerBankand that the occupation authoritieshad even arrested bank directors and supervisory board members who were not Party members in order to see if the banks could be charged with war crimes. Afterward, the inter-rogation shifted to the insurance concerns, and he feared the Americans had the intention of destroying Munich Re just as they intended to break up IG Farben, the universal banks, and ※everything large.§109 Kisskalt thought that a great deal of the blame in the case of insurance could be placed at the doorstep of Profes-sor Alfred Manes, now at the University of Indiana, who had written an article in April 1945 calling for the breakup of Germany＊s ※reinsurance cartel.§110 
Whether Manes had a long-standing animus against Munich Re (as the fret-ful Kisskalt suggested) was less to the point than how Munich Re and Allianz, who would be most threatened in any decartelization or socialization program, would prepare themselves and present their case so that they could confront such threats as they arose. It was important, therefore, to establish a self-exculpation 
107 Von Reininghaus an Adolphe Mler, 10.Nov. 1948, MR, B 22/36. This volume also contains 
the review of the military government court of Aug. 8, 1947, and correspondence with the Bavar-
ian authorities, including Ludwig Erhard, and with the Bavarian military authorities about the 
case. 108 Weinreich of Isar Lebensversicherungs-AG to Carl Otto Pape of Frankfurter Versicherungs-AG, 
Sept. 16, 1946, FHA, B 2.3.1/30. 109 Kisskalt an Schmitt, 16. Dez. 1945, 29. Jan. und 20.Feb. 1946, FHA, NL 1/13. 110 Alfred Manes, ※Germany＊s Reinsurance Cartel,§ Free World 9,no. 4 (April 1945), p. 44. A copy 
is to be found in FHA, NL1/157 along with a lengthy unpublished rejoinder. 
parallel to that developed in the denazifcations. As in the past, so now did Munich Re and Allianz lead the way in trying to fnd a common position for the insurance business. In the case of Munich Re, which had been banned from selling reinsurance outside Germany by the occupation authorities and could only reestablish its position if the ban were lifted, the crucial point to make was that the concern was not part and parcel of Nazi Germany＊s imperialism and had played an internationalist role during the war. Walther Meuschel frst tried his hand at what he sarcastically called ※a history of reinsurance during the last thousand years,§ in tribute to the ※Thousand Year Reich§ that had just gone to the dogs, and produced a detailed argument that the reinsurance business had at once behaved properly and even protected the occupied areas from the worst potential exploitation 每 such as might have occurred, for example, if the direct insurers had a free hand both to enter these markets and to set whatever rates they wished. When Meuschel sent his piece around, Hilgard took umbrage at the suggestion contained in the essay that, insofar as there had been resistance on the part of the insurance industry, it had come from the reinsurers. He thought the direct insurers deserved some credit, above all those who paid attention to the problem in the Reich Group 每 by which he meant, of course, himself.111 A more serious challenge came from the insurance expert Ludwig Arps, who bluntly sug-gested that it was a mistake to argue that the takeovers in the occupied areas were all forced upon the reinsurance companies by the regime. When challenged by Meuschel to support this claim, Arps produced some seventeen cases of invol-untary takeover, six of which involved the Munich Re. One of these was Wiener Allianz, and this was obviously not an acquisition forced upon either Allianz or Munich Re but rather one forced on the Italians and Austria. As should be obvious, however, the interest here was not historical investigation and analy-sis but a self-generated Persilschein that would legitimize the restoration of the reinsurance business to its old status. It is signifcant that the reinsurers were confdent they could call on the services of Lauinger toward this end. If there was a ※restoration,§ then Lauinger was part of it. Unlike Manes, he had come ※home§ and was, probably deservedly, a more potent voice.112 
The most formidable self-exculpation for the industry was provided by Hans Dmler of Bayerische Versicherungsbank in the spring of 1946. Filled with de-tail about the struggle against the publicly chartered companies, the National Socialist control of investments, and the effort to be civilized in the occupied countries, the manuscript was a sober defense of the role of the private insur-ance industry in the Third Reich. Its fundamental message was stated in the conclusion: 
111 For Meuschel＊s essay and Hilgard＊s criticism of May 4, 1948, see MR, D/6. Alzheimer made a 
similar criticism and Meuschel agreed to make the necessary revisions. 112 See Arps an Meuschel, 5. Jan. 1948, Rkversicherer Besprechung, 6. Jan. 1948, Aktennote 
Meuschel, 5.Feb. 1948, Meuschel an Arps, 6.Feb. 1948, Aktennote Weinreich, 6.Feb. 1948,No-
tiz Mch, 23.Feb. 1948, MR, E 4 /15. 
The presentation shows that the German private insurance business at home and abroad, insofar as its infuence reached, defended itself in hard battles against the Party and lim-ited itself to a moderate self-limitation abroad that restricted itself to pure professional business activity. It had thereby fought to make the claim, after the fall of National So-cialism, to be promoted rather than destroyed by the democracy, whose principle bases in private insurance cannot be denied. It would be an irony of fate if it would be just that democracy that wanted to realize the National Socialist that will destroy it.113 
The intention was to send the manuscript to the occupation authorities in the hope that it would infuence them against socialization, and so, like the Meuschel manuscript, it was circulated for critical comment. Quite interesting in this regard were the comments of Director Hans Knoll of Knische Hagel Versicherungsgesellschaft, who certainly found the entire effort informative and laudable but nevertheless could not but help feeling that the manuscript made a great effort to push certain persons going through denazifcation into the back-ground and to engage in an ※all too zealous vindication§ of them. He found it noteworthy that the Allianz group was scarcely mentioned, and while other persons were identifed with their companies, Schmitt was only identifed as an ※experienced expert§ or someone who was an insurance man and Hilgard was only once mentioned in connection with Allianz but regularly identifed with the Reich Group. The head of the life insurance group was never even mentioned by name, although it happened to be Schloe.mann of Allianz Leben. Knoll also thought that the case would appear too apologetic because the profts made af-ter 1933 were not mentioned, and someone was bound to discover not only the fgures but also the praise given to the regime for cutting the crime rate.114 
Such exercises in memory, however, were rapidly to fade in importance as the Cold War undermined the interest in decartelization and socialization and as currency reform created a foundation for recovery.115 Breaking up the insur-ance concerns never had the urgency it had in industry or in banking for the Allies, where it was not very successful either, and socialization was not really a serious threat except perhaps in Hesse, where there was a strong movement for socialization. This was one of the reasons that Allianz decided in 1949 to set up its headquarters in the more friendly climes of Bavaria.116 By 1950, Mu-nich Re was again allowed to do business abroad. There had, to be sure, been disappointments. The Swiss authorities insisted that Union Rk be genuinely separated from Munich Re, as demanded by the Allies, while Schweizer National 
113 Hans Dmler, Die deutsche Versicherungswirtschaft und der Nationalsozialismus (1946), p. 
40, AXA, Bestand Knische Hagel Versicherungs-AG, Akte ※Die Deutsche Versicherungswirt-
schaft und der Nationalsozialismus.§ 114 Knoll an Karl Haus, 26. April 1946, ibid. 115 See Eisenberg, Drawing the Line, pp. 139每51, 374每8. 116 On the moderate attitude toward insurance decartelization, see the memorandum of Walter 
Lichtenstein (chief fnancial institutions branch) of July 15, 1946,NA, RG 260, 390/46/1/01/box 
27. On the motives for moving to Munich, see the Aktenvermerk Lubowski, 20. Jan. 1949, BAK, B 280/1707. 
did not keep to the promises made to Allianz leaders and never returned into the latter＊s fold; this made for ugly relations, lawsuits, and a settlement fnally mediated by the Dutch insurer J. W. Gratama.117 On the whole, however, the future looked bright, and business picked up after the currency reform. Thus, Allianz and Munich Re had survived the Third Reich, survived the occupation, and even survived the internecine quarrels of their old leaders. In addition to the broken friendship of He. and Schmitt, there was an effort by August von Finck to become chairman of the supervisory board of both concerns, an effort that Alzheimer and Goudefroy found inappropriate and that led to a nasty public battle over shares, which gave them unwanted publicity. Otherwise, there was remarkable continuity. He. yielded his general directorship to Goudefroy in late 1948 and became chairman of the supervisory board of Allianz until his retire-ment in 1954. Schmitt assumed the chairmanship of the supervisory board of Munich Re in 1949 but died unexpectedly the following year of a cancer. Hilgard joined the Allianz supervisory board and remained on it until 1960, when he re-tired at the age of 76. Alzheimer followed von Reininghaus, who died in 1950,as chairman of the board of management of Munich Re and remained in this posi-tion until 1968, after which he became chairman of the supervisory board until 1976. The continuity of personnel did much to ensure a continuity of attitude, above all the conviction that the German private insurance industry and its lead-ers and leading concerns had been among the victims of the National Socialist dictatorship. 
This was a false perception, every bit as misguided as the ※cognitive catas-trophe§ that had led the top leaders 每 especially Schmitt and Hilgard 每 to start doing business with Ging as early as 1930 and to assume a proactive posture toward the regime after it took power. They set the example that others followed, and if He. was able to maintain his distance then it was in large part because he had colleagues who dirtied their hands and ※covered§ for him. When Goude-froy wanted to quit the Party in 1935, He. would have none of it, just as Schmitt let Hilgard do the everyday business of dealing with the regime as head of the Reich Group. The performance of Hilgard and Goudefroy in connection with the Pogrom of November 1938 demonstrated the depths to which one had to sink when choosing to assume or remain in a leadership position. Whatever the par-ticular mix of ambition, professionalism, and opportunism involved, ※prevent-ing the worst§ became the all-absolving rationalization for their engagement. Although some of those discussed here did what they could to help Jews and others persecuted by the regime, they ultimately became participants 每 whether they wished or not 每 in the despoliation of their Jewish customers, and the in-surance concern they served ended up doing business in Lodz and Auschwitz. Denazifcation, as practiced, focused the attention of business leaders on efforts to demonstrate that they were not ※real Nazis§ and were indeed opponents or 
117 See the correspondence in MR, A 2.19/109 and 121. 
critics of National Socialism. The result was that these individuals 每 and their compatriots in other concerns and enterprises throughout Germany 每 emerged from the immediate postwar period with no clear consciousness of either the ex-tent to which they had been implicated in the misdeeds of the regime or their moral responsibility. 
allianz and the problems of restitution 
This often repressed and clouded understanding of the business community＊s role in the National Socialist regime inevitably had consequences also for the way it dealt with restitution. The postwar management of Allianz was also compelled to confront and deal in some way with the claims and demands of the real victims of the Nazi regime 每 above all, its former Jewish employees, the former Jewish owners of various kinds of property in whose Aryanizations Allianz had been implicated, and its Jewish customers. As we have demon-strated, Nazi despoliation of the German Jews had been a complicated process in which legal and fnancial measures, intimidation, and force were all combined to tear asunder the network of citizenship rights and economic and social re-lations into which they had been embedded thanks to the liberal emancipatory legislation of the previous century. The task of ※making good again§ 每 what the Germans called Wiedergutmachung, the term used here when reference is made to legislation and practices encompassing both restitution and compen-sation 每 inevitably had to address the peculiarities of the shameful process of Jewish de-emancipation and exclusion under conditions that featured a host of complicating factors: forced emigration, murder, aging and natural death, physical destruction of assets through bombing, the fnancial constraints faced by Germany in its economic reconstruction, and the dilemmas of assigning responsibility. 
Furthermore, Wiedergutmachung went through a number of phases and took some time to become uniform in its application. Initially, it was mandated by the Western Allies, with the Americans (as in the case of denazifcation) taking the lead. Subsequently, responsibility for Wiedergutmachung was transferred to the Germans and then assumed by the new German Federal Republic on the basis of a combination of international agreements and domestic legislation.118 This is not the place to review this complicated history, but a brief description of the most relevant legislation and its applicability to the insurance industry is essential. The most important occupation authority legislation was American Military Law No. 52 of September 18, 1944, and its amendments of April 26 
118 The most important works are Goschler, Wiedergutmachung, and Herbst & Goschler, Wieder-gutmachung. See also Jg Fisch, Reparationen nach dem Zweiten Weltkrieg (Munich, 1992). An up-to-date and thoughtful account is that of Hans Gter Hockerts, ※Wiedergutmachung in Deutschland. Eine historische Bilanz 1945每2000,§ Vierteljahrshefte f Zeitgeschichte 49 (2001), pp. 167每214. 
and July 14, 1945, which enabled occupation authorities to seize and control not only the property and assets of Nazis and their organizations but also property wrongfully taken or acquired by duress, together with American Military Law No. 59 of November 10, 1947, which mandated the restitution or compensation of assets seized or transferred under duress by the National Socialist regime. Im-portant portions of Law No. 59 were worked out with the minister presidents of the L.nder, but it was ultimately decreed by the Americans after the German authorities (whose full support they had hoped to secure) protested the idea of being responsible for ※heirless assets§ and the provision for ※strict liability§ 每 that is, responsibility to make restitution if those holding the asset were aware (or should have been aware) that it had been confscated from members of a persecuted group. This was of great importance, since it meant that a person or organization purchasing assets originally acquired by someone else could be held liable for restitution if they knew 每 or should have known 每 that the prop-erty had been acquired from a member of a persecuted group sometime between Hitler＊s seizure of power on January 30, 1933, and the unconditional surrender of Nazi Germany on May 8, 1945. Allianz or any other company would thus be responsible not only for the restitution or compensation of real property and shares it acquired directly from Jewish owners but also for such assets as it may have purchased from government authorities or banks. Article 2 of Law 59 also implicitly provided for compensation of life insurance assets, since it stipulated that ※ascertainable assets§ seized by the State to which a claimant had justifed expectation were encompassed under the law. At the same time, however, ar-ticle 89 declared that special regulations would be issued for the restoration of insurance, copyrights, and patents.119 
Not only Law 59 but also certain features of its implementation served as a model for the later German legislation after the Federal Republic was estab-lished. Although the occupation authorities retained oversight powers and fnal adjudication rights under Law 59, the actual task of controlling property and implementing Wiedergutmachung was placed in the hands of German civil ser-vants, and German restitution courts were set up to hear contested cases. Also, the law made provision for the representation of Jewish interests. Their rights of representation included Jewish assets that were unclaimed because of the death or disappearance of the owners or their heirs. Restitution for these could be made to Jewish organizations. These provisions were not lacking in compli-cations. As in the case of denazifcation, turning the job over to the Germans inevitably produced conficts of interest and sentiment, including cases where perpetrators and other dubious characters were placed in control of property to be restituted and where the court personnel were tainted. Furthermore, the 
119 There is a convenient compilation of the restitution legislation and international agreements in 
Das Deutsche Bundesrecht, 249. Lieferung 每 M.rz 1968, Nr. II C 91;Law No. 59 appears as 
Anhang 4. 
Jewish Restitution Successor Organization (JRSO), which had been established to represent the Jewish organizations involved in reparations questions,120 was often overwhelmed by its tasks and sometimes had a confict of interest with claimants who challenged its rights to distribute the heirless assets or German-Jewish assets to Jewish organizations outside Germany.121 Lastly, the currency reform and the creation of the Deutschmark (DM) further complicated issues of restitution, since the reduction of most liquid assets to 10% of their worth led to hard feelings on the part of claimants; it also increased the amount of litigation and promoted delays in settlements. 
After the founding of the German Federal Republic in 1949, the issue of repa-ration and restitution became the subject of a series of complicated negotiations between the German government, the Americans, Jewish organizations, and the State of Israel. The result was the Luxemburg Treaty of September 10, 1952, be-tween the German Federal Republic and Israel under which the former, as the successor to the National Socialist regime, agreed to provide Israel 3 billion DM in goods over a period of 12每14 years, as well as another 450 million DM to be paid to the Jewish Material Claims against Germany. The Claims Confer-ence, as it was called, was established in 1951 to assist in the negotiation of a global settlement with Germany; it became the legal heir of unclaimed Jewish assets and funds made available by the agreements with Germany to support hardship cases and Jewish institutions.122 Under the First Hague Protocol to the Luxemburg Agreement, the German government agreed to pass a federal compensation law to provide compensation to individual victims or Jewish or-ganizations making claims for loss of life, liberty, damage to health, property and income, educational opportunity, and assets. The law was hastily passed on October 1, 1953. It became the basis of more thoroughgoing and carefully crafted legislation in 1956每1957: the Federal Law for the Compensation of Vic-tims of National Socialist Persecution (BEG) of June 29, 1956, which was made retroactive to October 1, 1953; and the Federal Restitution Law of July 19, 1957. This legislation laid out the categories of compensation as well as the procedures to be followed in implementing compensation.123 
120 On the JRSO and the other organizations involved, see Ronald W. Zweig, German Reparations 
and the Jewish World. A History of the Claims Conference (Boulder & London, 1987), pp. 1每30; 
for a list of the organizations, see App. 1, pp. 166每70. 121 Ibid., p. 41. 122 Ibid., pp. 15ff. 123 These laws are to be found, respectively, in BGBl, 1953, I, pp. 387ff.; BGBl, 1956, I, pp. 559ff.; 
BGBl, 1957, I, pp. 734ff. They are conveniently compiled in Rkerstattungsrecht. Bundes-rkerstattungsgesetz vom 19.7.1957, Textausgabe mitVerweisen und Sachverzeichnis (Beck＊sche Textausgaben), 5.neubearb.Auf. (Munich, 1970). Thereisamassivecompilationofinformation in Die Wiedergutmachung nationalsozialistischen Unrechts durch die Bundesrepublik Deutsch-land, 6 vols., hrsg. vom Bundesminister der Finanzen in Zusammenarbeit mit Walter Schwarz (Munich, 1974每1987). See also the literature cited in note 4. 
As has been shown earlier, direct claims against Allianz with respect to un-paid insurance were in the last analysis unlikely to play a major role in restitution claims against the company because of the massive cashing in of policies in the late 1930s.124 Allianz＊s handling of claims of former business associates and employees 每 and of demands for restitution of property and securities in the ※Aryanizations§ of which it had been involved 每 were frequently more important and revealing of the attitudes of its postwar leadership. Broadly speaking, the management of claims after the war paralleled the concern＊s attitudes toward the claimants during the National Socialist regime. The greater the considera-tion and decency during the Nazi regime, the more likely these qualities would be exhibited in the postwar period. Similarly, indifference and callousness to-ward victims during the National Socialist regime continued when they or their heirs made their claims. 
This should not be viewed as some kind of iron law, however, and the discus-sion that follows makes no pretense to completeness with respect to the Allianz concern 每 nor to be generalizable to other concerns or the restitution process in general. It deals with cases that have been found, no more and no less. System-atic work on restitution from a variety of perspectives remains to be undertaken, and the discussion here, while revealing much about restitution at Allianz, should serve also as a demonstration of how much work needs to be done by historians seeking to understand the political and legal 每 as well as the social and eco-nomic 每 dimensions of this process. 
The Treatment of Former Employees and Business Associates 
Turning frst to Allianz＊s treatment of its former Jewish employees, it is evident from the available records that the greatest possible consideration was shown to Erika Freudenburg, the widow of Director James Freudenburg. As noted earlier, the company had been assiduous in protecting his pension until his deportation and murder in Auschwitz in 1942. His wife, who was not Jewish, continued to receive the pension he had provided for her until the end of the war, although it was subject to special deductions imposed by the government on the spouse of a Jew. The company then went on to pay her a respectable monthly 620 RM pen-sion (with an equivalent amount in DM after the currency reform) and raised it to 682 DM per month in 1955. This was possible because the Allianz pension fund successfully fought to pay its long-term members at a one-to-one ratio for RM to DM despite the currency reform. This was done on the basis of a con-tract with the members of 1925 that sought to reassure them, after the currency reform of 1923每1924, that they would not again be subjected to a devaluation of their pensions. Allianz promised full compensation to members of the pension fund and did so beginning in 1949 by supplementing its payments to cover the dif-ference between what they would have received under currency reform and what 
124 See Chapter 6, pp. 247每50. 
they were entitled to under the 1925 guarantee. It was, of course, only proper to give Erika Freudenburg the full pension benefts her husband had assigned to her. At the same time, however, Allianz also supported her claim (made at the end of 1949) for compensation for losses her husband had incurred through his forced retirement. Although the full record of his compensation had been lost in air raids, Allianz nevertheless could 每 from the memory of Allianz managers who dealt with Freudenburg 每 attest that he would have been kept on between 1936 and 1943 with earnings between 80,000 RM and 100,000 RM a year. His estimated earnings, which were composed of salary and royalties, were calcu-lated at 620,800 RM. This translated into 62,080 DM after the currency reform to be paid by the government compensation agencies.125 
The case of the Magdeburg director Maximilian Eichbaum had been a hap-pier one, and he could have taken up a managerial position at Allianz if he were willing to return to Germany. As noted earlier, he had a friendly correspondence with Schmitt and He. after the war. While he petitioned in 1949 for restitution of his pension, whose payments had ceased in 1941 by government order, this seems to have been done for purely formal and legal reasons. In September 1949, he and Goudefroy reached an agreement under which Allianz compensated him for the money he had not received and also resumed pension payments until his death in 1958. Eichbaum received 77,700 DM for unpaid pensions, which was apparently in considerable excess of the 40,000 DM considered the maximum compensation for pension backpayments under the currency reform.126 This by no means ended Allianz＊s engagement with the restitution of Eichbaum＊s assets, however, since Eichbaum not only renewed the general power of attorney (to represent his interests) that he had given Allianz when he left Germany in 1937 but also extended it in 1947 to cover his family as well. As his representative, Allianz became involved in trying to gain compensation for Eichbaum and his family for a variety of claims, the most diffcult of which involved over 240,000 RM in securities, 57,600 of which had been used to pay the atonement tax and the remainder of which had been placed into an account in the name of his chil-dren (who were half-Jewish) at the Dresdner Bank but had been confscated and sent to the Reichsbank and then sold to various private parties, frms, and banks. Allianz (more precisely, the legal section of its branch) successfully represented Eichbaum＊s claims for compensation due to damage done to his career and won a court case that brought 25,000 DM to Eichbaum＊s widow, Erna, in 1969.How-ever, she did not live to receive the compensation granted her children for the 
125 See Erika Freudenburg an das Hessische Staatsministerium, 29. Dez. 1949, and other relevant documents in FHA, B 2.4.5/134. On the handling of the currency reform in the Allianz pension fund, see Maiholzer, ※Die Berliner Allianz-Betriebe,§ pp. 216ff., FHA, and the material on the Allianz-Versorgungskasse in FHA, A 3.7.3. For the discussions concerning the Allianz pension regulation, see BAK, B 280/1696. 
126 
See the correspondence for 1950每1953, WG., 4 WGA 912/50 (Maximilian Eichbaum); for the September 27, 1949, agreement, see FHA, AZ 6/3. 
securities in a complicated set of cases that dragged on before being brought to a successful conclusion in 1975 每 that is, three years after her death. The value of the securities and the compensation demanded for the proft made from them by those, like Deutsche Bank, who held them after 1943 encouraged Erna Eich-baum and her children to press the case. Moreover, Allianz felt committed to placing its legal resources and personal efforts behind the family. Alfred Haase, who was chairman of the management board of Allianz in the late 1960s and who negotiated with Director Heinrich Ulrich of Deutsche Bank in an effort to settle the case, argued strongly to the latter in 1967 that the return on the shares for those who illegitimately held them had turned out to be far higher than originally thought, so that Erna Eichbaum was justifed in refusing to settle prematurely and was understandably bitter about having been so far deprived of thirty years of returns on the securities. He was anxious to assist her so that ※this unfortunate and tedious disagreement will fnally be settled and not always time and again bring up the memory of the sad events of the past.§127 Allianz＊s willingness to employ its resources for so sustained a period in the case certainly was praiseworthy and deserves to be recorded. 
At the same time, however, Freudenburg and Eichbaum were special cases, as they had been in the 1930s, and by no means typical. In some instances, the be-havior of the concern toward its former Jewish employees could appear quite confusing and contradictory. Thus, in the case of Robert Sulzberger, a highly successful general agent for Allianz in Berlin between 1933 and 1938, the pen-sion fund strongly urged the Allianz legal department to turn down his lawyer＊s demand that Sulzberger have his pension rights restored, among other things, on the grounds that Allianz ※was obligated to pay Dr. Sulzberger from the per-spective of collective guilt,§ presumably for the way the Germans had treated the Jews in the Nazi period.128 He., as chairman of the supervisory board and pre-vious general director, strongly supported this decision in the fall of 1951, asking that Sulzberger be reminded about how fairly he had been treated at the time of ※his departure conditioned by the situation at that time§ and that He. had ar-ranged for him to work for Schweizer National in Palestine. Allianz suggested that Sulzberger could turn to the public purse (i.e., the Senate of Berlin) for com-pensation for his pension loss. A year later, however, in November 1952, Allianz was happy to inform Sulzberger that permission had been received to put 6,000 DM in his blocked account at the Wiesbaden branch of the Sdeutsche Bank! 
127 Haase an Ulrich, 10. Okt. 1966 und 11. Aug. 1967,FHA,AZ 6/1, as well as FHA, AZ 6/2 and 3. 
Allianz did an extraordinary job of tracing the odyssey of the Allianz shares held by Eichbaum 
that were used to pay his atonement tax and to pay the costs of his emigration. The records 
showed that some of these even came into the hands of Kurt Schmitt; Merck, Finck & Co. and 
Sdeutsche Bank also held some, as did Bosch-Hilfe e.V., Bayerische Vereinsbank, and Deutsche 
Bank, as well as Metallgesellschaft. See Allianz Rechtsabteilung an die Vermensverwaltung 
Allianz, 22. M.rz 1967, and related documents, FHA, AZ 8.1/4. 128 Allianz an Rechtsanwalt Hans Gumpert, 30.Nov. 1951, and Allianz Versorgungskasse an Al-lianz Rechtsabteilung, 29.Nov. 1951, FHA, O 1.4.2/24. 
(One of the ugly ironies of the postwar situation was that exchange controls con-tinued to exist 每 both under Allied occupation and in the Federal Republic 每 until 1953每1954 so that accounts of persons living abroad, including Jews receiving compensation, were blocked and thus required special permission for funds to be transferred outside the country.) In asking permission from the Bavarian State Bank to place the money in Sulzberger＊s account as a cash settlement agreed upon by Allianz and Sulzberger, Allianz expressly emphasized his extraordinar-ily successful work for the concern and that he had lost his membership in the pension fund when he had to leave because of the ※increasing pressure of those who held power at the time on the Jews.§129 He had turned to Allianz for the settlement in question, and the concern had decided to agree because he had lost his membership in the pension fund and, given the circumstances in Israel, had not been in a position to build up new retirement savings. 
How is one to explain the changes in tone and deed between 1951 and 1952? Since the record is incomplete, one must hypothesize, and the simplest answers are probably the best. On the one hand, Sulzberger must have explained his real situation directly to his former employers, who did indeed remember him as one of their star insurance agents. The Allianz leaders seem to have concluded that the ※fairness§ shown in 1938 did not eliminate the legacy of unfairness described to them by Sulzberger and that they had a moral obligation to compensate him for his exclusion from the pension fund. On the other hand, those managing the pension fund were extremely touchy about maintaining its rules and regula-tions and not setting precedents for the future, and they probably were doubly alarmed by the language of Sulzberger＊s lawyer with respect to the ※collective guilt§ of the concern. There is signifcant evidence that both the Allianz con-cern leadership and its pension fund leadership were exceedingly cautious in 1951 in dealing with claims and inquiries emanating from the U.S. Justice De-partment, to whom refugees from Germany who had become U.S. citizens often appealed for restitution on behalf of former employees and insurance agents of the concern.130 It was, in any case, one thing to make an ad hoc settlement with Sulzberger, yet quite another to accept liability toward him and compensate him out of the pension fund. All this changed in the late 1950s and 1960s after the German Wiedergutmachung legislation had been passed and formulas had been devised under which pensioners and their immediate heirs had their rights re-instated. This made it possible to calculate both contributions to the fund and pension entitlements, so that pensions were paid out after previously unpaid contributions had been deducted.131 
129 Allianz an die Landeszentralbank Bayern, 4. Okt. 1952, Allianz an Sulzberger, 4.Nov. 1952, ibid. 130 See Allianz Rechtsabteilung an die Allianz-Pensionsverwaltung, 27. Juli 1951,FHA,O 1.4.2/9. 131 Files on such cases can be found in FHA, O 1.4.2 /1 (Fritz Aronheim), O 1.4.2 /3 (Sally Bieber), O 
1.4.2 /12 (Edith Hollander), and O 1.4.2 /18 (Hilde Mosse). There are some interesting Allianz pension cases in WBG, Wiedergutmachungsakten, Ia1950 (Bernhard Selling) and Ia 5046 (Hans Heymann). 
No such formulas could be found for the compensation of Allianz agents and representatives for the portfolios surrendered (from which Allianz had beneft-ted) and the settlements uncollected or confscated owing to regulations of the National Socialist regime. This was well demonstrated by the case of Ludwig Pototzky, one of the owners of the frm of Pototzky & Co., which had sold in-surance for Allianz in Berlin and Breslau. As discussed in Chapter 3, his two brothers in Breslau (Fritz and Hans) had given up their ※Aryan§ portfolio in 1937 in return for an annual pension of 3,000 RM each. Fearing Party interfer-ence a year later, Allianz did not ※purchase§ the portfolio managed by Ludwig Pototzky but instead initially promised him a yearly pension of 4,950 and sub-sequently agreed to his request for a settlement of 25,000 RM so that he could emigrate to London in 1939. In the end, he was only able to take 2,500 RM with him because of government impositions and controls.132 
At the end of 1948, Pototzky petitioned for compensation from Allianz for his portfolio under Law No. 59. Allianz rejected his claim, arguing that no ※ascer-tainable assets§ were involved 每 that is, unpaid salaries, pensions, or royalties. The concern insisted that the pension originally promised to Pototzky was for commissions he would have received for managing the portfolio and not com-pensation for transfer of the portfolio itself; they also argued that rights to assets in Berlin still had not been regulated while assets in Breslau could not be com-pensated because the area was under Polish administration. Without prejudice to its position, Allianz was prepared to make a one-time payment to Pototzky of 1,000 English pounds from its sequestered assets in England if the British govern-ment would permit. It had hoped to make such a transfer to Pototzky in 1939, but the German Economics Ministry had refused to allow it at that time. Fun-damentally, then, all Allianz would offer Pototzky was a sum in England over which it had no control anyway.133 
After an effort to reach a compromise failed, Pototzky and his English solici-tor Philipp Cromwell decided to take the case to the restitution courts in Bavaria, although Pototzky had Cromwell inform Allianz that he considered the litiga-tion a necessary effort to settle a legal question and that he had no intention ※of upsetting the friendly relations going back many years,§ a proposition with which Allianz agreed.134 Pototzky was in fact more wounded than he pretended and, when he heard that Kurt Schmitt was head of the Allianz supervisory board, decided to write to him in May 1950 since he admired Schmitt for the position he had taken against the Nazi regime＊s anti-Semitic policies. He pointed out to Schmitt that the Pototzky brothers had suffered badly. Fritz had been thrown into a Gestapo prison in Norway in 1942 in such a manner that he died from head wounds. The 67-year-old Hans had made it to Palestine, where he was ex-tremely unhappy. Only he, Ludwig, had succeeded in building up an insurance 
132 See Chapter 3,p. 135. 133 Allianz an das Amt f Vermenskontrolle und Wiedergutmachung, 19. Juli 1949, WGB, Ia 
6059, Bl. 7每9. 134 Cromwell an Allianz, 14.Nov. 1949, Allianz an Cromwell, 10. Dez. 1949, ibid. Bl. 15f. 
agency in England, but it had been no easy task and he was over 60. Hence, he went on, 
I am all the more so disappointed by the position of Allianz in its posture toward us .... Our contracts, which we concluded with Allianz in the transfer of our business were sup-posed to more or less provide us with security for the rest of our lives, and now every right is being contested so that I am forced to take recourse to the Restitution Chamber in Munich. The laws and court judgments are so clear that I have no doubt about a de-cision in my favor, but it is painful for me to sue Allianz which once 每 in a letter to us on the occasion of our 25th anniversary of working with Allianz and actually signed by you 每 maintained that: ※The name Pototzky will always be assigned an outstanding place in the annals of the Allianz§.135 
Pototzky attributed some of his treatment to the fact that many of the old-timers were no longer in the top echelons and the newcomers did not understand the im-portance of the Pototzkys, and he praised Schmitt＊s son-in-law Carl Otto Pape, as well as He. and Haase, for promising to use the services of Pototzky＊s Lon-don agency for reinsurance purposes. They, at least, had recognized that the Pototzkys had devoted themselves to Allianz and had, indeed, stayed on so long that, of the living Jewish associates of Allianz, they were the only ones who did not get a settlement in hard currency and were thus ※subject to the hard fate of refugees without means.§ From Pototzky＊s perspective, he and his brothers had been forced to alienate their portfolios under compulsion and to do so for secu-rity and money they never received. He readily admitted that Allianz had also been forced to behave in this manner, but he nevertheless believed that ※Allianz should itself undertake the act of ameliorating justice and should not leave it to the courts, even if the laws were not so clearly in my favor as they are.§ 
Schmitt expressed shock at the fate of the Pototzkys and, while convinced that the men at Allianz were of good will, promised to pursue the matter fur-ther. As for Pototzky, he felt there was no choice but to battle the legal issues out in court and hope they would be resolved quickly and in a friendly manner; he also hoped that he could serve Allianz and Munich Re in London in the fu-ture.136 In a decision of June 1951, the Restitution Chamber decided the basic issues in favor of Pototzky, declaring that an ※ascertainable asset§ was involved in the agreements of 1938每1939 and that Allianz was required to pay Pototzky both a yearly pension of 4,950 DM and 15,847 DM as an unpaid balance on the settlement. Further payment to the plaintiff for his losses were reserved for a fnal settlement.137 This paved the way for negotiations leading to a 1952 agree-ment between Pototzky and Allianz in which the latter paid the former 60,000 DM plus 2,000 DM legal fees, in return for which Pototzky renounced all further claims as well as the monies granted under the June 1951 judgment.138 
135 Pototzky an Schmitt, 27.Mai 1950, FHA, NL 1/18. 136 Schmitt an Pototzky, 19. Juni 1950, Pototzky an Schmitt, 16. Juni 1950, ibid. 137 Teilbeschlu. der Wiedergutmachungskammer, 4. Juni 1951,WGB,Ia 6059, Bl. 88每99. 138 Vergleich, 8. M.rz 1952, ibid., Bl. 93. 
This appears to have been an amicable and fairly quick settlement. It con-trasts with a similar claim made by another agent, Hans Grebaum, whose 1936 contract was abruptly terminated in June 1938 under Nazi pressure even though it was supposed to run until 1941. He was given a year＊s commission of 35,000 RM as a settlement.139 Grebaum went to the United States and settled down in Chicago under the name of Harry H. Gray. In December 1948, he sued Allianz for 70,000 RM, which he considered to be the amount of commission he would have earned if the contract had not been broken by Allianz. As in the case of Pototzky, the concern contested the claim, arguing that no ※ascertainable asset§ was involved and also asserting that Grebaum＊s portfolio was already seriously diminishing and would have diminished further if the contract had con-tinued. Gray＊s case was clearly weaker than Pototzky＊s in that one could question how independent his agency actually was, but Gray was no less tenacious and apparently also sought to gain compensation through the U.S. Department of Justice by targeting Allianz assets in the United States. The case went through a number of courts, with an appeals court in Frankfurt deciding against Gray in 1952 and treating the 35,000 RM given by Allianz as an act of loyalty that was based on no legal obligation, because the plaintiff had not collected any premi-ums from his portfolio during the year for which he was being paid. Two years later, the 2nd Civil Court of the Superior Court in Frankfurt sent the case back to the lower court for reconsideration, and the case dragged on until April 1958, when a settlement was fnally reached 每 although the exact nature of the settle-ment is unclear from the available records. It is not inconceivable that Allianz privately settled with Gray without surrendering its legal position but gaining the advantage of having Gray drop all claims in both Germany and the United States, the latter apparently being a matter of particular concern. The entire case refected both the understandable bitterness felt by Gray as well as the ten-dency of Allianz to dig in its heels and contest such claims made against it. This attitude may have been reinforced by the position of the American military gov-ernment, which (initially at least) viewed unrealized commissions as not being 
140
assets in the sense of Law No. 59. 
Because there is no full record of how many of Allianz＊s Jewish insurance agents and representatives contested settlements made during the Nazi period, it is diffcult to draw satisfactory conclusions. Certainly the Franconian insurance agent Martin Lachmann, a subdirector of Allianz in Berlin, might have claimed to have had an ※ascertainable asset§ in his ※Aryan§ portfolio 每 of whose benefts he was suddenly deprived in 1938 in return for a pension worth a quarter of his previous income 每 but he and his wife were victims of the Holocaust. When their heirs, who lived in Sweden, tried to claim the pensions in 1950, they discovered 
139 See Chapter 3,p. 132. 140 The records on the case can be found in the HessHStA, Wiedergutmachungsakten, FFm-6516 
and BAK, B 215/1401. On possible claims against Allianz assets in the United States, see Allianz 
an die Allianz Pensionsverwaltung, 27. Juli 1951, FHA, O 1.4.2 /9. On the U.S. military govern-
ment position, see Aktennote of 21. Jan. 1949, FHA, AZ 8.1/2. 
that rights to the pensions did not fall under the restitution legislation.141 It is impossible to know if there were other such cases or how many there might be. One could imagine that Moritz Goldmann, an insurance agent from Magdeburg who gave up his agency and was promised a position in Berlin, only to end up with a paltry 5,000 RM settlement in 1938, might have been as bitter as Gray.142 His lawyer did make inquiries in 1954 and was told that the Magdeburg branch had been confscated by the Eastern zone authorities and that much of the doc-umentation was lost in the bombing. Allianz did supply information from the memory of some of those who had worked in Magdeburg: the Goldmann agency made 8,000每9,000 RM. While noting that its fles in Berlin had been destroyed, it did not mention the 1938 correspondence with Goldmann that happened to have been saved, but this is hardly surprising. The correspondence showed that Allianz was able to acquire his portfolio well below its worth and that it paid him a low settlement. Whatever the case, there is no record of Goldmann suing, and it is most unlikely he would have done so with much success under the ex-isting legislation. Given the record presented here, however, the case certainly would have ended up in the courts, and Allianz might have been willing to come to a settlement. 

Restitution and Compensation for ※Aryanizations§ of Real Estate and Securities 
Allianz faced what were probably its most serious restitution problems in the area of ※Aryanized§ real estate, and the record often speaks poorly for the man-ner in which the concern dealt with claimants and even more negatively with respect to its attitude toward them. This is not to say that judging each indi-vidual case (an impossibility here) would be a simple matter. Most diffcult, undoubtedly, are the cases of mortgage foreclosure and forced sale, especially when they took place in the early years of the National Socialist regime. Such events were hardly uncommon in the depression and were not ipso facto evi-dence of discrimination against Jews, especially if the price received by Allianz or any other mortgage holder for the sale of the property seemed reasonable. 
Nevertheless, the handling of some of these cases by Allianz seems very dis-turbing today. A revealing illustration was the claim for restitution of a property in Frankfurt a.M. whose mortgage Allianz had foreclosed and which it auctioned off in 1935. The lawyers for the 70-year-old widow of the deceased Jewish owner Leo Levor, who had died a refugee in 1939, claimed that the forced sale was a consequence of the anti-Jewish discrimination, beginning with the boycott of April 1933 and above all because of his subsequent loss of business with the agri-cultural organizations with whom he dealt. As Hilde Levor told her lawyers, this loss of business made her husband ※so nervous, that nothing else was left 
141 
See Chapter 3, pp. 135每6, as well as WG., 1 WGA 3745/50 (Ruth Ernestine Haas). 142 On the Goldmann case, see Chapter 3, pp. 133每5. 
to do than to leave the land that did not want us.§143 Allianz＊s position on the case was that the property was already indebted in 1932 and had been placed under its receivership in 1933, and that the owner was given further opportunity to straighten matters out without successfully doing so. Since the mortgage in question was part of the coverage for their insurance policies, they had no choice but to foreclose. Indeed, they were able to demonstrate that the Levors expressed gratitude to Allianz for showing forbearance despite their diffculties. The forced sale, therefore, was justifed on a pure economic basis and, Allianz claimed, had nothing to do with Levor being a Jew. If Allianz had given credit to a Jew, then it could also collect debts from a Jew without being charged with discrimination. At the same time, Allianz also emphasized that both the restitution laws and the case law (i.e., the decisions handed down by restitution courts) placed the bur-den of demonstrating discrimination on the plaintiff rather than the defendant, and that it was important not to let the burden of proof be shifted, as often al-legedly occurred. The concern instructed its lawyer in the case, Otto Dichen of the Frankfurt offce of Allianz Leben, to make use of decisions that required the plaintiff to show that actual intention to employ discriminatory legislation was at issue rather than the inability to pay debts. Furthermore, Allianz saw no reason to seek a settlement with Hilde Levor.144 
Dichen followed his instructions, but found the court very unhappy about Allianz＊s unwillingness to seek a settlement despite (what he considered to be) the sound arguments and legal precedents he had presented. In Dichen＊s view, there was no justifcation for Allianz ※to pay even so small a settlement sum§ since Allianz had made a loss on the forced sale of the property by failing to collect what the Levors owed. As he went on to describe the situation, ※the opposition constantly tried to place the present distress of his perhaps 75-year-old client, who even now must make a living by working, in the foreground. I responded to this by pointing to the present situation of the life insurance com-panies created by the adaptation to the new currency... etc.§145 Apparently, the court was more moved by the plight of Hilde Levor than by the travails of the insurance business. It demanded proof that Allianz had made a loss and also strongly urged some kind of payment to her, however small, the possibility of which Dichen once again denied. Allianz went on to gather materials seeking to demonstrate that it made nothing but a loss on the property, a loss subse-quently compounded by its total destruction in an air raid. The fles do not indicate how this case turned out, but Allianz seemed confdent in its case and totally resistent to a settlement. Such tenacity in dealing with claimants was by no means usual, but Allianz pursued at least one case where its legal position was much worse in order to satisfy the supervisory authority that it had not given in. 
143 Valentin Heckert an das Landgericht Frankfurt a.M., 3. Wiedergutmachungskammer, 24. Okt. 
1952, FHA, S 17.16/75. 144 Allianz Leben an Otto Dichen, 20. April 1951, ibid., to which was appended a list of court 
decisions bearing on the case. 145 Dichen an Allianz Leben, 11.Mai 1951, ibid. 
This suggests that the concern＊s attitude with respect to restitution cases was not always free of considerations of what might be said by regulators in the federal supervisory offce for insurance, who had an obvious interest in reconstruction of the insurance industry as well as in preservation of existing coverage for in-surance company policies.146 Where Allianz did engage claimants in the courts, however, it was extremely sensitive to charges that it was in any way anti-Semitic in its treatment of Jewish mortgagees, insisting that the contrary had been the case.147 Ironically, some of the evidence suggests that this was true; those in charge of dealing with Jewish mortgages at Allianz in the early 1930s may have been more sensitive to the plight of their Jewish clients than were their succes-sors, who (as in the Levor case) bizarrely compared the postwar problems of their corporation with those of a Jewish refugee＊s aged widow. 
Yet we have already seen that Allianz could make little claim to sensitivity in the Aryanizations of the late 1930s. The restitution courts were seemingly well aware of the brutality shown to the Jews in the late 1930s and tended to be less inclined to turn down plaintiffs whose properties had been alienated in 1937每1939. The evidence that Allianz took advantage of the anti-Semitic cli-mate was also more compelling in the later period. The contrast is illustrated by two cases against Allianz handled by the Berlin lawyer Hans Friedberg. The frst, brought by Manes and Cirl Tennenbaum, was for the restitution of a prop-erty on the Pariser Stra.e, which had been put into receivership in 1934 and then sold because of indebtedness. The property had been purchased by the Tennen-baums for paper marks in the infation, but upkeep and costs thereafter led to chronic indebtedness even before 1933. Friedberg tried to argue that the even-tual purchase of the property by Allianz in 1936 每 from a person notorious for buying up Jewish properties 每 demonstrated that discrimination had played a role. However, Allianz＊s lawyers argued successfully that even non-Jews suffer-ing from such chronic indebtedness would have lost their property under the circumstances, a conclusion reached also by the courts in 1953 and again in 1955. In the latter trial, the lawyer for the now widowed Cirl Tennenbaum tried to argue on the basis of a 1954 higher court decision in another case of forced sale that there was an entitlement to restitution because it was impossible for Jews to get credit in Nazi Germany. But the restitution court hearing the Ten-nenbaum case pointed out in its decision that the forced sale in question took place in 1939每1940 每 that is, four years later, when conditions were dramatically more unfavorable for Jews 每 and thus there could be no question about the in-capacity of the owner in that case to pay his debts.148 
146 Allianz Leben an Dr. Dichen, 8.Mai 1951, ibid. 147 Allianz Leben an die 3. Wiedergutmachungskammer beim Landgericht Frankfurt a.M., 7. Jan. 
1952, ibid. 148 See especially the Beschlu. der fentlichen Sitzung der 142. Zivilkammer des Landgerichts 
Berlin, 30. April 1953, and the Beschlu. des 14. Zivilsenats des Kammergerichts in Berlin, 28. 
M.rz 1955, WG., 8 WGA 933/50 (Manes und Cirl Tennenbaum), Bl. 68每89, 104每24, and other 
relevant correspondence. Another case in which restitution was denied for the 1934 foreclosure 
This distinction in time and circumstance may explain why Friedberg had more success against Allianz in the case of the forced sale of Adolf Wollenberg＊s properties (on the Kurfstendamm and the Joachimsthaler Stra.e) in Berlin in February 1939 in response to his failure to pay 42,443 RM in interest. Allianz made familiar arguments that the indebtedness dated back to an earlier time and that it was forced to take action for economic reasons. Friedberg, representing Wollenberg and then his widow during the years 1950每1953, was able to show that Allianz＊s case for foreclosure specifcallynoted that the owner wasa Jew, that his chances of making payment were doubtful because of his taxes, and that the property would be more proftable if it were in Aryan hands. In the end, Allianz agreed to a settlement and paid Wollenberg＊s widow 10,000 DM (and also cov-ered court and other costs) in return for her renunciation of her property rights, whose estimated worth was 171,950 DM. It is likely that the settlement refected the fact that encumbrances on the property, which were very high, would also have been taken into account and that Wollenberg＊s widow was living abroad and may have had no further interest in dealing with the property. The settle-ment was duly approved by the federal supervisory offce for insurance.149 
An even more interesting case of this type was that of Rebecca Halsband, who owned a property on Meinekestra.e in Berlin which Allianz foreclosed on and then sold in November 1938. Allianz＊s initial response in April 1951 was to reject the claim and argue that Halsband had a long record of fnancial mismanage-ment that predated the National Socialist period. For reasons that are unclear from the restitution fle but which, as in the Wollenberg case, may have had something to do with the Allianz＊s argument for foreclosure made in that most fateful year of 1938, Allianz changed its position and, in February 1954, agreed to pay Halsband 30,000 DM ※in recognition of the special circumstances.§150 The overriding ※special circumstance§ in all these cases, of course, was the abnor-mal situation created by anti-Semitic discrimination and persecution that made what might have been normal economic activity suspect. Allianz may have had valid economic reasons for foreclosing on Wollenberg and Halsband 每 there is no reason, after all, to assume that all Jews are astute in the management of their fnances. The Third Reich created circumstances, however, in which it was im-possible for Jews either to succeed or to fail fairly. Thus, the Allianz lawyers and representatives in the late 1930s were so easily tempted to taint even their good cases with anti-Semitic content that they became defendants who were justifably 
and sale of a property in Berlin is that of a property on the Brandenburgische Stra.e in Berlin 
Wilmersdorf owned by Paul Mlmann, then living in Haifa. See WG., 7 WGA 2536/50 (Paul 
Mlmann). 149 Hans Friedberg an das Landgericht Berlin, 11. M.rz 1953, Sitzung des Landgerichts Berlin, 23. 
M.rz 1953; Bundesaufsichtsamt an den Vorstand von Allianz Leben, 18. April 1953, WG., 6 
WGA 2920/50 (Adolf Wollenberg), Bl. 69每70, 75每6, 89. 
150 
See Allianz an die Wiedergutmachungs.mter von Berlin, 11. April 1951 und 7.Feb. 1952,WG., 11 WGA 405/51 (Rebecca Halsband), Bl. 10每12, 26. Marginal notations at the bottom of the 1951 letter suggest that Allianz was seeking out the documentation on the foreclosure. It is hard to imagine that in 1938 it would not have made reference to Halsband＊s ※race.§ 
liable to make at least some restitution a dozen or more years later. By capital-izing on the Jews as being poor risks, they became implicated in making them poor risks. 
Such considerations produce a constant and perhaps unwarranted discomf-ture in dealing with those restitution cases in which Allianz was involved yet emerged free and clear of all responsibility and liability to pay. It is important to bear in mind that Allianz was not called to account in cases like those just de-scribed if the properties in question were in the East. When Hugo Benjamin from Tel Aviv sought compensation for what he considered to be the undervaluation of his property in Breslau in a 1939 foreclosure by Allianz, he found that West Berlin courts were not competent to hear the case and that the restitution laws did not cover territories then considered under Polish occupation.151 It is diff-cult to know what to make of the case of Leon Balaban, an engineer with a high position in the Berlin construction industry who lost his employment and then made a living 每 between 1933 and his emigration to Palestine in 1938 每bybuy-ing, renovating, and reselling real estate. The property in Berlin-Tempelhof that he sold to Allianz in 1935 was, he claimed, sold in order to fnance his emigra-tion and would not have been sold otherwise. His emigration had been delayed because he fell ill. Allianz contested his claim that the price had not been fair and pointed out that the money was used to purchase other properties as part of Balaban＊s business, a use which Balaban argued was made necessary in order to survive until he could emigrate. On the one hand, the account of Balaban＊s des-perate efforts to make a living and fnd the means to emigrate after being thrown out of a profession in which he had prospered for 25 years hardly suggests that any action he took was motivated by normal economic decisions 每 those that would have been made under other political circumstances. He had been a very well-connected businessman, and this may have made it possible for him to con-duct his real estate business despite the diffcult situation. On the other hand, the claim that Allianz undercompensated him by paying only 238,000 RM instead of the 255,000 his lawyers claimed the property was worth is not very compelling, and it did not convince any of the courts to which it was taken 每 including the United States Court of Restitution Appeals of the Allied High Commission for Germany in 1953. 152 
Not all property restitution cases were as adversarial as those just described. In one case, at least, restitution actually led to a restoration of business relation-ships. Thus, Abraham Gorodecki, who had been in the real estate business and had sold off properties to Allianz in Berlin-Halensee in 1935, received them back and agreed to take out mortgages with Allianz to fnance rebuilding of the totally 
151 See Allianz an Wiedergutmachungs.mter von Berlin, 22. Sept. 1950, Beschlu. der Wiedergut-
machungs.mter von Berlin, 30. Okt. 1951, as well as other relevant documents in WG., 5 WGA 
484 /50 (Hugo Benjamin). 
152 
The record of the lengthy case is to be found in WG., 4 WGA 5004 /50 (Leon Balaban). It is worth noting that this case demonstrates what a rich source restitution fles can be for the histo-rian of the social history of Jews in Germany in the 1930s. 
destroyed structures.153 There was anything but reconciliation, however, in the case of Ludwig Jansen, a Jewish businessman who had fed to Rio de Janeiro and whose house on the Kastanienallee in Berlin had been sold to Allianz in 1936. Jansen bought the property in 1927, and he built an especially attractive house for himself and his family and also one that would provide rental income. A large mortgage had been taken out with Karlsruher Leben, which belonged to the Allianz concern. From Allianz＊s standpoint, Jansen had received a fair price, especially since it had bought the property from a Jewish real estate agent and the sale was not made under duress. Jansen saw the matter differently, re-membering that Director Maiholzer had told him that Jews should take what they could get under the cirumstances and that he subsequently had to fee the Gestapo, which was after him for trumped-up foreign exchange violations. In 1952, Allianz returned the property as part of a settlement with Jansen.154 
Allianz was much more resistant, however, to accepting the claims of Jews whose properties had been purchased in connection with plans for creating the Runder Platz designated by Albert Speer for the new Allianz building. As shown earlier, Allianz was anything but the unwilling participant that its post-war claims would suggest in the realization of these megalomaniacal schemes. Contrary to Allianz＊s pretensions, the Jews whose properties were bought out in 1939每1940 received demonstrably less than others who were compelled to sell their properties under the laws governing the reconstruction of Berlin. Need-less to say, the Jews in question also ended up not having free disposition over their funds. The family most affected by these losses 每 that of Richard and Walter Feige, whose heirs lived in the United States 每 made their restitution claims in 1949 and, after considerable effort, achieved substantial success in both a lower court and then in a decision by a higher court against Allianz＊s appeal in 1953. What is remarkable is the extent to which Allianz held to its claims with respect to the relative fairness of the price 每 despite the evidence presented by the concern itself regarding the prices paid to Aryan and Jew-ish property owners 每 and the even more extraordinary unwillingness to accept the Feige family＊s contention that Jews could not achieve a fair price under the circumstances.155 
If anything, however, Allianz was even more tenacious in resisting the claims of another Jewish property owner forced to sell out, Walther Czempin, the son of the original owner, Alexander Czempin, a noted gynecologist who (as mentioned in Chapter 3) committed suicide at the age of 82 in order to avoid being deported.156 In this case, which began in 1950 and lasted until 1961, Al-lianz actually mobilized the Senator for Finances, Special Assets and Buildings 
153 
See Allianz an Abraham Gorodecki, 15.Mai 1950,WG., 4 WGA 2475/50 (Abraham Gorodecki). 
154 
See Chapter 3, pp. 144每5, and WG., 5 WGA 4664/50 (Ludwig Jansen). 155 See especially Allianz an das Kammergericht Berlin, 15. Zivilsenat, 7. Dez. 1953, Rechtsanwalt 
Joachim Bner an das Kammergericht, 17. Dez. 1953, Beschlu. des 15. Zivilsenats des Kam-
mergerichts Berlin, 18. Dez. 1953, WG., 6 WGA 264 /51 (Berta Feige), Bl. 137每40, 141f., 150每8. 156 See Chapter 3,p. 143. 
of Berlin to argue in a lengthy memorandum that Czempin＊s claim should be rejected. Czempin＊s lawyer suggested that the Senator was not exactly a disin-terested party, since Allianz had indicated that, if it lost, it would sue the City of Berlin for losses connected with the construction plans of its predecessor. Given the energy put into the matter by the Senator＊s offce, this was quite plausible, and it suggests why the Czempin case proved so diffcult and especially why the actual fairness of the payment made to the elder Czempin for his property was so diffcult to contest by his son. Indeed, the Senator＊s offce intervened repeatedly to argue for Allianz. In the end, the court urged a settlement on both parties in the form of a 20,000 DM payment by Allianz to Czempin in return for surrender of the Czempin claims, and this was accepted in November 1961. 157 
Allianz put up no such battle in the case of Kaufngerstra.e 22 in Munich, which had been the property of the ill-fated Julius and Else Basch, who had hoped to join their son in the United States and instead ended up victims of the Holocaust.158 The property was purchased by Allianz in 1940 from SA-Obersturmfrer Hans Wegner, who had headed up the organization for the ※Aryanization§ of Jewish property in Munich, through the Baschs＊ appointed ※representative,§ Hanns Stumfall, who acted as a ※trustee§ for Jews forced to sell their assets. Allianz paid 1,674,000 RM for this choice property in the cen-ter of Munich, which was well below its real worth; it paid a commission to Stumfall of 72,000 RM, along with 4,080 RM as a special fee for permission to buy Jewish property (under the decree for the mobilization of Jewish assets) and 
410.25 RM in other fees. When Basch＊s son Ernest B. Ashton demanded resti-tution in 1949每1950, Allianz＊s initial response was to claim that the price it had paid was fair and that Stumfall was a legitimate agent for Basch. Allianz soon changed its tune in the face of documentation provided by Ashton＊s lawyers, a good move since evidence now available in the Moscow archives demonstrates that Allianz was totally aware of the duress under which the Baschs were selling their property and had actually used their detailed knowledge of the Baschs＊ tax debts to justify the money Allianz spent on the property to the RAA with the ar-gument that the Baschs would have to give most of it to the government. Allianz thus settled with Ashton, paying 1.1 million DM in return for all rights to the property. 
Allianz had now legitimately bought the property and all the rights and lia-bilities attached to it. Remarkably, Allianz then turned around and 每 in effect playing the role that could have been played by the deceased Baschs or by their son, had he chosen to retain any further connection with the sale of the prop-erty 每 proceeded to sue the government and the Nazi Party, whose sequestered assets were being used for restitution purposes, for the 72,000 RM paid Stum-fall, the 4,080 RM paid in order to buy a Jewish property, and the 410.25 RM in other fees. Taking the position of Ashton seeking restitution for illegitimate costs in his compensation, Allianz now argued in effect that it had purchased 
157 
See WG., 1 WGA 2462 /50, Bd. I每II (Walther Czempin). 158 See Chapter 3, pp. 145每7. 

The offce block on Kaufngerstra.e 22 (today, no. 28) was Aryanized in 1940 when Al-lianz purchased it. After 1945 this building became an object of restitution procedures. 
Ashton＊s rights to seek compensation for these payments. Thus, the 4,080 RM fee under the decree for the mobilization of Jewish assets 
is by its nature a remuneration for the fact that the racially persecuted had to pay for the fact that the authorities of the Reich took or decimated their assets. It is impossible that a fee which the Reich had instituted can be recognized as legal for the carrying out of mea-sures which are today recognized as illegal and which the legislature has therefore ordered to be made good. If this activity of the Reich as such is condemned, then the remunera-tion for it must necessarily be regarded as a levy imposed by force.159 
Allianz also laid claim to compensation for the commission Basch had paid to Stumfall, for Stumfall＊s retention of the commission had to be seen for what it really was: ※In view of the machinations which the Nazi authorities employed to gain control of the assets of Herr Basch, one surely cannot speak seriously about there being a voluntary agreement from the side of Herr Basch.§ Indeed, Stumfall＊s very person and his known record militated against such an interpre-tation. His commission, therefore, was another compulsory and illegitimate fee aimed at despoiling Basch and so compensation for the legitimate owner of the property was likewise in order 每 and that owner, thanks to the settlement with Ashton, was Allianz. 
Allianz had indeed travelled a rather long road from its response to Ash-ton＊s claims in the letter of April 1949 to the restitution authorities, when it had declared: 
We contest that the seller at that time was in a situation of constraint. The Basch cou-ple had presented themselves long before as being interested in selling, and had charged Herr Hanns Stumfall, an engineer and economic consultant to negotiate the sale of the property in question .... Also the power of attorney on the basis of which Herr Stum-fall negotiated with us was granted by the Basch couple voluntarily and without any compulsion.160 
Obviously, the perspective had changed when Allianz had ※become§ Basch or Ashton some seven years later, but the restitution court was not at all confused as to who was who in its deliberations in 1957. It heard testimony from Stumfall, who insisted that he was acting on behalf of Basch in a perfectly normal manner and that his commission was appropriate. The court then ruled that there was nothing discriminatory about Stumfall＊s commission and the charges in ques-tion since the buyer knew ※that a Jewish asset was in question and that at that time special permissions were necessary.§161 If restitution often entailed a sub-stantial gap between law and justice, in this case at least there was a welcome if curious confuence. 
Such fickering moments of illumination 每 when those charged with dealing with restitution problems at Allianz were willing to recognize that they had been well aware that the assets coming into their hands were of Jewish origin and had been sold under constraint 每 were the exception rather than the rule. This was true not only with respect to real estate but also with respect to securities. One of the more protracted but telling cases dealing with securities was that of Peter Newman of New York City, who in November 1948 fled for restitution of 
159 Allianz an das Landgericht Mchen I, Wiedergutmachungskammer, 18. Dez. 1956,WGB, Ia 
919, Bd. 3. 160 Allianz an die Wiedergutmachungsbehde Bayern, 12. April 1949, ibid., Bd. 2. 161 Sitzung der Wiedergutmachungskammer beim Landgericht Mchen I, 12. Juli 1957, ibid., Bd. 3. 
shares in Berlinische Lebensversicherungs Gesellschaft AG, a member of the Al-lianz concern. Peter was the son of Samuel Neumann, who owned a banking house and had died while still in Germany. Peter Newman, anxious to get out of Germany, found it necessary to transfer the shares to Merck, Finck & Co. in the spring of 1939, and the shares were sold to Allianz in August of that year. It was Newman＊s contention that anyone acquainted with the market at that time had to know that such a block of shares could only come from a Jewish port-folio, especially given the low price at which they were acquired. Furthermore, the shares of Berlinische Leben (as was not unusual in the case of insurance com-panies) could be purchased only with permission of the company, and the block of shares had been sizeable enough to merit a friendly visit to Samuel Neumann by the chairman of Berlinische Leben in the early 1930s.162 
Allianz＊s response to the Newman claim was to declare 每 and, it must be said, with a disingenuousness that borders on the repulsive 每 that it certainly still held the shares that it had bought from Merck, Finck & Co. in Berlin and knew that they had been in the possession of the Neumanns, but that ※the reason why these had been sold is unknown to us.§163 However, its chief argument against the Newman claim was that the shares in question, which had to bear a name and even if transferred were subject to approval by the corporation issuing the shares, could nevertheless be signed over to anyone. They were thus treatable (under the restitution laws and a variety of court decisions) as the equivalent of bearer certifcates 每 that is, securities that could be bought and sold without being registered to a particular person 每 and therefore not subject to restitu-tion. Newman kept on bringing the matter to court and losing, but the situation changed in February 1959 when the highest restitution court in Berlin ruled in Newman＊s favor, declaring that the shares in question were not a movable as-set comparable to bearer certifcations because approval had to be given by the company for their transfer. At this stage of the game, Allianz had no inten-tion of going back to court. It certainly could not argue that Neumann would have sold the shares if the conditions created by National Socialism had not required it and the legal situation had not become ※hopeless.§ Also, as the Al-lianz legal department argued, there were good ※political reasons§ for making a settlement with Newman: ※the repeated justifable public criticism concerning the drawn-out implementation of restitution in the Federal Republic.§164 Such considerations did not, however, lead to an initially acceptable offer of com-pensation to Newman by Allianz, which frst valued the shares at 260%ofthe face amount even as they were selling on the market for 360%. After New-man＊s lawyer refused to accept the offer, Allianz agreed to the latter valuation, 
162 Peter Neuman an das zentrale Anmeldeamt, Bad Nauheim, 14.Nov. 1948; Peter Neuman an die 
Wiedergutmachungs.mter von Berlin, 23. Juni 1952,WG., 62 WGA 3397/51 (Peter Newman, 
frer Neumann), Bl. 2每3, 20. 163 Allianz an die Wiedergutmachungs.mter, ibid., Bl. 6每7. 164 Rechtsabteilung der Allianz an Allianz Vermensverwaltung, 7. Juli 1959,FHA,AZ 8.1/2. 
and in 1960 Newman received almost 59,000 DM instead of the 35,000 DM ini-tially offered.165 
While Newman had pursued his case quite aggressively, this was by no means true of other potential claimants on shares in Allianz＊s possession. Law 59 of the American military government had required Allianz to report all shares that might have belonged to Jews and been subject to restitution, and in May 1948 it had dutifully reported 598 shares of Allianz Leben that might possibly have been subject to restitution. No claims had been made on these shares until August 1955, when the organization designated to act in place of the Jewish Restitution SuccessorOrganization(JRSO), the HessianTrusteeship AdministrationGmbH in Wiesbaden, laid claim to the shares for purposes of restitution. As in the case of Newman, Allianz argued that the shares in question were like bearer certif-cates and were not subject to the legislation; Allianz also questioned whether it could be held responsible in certain cases where the provenance was unclear and where it was by no means certain the previous owner had been Jewish. There was no reason to presume that Kuno Feldmann or Otto Pieppel or someone with the name Blessing was Jewish. And even if an owner was clearly Jewish, as in the case of the banking house of Arnhold, shares bought in 1933 and then sold in 1934, or even shares that were traded by the bank in 1935每1937, could not be assumed to be distressed sales because the Arnhold Bank continued to both buy and sell shares at this time. Nevertheless, Hans Arnhold and his daughters Ellenmarie and Annamarie were claiming restitution. Allianz also questioned whether shares once held by the banking house of Mendelssohn & Co. in Berlin were also not traded in a normal manner. In negotiations with the Hessian Trusteeship Administration, the number of shares subject to possible restitu-tion was reduced to 354. Aware that court decisions might prove unfavorable to their position, Allianz then offered to value the shares at the average quotation of 260 DM each, which would have amounted to 94,040 DM, and then settle for less than half this amount 每 namely, 46,020 DM. It would appear that the trusteeship administration was in the end prepared to accept 40,000 DM, but the federal supervisory offce for insurance refused to approve the settlement on the grounds that the courts were still considering the shares in question to be bearer shares not subject to restitution. In reality, Allianz itself had little to lose since, under existing legislation, Allianz would then be substantially compensated for its settlement by the State of Bavaria, whose government (as shall be explained more fully) was guaranteeing the liabilities of the insurance companies. At the end of 1957, Allianz proposed a settlement of 20,000 DM and believed it would be possible to gain approval of the supervisory offce for this sum, but the super-visory offce contended that Allianz would only get 12,390 DM back from the Bavarian state and would thus lose 7,610 DM, which (in their view) constituted an unfair hardship for the concern. State guarantees of the insurance companies 
See the documentation in WG., 62 WGA 3397/51 (Peter Newman, frer Neumann), Bl. 108每36. 
had been based on the premise that they were technically bankrupt, which they had been at the end of the war. Thus, on the one hand, the Bavarian govern-ment was covering at least a portion of their restitution costs, while on the other it took the view that losses incurred by Allianz were unaffordable. This was not, in fact, the view held by Allianz, which thought that the amount in question could easily be absorbed. The supervisory offce then gave permission for the settlement to go forward. What is one to make of this case? 每 aside from the fact that it was a good demonstration of how and why some of these restitution cases dragged on for as long as they did. To begin with, it took seven years be-fore the trusteeship fnally acted. It then proved diffcult to determine in certain cases who was a Jew and who was not. Furthermore, in this instance, it could well be argued that some of the shares ended up in the Allianz portfolio through normal trading. Obviously, the lack of clarity about the legal situation served to diminish the settlement amount, but no less signifcant was that the federal su-pervisory offce played a substantial role in reducing the settlement 每 even to the point where Allianz itself felt compelled to say that enough was enough.166 
Matters were much simpler in other cases where the clear liability of Allianz was unquestionable. Thus, shares of Berliner Hagel-Assecuranz-Gesellschaft von 1832 belonging to the Mendelssohn family and purchased from Reichs-Kredit-Gesellschaft in 1938 obviously had to be restituted, since the name was known to Allianz and since the shares sold in 1938 were clearly alienated under duress. Simplest of all were the shares of Assecurantie Mij. De Nederlanden van 1845 which Allianz had bought in 1942 through Dresdner Bank. These shares were simply seized by the Allied military government in 1946, while other shares belonging to Dutch companies and citizens were handed over to the Dutch authorities.167 
This is not to say that the various claims against German insurers by Ger-many＊s former enemies were that simple to settle, but once the Federal Republic had been established in 1949 and the emphasis was placed on reconstructing Germany and Europe, the settlement of insurance questions 每 as demonstrated by the record of negotiations in the archives 每 moved fairly rapidly. Not surpris-ingly, the British, who were most interested in getting the European economies and their own economy going again, led the way and even took the initiative. They were to be the driving force behind the London Debt Agreement of 1953, which dealt with prewar debts and, by giving priority to debt payment and recon-struction requirements, effectively protected German industry from reparations demands until the signing of a peace treaty.168 The settling of insurance issues, 
166 The seemingly endless correspondence, running between 1955 and 1959, is to be found in FHA, 
AZ 8.1/1. 167 See Allianz Vermensabteilung an Rechtsabteilung der Allianz, 8.Feb. 1956, and other relevant 
documentation on the Mendelssohn case, FHA, AZ 8.1/3. 168 On the London Debt Agreement, see Hermann J. Abs, Entscheidungen 1949每1953. Die Entste-
hung des Londoner Schuldenabkommens, 2. Auf. (Mainz, 1991); Hans-Peter Schwarz (ed.), 
however, antedated the larger agreement and demonstrated how, once again, in-surance was given a special status in international arrangements from which the German insurance industry beneftted greatly. Thus, in March 1951 the British insurance leaders personally invited a number of leading German insurance ex-ecutives (representing the Association of German Insurers) to privately discuss the question of settling prewar obligations between the insurance industries of the two countries. They took the view that the ※international character of insur-ance§ and the ※inviolability of insurance contracts§ required a settlement that would restore things to normal.169 A formal agreement was reached in June that was very favorable to the Germans, enabling them to cover their obligations to their English counterparts by using the obligations of the latter to themselves. This was the beginning of a series of bilateral agreements in the 1950s between the German insurers and those of the countries occupied by Germany. The most important agreements certainly were with France in 1952, where so-called spoli-ation issues 每 that is, compensation to the French companies for the imposition of a German forced administration over their insurance companies, especially in Alsace-Lorraine, by German companies appointed as administrators 每 were subsumed under the general settlement of claims of a purely commercial nature. In short, no distinction was made between claims arising from the German oc-cupation and prewar claims. In most cases, the assets of German insurers in these countries were, insofar as they had not been already used to compensate for assets taken during the war, released and thus available to cover the obliga-tions of the German insurers. Normality in the international insurance business was thus restored by the end of the 1950s, a situation that obviously beneft-ted the German insurers, who were allowed to do international business again 
170
in 1954. 

Restitution to Customers: Property and Life Insurance 
※Normality§ also had important implications for the handling of insurance poli-cies issued by German companies and held by persons living abroad. After the German hyperinfation of 1922每1923, there had been little enthusiasm on the 
Die Wiederherstellung des deutschen Kredits. Das Londoner Schuldenabkommen (Stuttgart & 
Zich, 1982); Christoph Buchheim, ※Das Londoner Schuldenabkommen,§ in Ludolf Herbst 
(ed.), Westdeutschland 1945每1955. Unterwerfung, Kontrolle, Integration (Munich, 1986), pp. 
219每27. For a good discussion on the relationship between the agreement and Wiedergut-
machung, see Ulrich Herbert, ※Nicht entsch.digungsf.hig? Die Wiedergutmachungsansprhe 
der Ausl.nder,§ in Herbst & Goschler, Wiedergutmachung, pp. 273每302. 169 Niederschrift er die Besprechung am 4. Dez. 1951 betr. das Abkommen zwischen der deutschen 
und englischen Versicherungswirtschaft vom 5.每7. Juni 1951,GDV,RS/102. 170 For the normalization of relations with France, see Politisches Archiv des Ausw.rtigen Amtes, 
B 86/89; with Belgium, the Netherlands, and Denmark, ibid., B 86/1045; with Austria, ibid., B 
86/482 and 1045; with Great Britain, ibid., B 86/863; and for the restoration of the right to do 
business abroad, ibid., B 927. 
part of foreigners about taking out German life insurance policies, so that most such policies held abroad were in the hands of emigrants. Their claims, ac-cording to accepted principles of international law, were considered part of the domestic German debt (i.e., what Germans and German entities owed to one another) and thus were subject to German legislation and regulations affecting such debt.171 Therefore, turning to the fnal areas of restitution relevant to this study 每 namely, property insurance and above all life insurance 每 the question of insurance claims against German insurance companies had to be settled in accordance with German law. 
Insofar as property insurance claims were at issue, the only signifcant area that came up with respect to restitution was the damage caused to Jewish assets during the Pogrom of November 1938. Allianz＊s position, as can be imagined, was that it had no liability since payment for damages caused through ※domes-tic disturbances§ was excluded from the insurance. The number of claims that poured in to the various insurers caused a considerable amount of worry, so that as early as the summer of 1947 the property insurers asked for a legal opinion from a major lawyer in Cologne, who affrmed in the strongest possible terms that the insurance conditions precluded coverage for such events. Just as the in-surers in 1938 had argued that the payment of the 20 million RM demanded by Ging and the Finance Ministry threatened the existence of some of the insur-ance companies, so now, nine years later, their lawyer raised the same spectre: 
Where such low instincts are set loose, where law and the consciousness of law are un-dermined, where the wild masses are let loose, there acts of force are unavoidable and damages incalculable. An insurance protection in such cases leads either to the collapse of the insurance companies or 每 if such a risk is included 每 burdens the insured with such high premiums that the conclusion of an insurance would be impossible. In the interest of the insured alone such a liability must be excluded.172 
There were, nevertheless, certain peculiarities connected with the insurance situation of some of the victims of the Pogrom. One of them, Mali Fleischmann, whose father＊s home furnishings and possessions had been insured by Allianz, asserted that the company had used ※the mood of the people§ to refuse the pay-ment claim and joined with her siblings in demanding compensation in 1948. 173 It is hard to imagine her making such a statement if it were not true, and in at least this case it would appear that Allianz used Goebbels＊s contention 每 that the Pogrom was an elemental outburst of the people against the Jews 每 not only in their efforts to escape payment to the government but also in claiming non-liability for the victims themselves. Then there was the Berlin shopowner Julius Schubert, who had made a claim and then suddenly received a notice on August 
171 See the negotiations with the Tripartite Commission in London, Oct. 21, 1952,GDV,RS/103. 172 Gutachten Dr. Lenz, 22. Juli 1947, and Niederschrift er die Sitzung des Hauptausschusses der 
Arbeitsgemeinschaft Sachversicherung am 11. Juni 1947 in Kn, FHA, S 17.13/168. 173 Mali Fleischmann an das Zentralmeldeamt, Bad Nauheim, 30.Nov. 1948,WGB,Ia 1688. 
9, 1939, that he was receiving a payment of RM 3,850 每 which, however, was being sent to the Reich Revenue Offce. When his daughter and heir Gertrud Becker sought restitution from Allianz for the amount in question, Allianz con-tested the claim, pointing out that the fctitious payment made to Schubert was a consequence of the agreement reached between the insurance companies and the Reich, which relieved the companies of all obligation. Needless to say, the mystery of how they could be freed of all liability when they had no liability in the frst place was never exactly explained, except by arguing that the compa-nies had taken a stand on their nonliability but that the Reich had forced them to make some kind of payment anyway.174 While one of the three courts that heard the case and decided against Becker made note of the fact that the payment could be deducted from a portion of the atonement tax, both Allianz and the courts took the position that there was never any liability on the part of the insurers and that the payment, on the one hand, was made without any claim for liability being recognized and, on the other, provided relief from all future claims against the companies. Gertrud Becker, who was living in Brooklyn, New York, had not found any of this convincing from the very start, and she had a particular ani-mus against Allianz 每 claiming that its leadership (and especially Hilgard) had promoted the Nazi system and had consorted ※especially with Ging and other worthies of this kind§ already in 1933. She charged that even in that year Jews had been barred from entering the headquarters of Allianz and insisted that Al-lianz was one of the chief culprits in bringing about the Third Reich. It was they who had helped bring to power the ※lunatics or criminals, who dragged down beautiful Germany and a large portion of the world into mass misery and mis-fortune.§175 She considered it scandalous that someone like Hilgard should still have a high position in the company, and she demanded that her claims should therefore be granted and what she considered the purely formal arguments of Allianz rejected. In any case, she intended to fght on for principled reasons and to demonstrate for all to see how restitution for the Jews was being handled in Germany. 
Manifestly, this was not a very compelling legal argument, and the real test of the adequacy of restitution would be the success of her claims not against Allianz but rather against the government. One suspects, however, that the emo-tions refected by her remarks were widespread and help to explain the insistence of many Jewish claimants on taking their cases from court to court. As has been shown, the performance of Hilgard and other Allianz leaders in the Pogrom was often morally deplorable, but this did not make it actionable. It is thus hard to fault the basic position of Allianz and the other insurers that, in view of the Nuremberg Trial evidence on the Pogrom, the responsibility for the damages lay with the Reich and its successor state 每 namely, the German Federal Republic. 
174 Allianz an den Magistrat von Gro.-Berlin, Wiedergutmachungsamt, 31. Aug. 1950,FHA, S 
17.13/168. 175 Gertrud Becker an das Wiedergutmachungsamt Berlin, 29. Okt. 1950, ibid. 
It was thus proper for Allianz to urge its former clients, like the aforementioned Fleischmann family, to seek recompense from that quarter under the Law for the Compensation of National Socialist Injustice of August 12, 1949, rather than the American Restitution Law (Law No. 52).176 
This position received important confrmation in the key decision of the 2nd Civil Senate of the Federal Supreme Court of April 23, 1952, discussed earlier in this study,177 which upheld the standpoint of the insurers and placed full respon-sibility on the government. It is important to note that it was an argument also accepted by the director of the JRSO, Ernst Katzenstein, who visited the Allianz offces on September 3, 1958, to discuss the claims that the JRSO intended to bring against the government on behalf of those who had suffered losses in the Pogrom. He pointed out that there was no intention of making claims against the insurers※sincetheJRSOisclearaboutthefactthattheemploymentofthedomes-tic unrest clause was justifed.§178 Katzenstein believed, however, that the Reich should also restitute the payments it received from the insurers in the compromise worked out in 1939, although it remained unclear exactly what those arrange-ments were, and he wanted to know if Hilgard 每 whose testimony at Nuremberg had obviously been very important 每 was still alive. Indeed, the JRSO repre-sentative went so far as to suggest that the insurance companies join with it in suing the government for the ※unjustly paid damage compensations§ but agreed with the Allianz executive involved that it was not a paying proposition because compensation would have to be converted into DM. Whether a conversation be-tween Katzenstein and Hilgard ever took place is unknown to this author, but Hilgard＊s position could not have been any different from that of Allianz, which told Katzenstein they had argued that domestic unrest was the issue but that 
those in power at the time would not let this objection hold with the claim that it was not a matter of domestic disturbance, but of an ※outburst of the people＊s rage against the agitationofinternationalJewry§ .... Gingdeclaredinunmistakabletermstothethen head of the Reich Group for Insurance that there was to be no negotiation at all over the reason for the claims but there was only the question of what sum the insurance industry was in a position to spend.179 
The result was the compromise under which the insurers were to act as if they were paying some portion of claims made by the Jews. What was left out of all this 每 assuming anyone involved at the time remembered (or cared to remem-ber) what had actually happened 每 was that the originally much higher sums 
176 See Rechtsabteilung an die Generaldirektion, E.D.-Abteilung, 24.Nov. 1949, ibid., and Allianz an Justizrat Carl Drescher, 12. Dez. 1949, as well as Drescher an die Wiedergutmachungsbehde I, Oberbayern, 17. Jan. 1950, withdrawing the Fleischmann complaint against Allianz, WGB, Ia 1688. 
177 See Chapter 5, pp. 228每9, as well as Entscheidungen des Bundesgerichtshofes in Zivilsachen 6 
(1952), pp. 28每35. 178 Aktennotiz, Betr. Pogromsch.den aus dem Jahre 1938, FHA, S 17.13/169. 179 Allianz an JRSO, 12. Aug. 1953, ibid. 
demanded by Ging had been reduced to 1.3 million, and that this had been accomplished using arguments concerning the Pogrom by Hilgard and Goude-froy that were replications of those used by Goebbels and other perpetrators of the Pogrom. Now, thanks to Hilgard＊s and Goudefroy＊s liberation, they could speak freely of the Pogrom as being a domestic disorder once again. 
As can be imagined, the most important claims made against Allianz and the other big insurance companies pertained to life insurance policies. At least for the period prior to the currency reform of June 1948, this problem must be viewed in part from the perspective of the fnancial and physical condition of the life insurance industry in 1945. This was succinctly described by the head of the insurance section of the OMGUS fnance division for Wttemberg-Baden in September 1945: 
When the Finance Division frst began operations ... it was found that the insurance business of Wttemberg/Baden was paralyzed. The major assets of most companies were Reich bonds and the Reich was non-existent. Most buildings had been bombed and records lost. Premiums, interest and dividends could not be collected and new poli-cies were not being written. Also many policyholders moved and left no forwarding addresses.180 
The greatest problem insofar as reconstruction of the industry was concerned was the overwhelming amount of state paper held by the companies. At the end of June 1946, such holdings for Allianz Leben amounted to 1,159,000,000 RM, which was much greater than their holdings of 93,067,000 RM in real prop-erty and 674,000,000 RM in mortgages.181 Under Allied regulations, the Reich bonds could neither be cashed in nor sold on the exchanges, and they were simply liquidated in the currency reform of 1948. Fundamentally, then, they were nothing but fctitious coverage, and this 每 combined with the other im-mediate postwar circumstances 每 created a high degree of uncertainty. As a consequence and with Allied approval, the life insurance industry decided in February 1946 that it could not pay full value on insurance policies but chose in-stead to pay only 40% on the policies of those who died before the capitulation on May 8, 1945, and full payment to the benefciaries of those who died after that date. The motive for this arrangement, whose basic unfairness was fully recognized by the insurers, was that it would promote confdence in the industry among the living 每 the full number and cost of the deceased still being uncer-tain 每 and thereby encourage them to pay their premiums.182 These payment restrictions were eased in October 1946 and then eliminated in March 1947, al-though a levy was imposed by the insurance companies on payments in order 
180 Report by George R. Cooper, NA, RG 260, OMGUS, OMG WB, Admin. Div., 12 /16每3/3. 181 ※Erhebung er den Versicherungsbestand und die Liquidit.tslage der Lebensversicherungsun-
ternehmungen,§ Hauptstaatsarchiv Stuttgart, EA5/002 L1, Bd. 181. 182 Bericht er die Sitzung des Bankausschusses-Unterausschusses Versicherungen vom 12. M.rz 
1946, ibid., EA1/104, Bd. 236. 
to make them possible despite loss of the premiums and interest suffered by the companies.183 
Ultimately, the future of the industry depended upon general economic con-ditions and above all a currency reform, which would restore confdence more generally and for which the insurance companies prepared and calculated assid-uously well before it took place. The leaders of the insurance industry 每 of which Gerd Mler of Allianz Leben was among the most outstanding in his capacity to defne the situation and the possibilities with rigor and impeccable logic 每 were well aware that the government would need a healthy insurance industry, and Mler was explicit about the importance of the insurance industry for the en-couragement of savings and the generation of tax revenues. It could and would claim special treatment and be in a position to transform the liabilities of yes-terday into claims against the state and thereby, although technically bankrupt, enjoy a virtual state guarantee of survival as stability was being restored. Indeed, the insurance companies had an entitlement to make ※equalization demands§ of the government as compensation for the damages they suffered because of the war and especially because of the total loss of value of the Reich bonds. It was only by such means that coverage requirements could be met.184 
Thus, a fundamental aspect of this insurance industry reconstruction effort (albeit one that was typical for the private economy as a whole) was, as much as possible, to shed past burdens and shift responsibilities to the government for the disasters of the past. The management of insurance claims emanating from Jew-ish policyholders 每 who had been compelled to make their policies premium-free and/or repurchase their policies or who had their policies confscated under the 11th Decree 每 was part and parcel of this more general tendency. This does not mean that there was anything sinister involved or that the German Federal Re-public, as the legal successor to the National Socialist regime, should not have taken responsibility for the compensation of such policies. As we shall see, how-ever, Allianz and the insurance industry organizations played a major and direct role in structuring the manner in which the compensation of confscated Jew-ish insurance assets was effectuated. On the one hand, the response of Allianz to the claims of Jewish policyholders inevitably promoted the self-exculpation process. On the other, the form taken by the compensation procedure no less 
183 A useful source of information on the reconstruction problems is ※Verband der Lebensver-
sicherungsunternehmen e.V., Gesch.ftsbericht 1938每1948, Teile I每III.§ An account of the chang-
ing policies toward policy payment is to be found in Teil II, pp. 26每8. The copy used here is from 
Staatsarchiv Bremen, 3-V6-12 /348. 184 Verband der Lebensversicherungsunternehmen e.V., Gesch.ftsbericht 1938每1948, Teil III, p. 
18, Staatsarchiv Bremen, 3-V6-12 /348; Gerd Mler an Rechtsanwalt Wehl, Wtt.-Badisches Fi-
nanzministerium, 10. Juni 1947, and his memorandum, ※Die Behandlung der Lebensversicherung 
in der Finanzreform,§ Hauptstaatsarchiv Stuttgart, EA5/002 L1, Bd. 181. The slow process of 
postwar fnancial reconstruction is well described in Arps, Wechselvolle Zeiten, pp. 166每98.On 
the currency reform and equalization demands, see Deutsche Bundesbank (ed.), Ffzig Jahre 
Deutsche Mark. Notenbank und W.hrung in Deutschland seit 1948 (Munich, 1998), pp. 130f. 
inevitably veiled the extent to which the relationship between insurer and policy-holder had been compromised by the confscation of Jewish insurance assets. The management of the compensation of Jewish insurance assets, however ra-tional and justifed it may appear in the context of the time, necessarily served to block or attenuate any serious refection on the implications of what had hap-pened with respect to business ethics and the social responsibility of business. The Jewish policyholders had, after all, been stakeholders in the much vaunted ※community of risk§ who had been cast out. How (assuming it was at all pos-sible to do so) and on what terms was one to ※make good§ the damage done to them? 
If the question is put in this way, then even the simplest and most straightfor-ward problem in the payment of Jewish insurance assets (i.e., the payment of an insurance policy due to death or because the policy came to term) was not with-out its problematic aspects. Take, for example, the case of Otto Jeidels, who had taken out a 100,000-RM life insurance policy in 1931 and died in 1947.Ap-parently, the policy had not been reported to the fnancial authorities under the 11th Implementation Decree to the Reich Citizenship Law. Possibly this was be-cause Jeidels was known already to be an American citizen and thus could not be classifed as a German Jew living abroad, but it is also possible that those in charge at Allianz chose to ※overlook§ the policy. In any case, Allianz Leben paid out 8,161.94 DM to his widow Gertrud Jeidels in 1949 每 that is, at the ratio de-fned by the June 1948 currency reform of 10 RM for 1 DM. It would appear that the actual DM payment was reduced to cover unpaid premiums and pay the so-called war levy, a 10% charge imposed on all insurance payments and de-signed to spread the costs of payments for those killed in the war. Gertrud Jeidels had maintained personal contact with Kurt Schmitt after her husband＊s death and visited him on the occasion of a trip to Germany in 1950, where, as Schmitt reported in a letter to Gerd Mler of Allianz Leben, ※she also brought up the life insurance of her husband, which, if I correctly understood her 每 was paid out by Allianz at 10 : 1. She asked me whether as an American and one of the persecuted she did not have a claim to 1 : 1.§185 Schmitt promised to look into the matter, pointing out to Mler that Jeidels had been an important supervisory board member and adviser to Allianz as well as a prominent banker in Germany and the United States and that his death was a loss to Germany. Mler responded by observing that the status of RM claims by citizens of the victorious powers had not yet been regulated, so that Gertrud Jeidels＊s question was ※premature.§186 However, in reality the Allies, especially the Americans, were the guardians of currency reform and took the position that hardships would be alleviated in the projected law on the equalization of burdens. Mrs. Jeidels＊s heir was, in fact, a benefciary of this law since Jeidels had an entitlement under the ※Old Savers＊ Law§ passed in 1953, which sought to give special compensation to persons who 
185 Schmitt an Gerd Mler, 13. Sept. 1950, FHA, NL 1/18. 186 Mler an Schmitt, 22. Sept. 1950, ibid. 
had savings prior to 1939 and had suffered unfairly from the currency reform. As a result, in 1955 he received a credit slip from Allianz entitling him to draw 4,200 DM from the Burden Equalization Fund along with an expression of Al-lianz＊s regret that more was not being granted for life insurance policies.187 
Underlying Gertrud Jeidels＊s question about the conversion rate for the assets of the persecuted under the currency reform was a more fundamental question: Why should Jews (or any other persecuted group or persons) be in any way fnan-cial victims of Hitler＊s war in the calculation of their restitution? Thus, another German-Jewish refugee-turned-American-citizen was furious when he received only 2,502.14 DM in 1949 on the 20-year 30,000-RM life insurance policy he had taken out in 1928. The policy had apparently escaped confscation, possi-bly because the policyholder was not recognized to be Jewish, and dividends had apparently covered the premiums until late 1944, which now left almost 500 DM to be deducted from the fnal 3,000-DM payout. He promptly made a claim for restitution: ※Insofar as the problem of the ＆restitution＊ of the paid life in-surance contributions is concerned, payment in depreciated money is really no ＆restitution＊ but rather an avoidance of real restitution. Therefore I hereby peti-tion that the repayment value be brought into a reasonable relation to the true sense of a ＆life insurance＊ policy.§188 Allianz＊s position was that its payment was in conformity to the currency law and that the policyholder had the choice of either accepting the payment or refusing it and waiting for a regulation of his rights in the future. It is interesting that the policyholder himself could not de-fne a reasonable relation between the expectations he held in 1928 and those he was entitled to hold in 1948. Needless to say, currency reforms are notori-ously unfavorable to those holding liquid assets. Indeed, while the Americans demanded restitution to Jews, they also demanded German reconstruction, and this particular policyholder also complained bitterly about the breakdown of American每Soviet relations and his inability to be compensated for assets in the East. He even went so far as to demand payment from Marshall Plan Funds being used to reconstruct Germany! As was often the case with Jews at this time, there was a good deal of resentment at the rebuilding of Germany so soon after the war and a strong sense that everything was being forgotten because of the change in the international situation. Restitution in the context of Ger-man reconstruction and the Cold War necessarily implied that compensation of German-Jewish assets be an integral part of the postwar fnancial and eco-nomic scenario: lost real value and destruction resulting from the war launched by those who had oppressed and despoiled the Jews. 
A variety of claims were made against Allianz by Jews (or on behalf of deceased Jews) for restitution ofinsurance policies that had been repurchased and/or made 
187 For the Jeidels policy see AZLB, A 104788. 188 Ernst E. Englehart [originally Engelhardt], MD, an das Zentralmeldeamt, Bad Nauheim, 9. Jan. 
1949, and Allianz Leben an das Amtsgericht Stuttgart, 1.Nov. 1949, Hauptstaatsarchiv Stutt-
gart, EA5/002 R10, Bd. 272. Actually, it was not Englehart but his wife who was Jewish, and he 
and his family left Germany for this reason. 
premium-free during the National Socialist period, as well as for policies whose repurchase value had been confscated under the 11th Implementation Decree of the Reich Citizenship Law of November 1941. Allianz rejected these claims, and its position was regularly upheld in the courts. In some cases, neither Allianz nor the claimants had evidence of the policies or suffcient information about their history. Most basically, however, Allianz (and other insurers) took the po-sition 每 forcefully expressed in an Allianz letter to Ministerial Director Richard Ringelmann of the Bavarian Finance Ministry on April 23, 1949 每 that 
it was a matter of indifference as to what the reasons are that insurance policies expire, whether through unilateral action of the policyholder or through termination by the in-surer because of non-payment of premiums, or through interventions on the part of the authorities (11th Implementation Decree of the Reich Citizenship Law). The fact is, in any case, that these policies no longer exist and that the insurance companies, which had in no way contributed to the dissolution of these contracts, are not in the position to re-store them again on their own authority. This position has also been taken by the military governments and the L.nder in the American and French zones. As a consequence, the L.nder have been summoned to issue compensation laws according to which the perse-cuted should be given compensation for their claims insofar as they cannot be made good according to the Restitution Law.189 
This letter was written at a time when the disposition of such cases by the restitu-tion courts was anything but certain. Allianz faced a suit by the heirs of a Jewish policyholder who had repurchased his policies (which fell due in 1941每1942)in 1939 and had instructed Allianz to place the money in his blocked account. In this case, the claimants were not asking Allianz for the money already paid 每 they were presumably planning to sue the government for that 每 but rather for the difference between what had already been paid and the full value of the poli-cies when they came to term, minus the premiums that would have been paid under normal circumstances. Quite aside from the fact that this could have been a costly precedent in the case of large policies, it was a potentially dangerous precedent since it opened up the possibility that all policies that were repur-chased or confscated could be liable to at least partial resurrection. From the standpoint of the insurers, it was essential to establish the principle that they had no liability whatever toward the policyholders, that the liability lay with the public authorities, and that paragraph 89 of the restitution law (Law 59), which provided for special legislation to deal with insurance, be implemented in a way that confrmed the insurers＊ position. Turning to Ringelmann for his advice in this matter was especially relevant because he was considered by Allianz as the ※father§ of the Wiedergutmachung law passed by the Council of L.nder and sub-sequently approved by the American authorities in the summer of 1949. Allianz won its case in a decision of the Stuttgart Restitution Chamber of June 1, 1949, but the appeal to Ringelmann is interesting since he tended to take a hard line 
189 Allianz an Ministerialdirektor Ringelmann, 23. April 1949, BAK, B 280/1706, and Bayerisches Hauptstaatsarchiv, MF 71778. 
on Wiedergutmachung for fnancial reasons and undoubtedly could be counted upon to be sympathetic to the Allianz position.190 
Nevertheless, the complicated problem of Wiedergutmachung for the insured remained to be solved, and both the conceptual approach to such Wiedergut-machung and the mode of implementation were of obvious concern to the in-surers. The most fully developed and important statement of their position was made by Gerhard Frels of Gothaer Leben, deputy chairman of the Association of Life Insurance Companies, whose various zonal branches were allowed to join together to form an association for all the Western zones in June 1948.He was also the chairman of the association＊s committee for legal and legislative questions and served as its most important spokesman on Wiedergutmachung questions.191 In an article of January 1950, Frels laid down the basic position of the insurance industry toward the issue of Wiedergutmachung, which is es-pecially notable for the way in which it brought together the self-understanding of the industry about its role in the National Socialist period, its fnancial con-dition as a result of National Socialist rule and the wiping out of a substantial portion of its paper assets in the currency reform, and the primacy of recon-struction considerations. Frels was quite insistent that policyholders deserved and had to receive a restoration of their rights and assets, and that this needed to be done as rapidly as possible. At the same time, 
the fnancial burdens of this Wiedergutmachung, however, ought not to be placed on the shoulders of the insurance companies. Otherwise, one injustice would replace another, for the German life insurers are not to blame for the persecutory measures under which many of their policyholders had to suffer. They abhorred these measures and did nothing by themselves to promote them. But they could just as little ward them off any more than the entire German people could prevent the terroristic measures of the Nazi regime. Wiedergutmachung with respect to life insurance must ... be carried out at the expense of the State (the L.nder or the Federation). One must also consider in this regard that the life insurance companies, which have delivered to the L.nder from the assets of these companies an estimated two billion DM in debtor＊s gain, have been left with no means for Wiedergutmachung purposes. Such means must therefore also be provided to them sub-sequently if they are burdened with Wiedergutmachung obligations, and this would lead to a raising of the equalization demands to be provided them. By means of this laborious and costly detour the end result would still be a burdening of the State with Wiedergut-machung costs. This detour can and must be avoided.192 
The basic principle under which policyholders would receive justice was laid down in the Wiedergutmachung laws accepted by the Western occupation pow-ers, above all in section 37 of the Bavarian law in August 1949, which became the 
190 The court decision is in BAK, B 280/1706. On Ringelmann, see Goschler, Wiedergutmachung, 
pp. 138ff. 191 ※Verband der Lebensversicherungsunternehmen e.V., Gesch.ftsbericht 1938每1948,§ Teil III, pp. 
5每9, Staatsarchiv Bremen, 3-V6-12 /348. 192 Gerhard Frels, ※Wiedergutmachung nationalsozialistischen Unrechts in der Lebensversiche-
rung,§ in Versicherungsrecht 1 (1950), pp. 1每3, 60每1, quote on p. 1. 
model not only for the other Western zones but also for the federal compensation legislation of 1953 and 1956. Under this law, ※Wiedergutmachung is constituted by the restoration at the expense of the State of the legal situation which would have existed if the damaging event had not occurred.§193 The amount of compen-sation was limited to 10,000 DM, and the insurance companies were obligated to provide information to claimants and collaborate in the restoration of their entitlements. Yet implementing the quoted principle was no simple matter, and it provided the insurers and their organizations with considerable opportunity to shape the rules and regulations governing compensation; indeed, the Asso-ciation of Life Insurers drew up a draft for the implementation of section 37 in 1949. In March 1950, the coordination bureau of the Interministerial Work-ing Group for Wiedergutmachung and Compensation Questions of the German Federal Republic set up a committee to work on these questions and was also charged to do so in consultation with the Association of German Life Insurers.194 It moved very slowly, however, in part because its chairman (Ministerial Director Heiland of the Baden Finance Ministry) was appointed to the Federal Consti-tutional Court, so that numerous technical questions continued to remain open at the end of 1951. Initially, for example, the insurance companies thought that government compensation could be used not simply to restore insurance rights as some sort of useful fction but actually to enable the claimant to choose to revive the policy on a DM basis. That is, assuming the policy had not come to term, the former policyholder would become a policyholder once again by using compen-sation monies to pay the premiums and keep the policy going. Ultimately, the opening of such an option was considered too complicated, but it is illustrative of the technical issues that had to be faced. A more basic problem, as the insur-ance organizations justifably argued, was the need for regulation of the matter at the federal level, so that there would be uniformity and consistency of practice. The diffculty here was that all issues of restitution and compensation remained a special reserve of the occupation powers even after the establishment of the Federal Republic, so that the West German government had frst to develop the basic principles under which it would regulate these questions and then secure Allied agreement.195 Ultimately, this came about in the wake of the Luxemburg Agreement between Germany and Israel in 1952 and the Federal Compensation Laws of 1953 and 1956, all of which explains why most of the compensation for insurance assets dates from the late 1950s and early 1960s. 
The provisions for the compensation of lost insurance assets were contained in sections 127每133 of the Federal Compensation Law (BEG), which in its provi-sions leaned very heavily on the basic principles (just discussed) that were devel-oped in 1949每1950. 196 The insurance companies were freed of all responsibility 
193 Quoted in ibid., p. 2. 194 Koordinierungsbo an das Finanzministerium Wttemberg-Baden, 4. Aug. 1950, Hauptstaats-
archiv Stuttgart, EA5/002 R10, Bd. 272. 195 Frels, Wiedergutmachung, pp. 60f. 196 See the excellent discussion of Detlef Kaulbach, ※Versicherungssch.den au.erhalb der Sozialver-
sicherung (∫∫127每133 BEG),§ in Die Wiedergutmachung nationalsozialistischen Unrechts durch 
for the compensation of policies, but were responsible for helping to fnd the policies of claimants and, most importantly, were assigned the task of calculat-ing the entitlement of the claimants. This was done on a special form designed by the federal supervisory offce for insurance.197 Under this legislation, the German government recognized that Jews who ceased paying premiums, had made their policies premium-free, or had repurchased their policies in the Nazi regime had done so under duress and deserved compensation 每 just as did those whose policies were confscated by government order under the 11th Decree of the Reich Citizenship Law. The point of departure for all compensation was that one started with the full value of the policy and what its present worth would be if the Third Reich had never existed. Then, a distinction was made between those who had received the repurchase value of their policies (whether directly or in a blocked account) and those who had their repurchase value confscated by the authorities. The value of the policies of those in the frst category was calculated by deducting the repurchase value they had received and/or monies they had borrowed on the policies and by deducting unpaid premiums after due credit was given for dividends that would have been received. The fctitious pre-miums owing before 1948 were calculated at 10% of their RM value, since the RM had been reduced under the currency reform, while those owing after 1948 were calculated in DM. The compensation given was the remaining cash value with the RM portion reduced by 90% (because of the currency reform) plus the Old Saver＊s entitlement. In those cases where the repurchase value was paid out directly by the insurer to agencies of the Nazi government, the policy was treated in terms of its full face value and there was no deduction of repurchase value at the time of confscation. Whatever was then owed in RM was reduced to 10% (i.e., converted into DM) and to this was added the Old Saver＊s entitlement. 
Clearly, those who had been subject to direct confscation were very much favored by this arrangement, while those who had experienced either no con-fscation or indirect confscation were likely to receive pathetically little. Thus, a doctor who had taken out a 20-year policy in 1925 for 25,000 RM and who repurchased it in 1938 for 14,571 RM 每 12,000 of which he needed to pay the Reich Flight Tax 每 ended up receiving 339.20 DM in 1956. This was because the repurchase value he had received in 1938 was deducted from the value of the policy as having been paid out already. The fact that the Nazis got most of the value he had received was irrelevant from the standpoint of the insurer, although the policyholder had every right to claim compensation from the government for the Reich Flight Tax and probably did. Even more extreme was the case of a widow whose husband had taken out a 20-year 10,000每gold mark policy in 
die Bundesrepublik Deutschland, hrsg. vom Bundesminister der Finanzen in Zusammenarbeit 
mit Walter Schwarz, Bd. 5: Hans Giessler u.a., Das Bundesentsch.digungsgesetz. Zweiter Teil 
(∫∫51 bis 171 BEG) (Munich, 1983), pp. 321每35. 197 A copy is to be found in ibid., pp. 334f. For the discussion that follows, see also the report 
of Rudolf Gerlach in J. D. Bindenagel (ed.), Washington Conference on Holocaust-Era Assets. 
November 30每December 3, 1998. Proceedings (Washington, D.C., 1999), pp. 623每7. 
1925 每 subject to mandatory conversion into RM in 1938 每 and had repurchased his policy in 1939 for 5,308.30 RM. She applied for compensation in 1956 and, when all the calculations were done, received 10 DM. The 10,000 RM less the money received in 1939 had left a policy worth 4691.70 RM, or 469.17 DM be-fore premium deductions, which ate up most of the remaining value.198 
To understand 每 in concrete terms 每 how so much could be reduced to so little and what this meant to a policyholder, it is useful to consider an actual case that demonstrates the odyssey of a German-Jewish life insurance policy from its pur-chase in 1925 to its fnal payment in 1960.The 20-year policy for 50,000 gold marks was taken out by the then 30-year-old engineer. At the time, the policy was redeemable either in RM or dollars and was reinsured by a foreign reinsurer. Despite this, the policyholder decided to convert his policy into RM after 1934, presumably because the dollar＊s devaluation (and his desire to take advantage of Allianz＊s 1 : 1 conversion offer) left him with little choice. In 1937, he and his wife emigrated, putting the repurchase value of their insurance (then amounting to 16,981.61 RM) into a blocked account, which was subsequently confscated in 1943. They frst went to France, where they had to go underground, and then ended up in the United States. In November 1948, the policyholder sent a lengthy demand for compensation to the U.S. military government under Law No. 59 asking not only for the worth of his insurance but also for the dollar value of the insurance on the day the policy fell due, March 1, 1945. The policyholder felt entitled to such compensation because he had been deprived of the security that the policy was intended to provide and had ※only been able to live his life under unworthy and wretched circumstances.§ He was demanding compensa-tion from both Allianz and the legal successor to the Reich Treasury. Allianz responded to this claim in 1950 by arguing that the RM conversion of the pol-icy had been voluntary and that it had effectively paid off the policy, so that the responsibility lay with the government. The case dragged on until 1960, when the policyholder＊s widow fnally collected 494.39 DM under the Compensation Law of 1956. The calculation was as follows.199 
Value of policy: 50,000.00 RM 
Repurchase value paid in 1937 16,981.51 RM 
Unpaid premiums on balance 25,071.30 RM 
War levy 3,000.00 RM 
Total deductions 45,052.81 RM 
Balance: 4,947.19 RM = 494.72 DM 
That the widow of this engineer could collect only 494 DM on a 50,000-RM policy while the daughter of a businessman could collect 371 DM on a 25-year 10,000-RM policy, also originally denominated in gold marks and taken out in 1925, demonstrated the relative advantage for assets compensated as a conse-quence of direct confscation. In this complicated and tragic case, the business-man in question 每 who had apparently been allowed to continue as a wholesaler 
198 AZLB, F 234080 and F 236446. 199 AZLB, F 235163. The discrepancy in the pfennig is due to the rounding off of the fgures. 

For offering services in restitution procedures, Allianz Leben charges the Wiesbaden Resti-tution Offce an amount according to the offcial fat rate, February 14, 1958. 
dealing in old paper as late as 1940 每 wrote Allianz in April 1940 asking about making his policy premium-free with the intention of later repurchasing it when he would emigrate. Allianz warned him that this would signifcantly reduce the value of his policy, so the policyholder did nothing except to make a prepayment on the policy 每 that is, a credit on future repurchase 每 of 727.50 RM. He and his wife were deported in October 1940; after sending him a number of premium bills and warnings, Allianz learned that he had been ※deported with his fam-ily to an unknown place.§ The policy was then made premium-free and set at a value of 5,298 RM on the death of the insured or on April 1, 1950. In early 1943, Allianz reported the existence of the policy to the revenue offce in accordance with the 11th Implementation Decree of the Reich Citizenship Law, and it subse-quently paid the value of the policy to the Mannheim revenue offce＊s bureau for the Administration of Assets of Jews and Enemies of the Reich. A decade later, in 1953, the daughter of the policyholder made inquiries at Allianz. After being informed that the policy had been cancelled owing to nonpayment of premiums, she told the company that the premiums had not been paid because her parents had been killed in 1942. In October 1957, the restitution value of the policy was calculated and the daughter received 371.67 DM.200 
The calculations in these cases, as in all insurance restitution cases, were done by the insurance company involved, which under the law was allowed to charge 
200 AZLB, F 235590. 
3, 6,or 9 DM, the last amount being asked in cases involving ※time consuming calculations and investigations.§201 Perhaps such language was a formulaic re-quirement needed to justify charging the very nominal 9 DM rather than 3 DM or 6 DM in simpler cases, but it is hard not to fnd it jarring today 每 and the refection of an underlying attitude of irritation over an unwanted distraction. This said, it is important not to let the distressingly low sums paid in such ※restoration§ of insurance rights 每 with all its fctions and complications 每 lead to overdrawn negative conclusions, and this for two reasons. First, however little one received for insurance policies repurchased by the policyholder, such pay-ment in no way precluded making substantial claims for compensation of monies used to pay the Reich Flight Tax, the atonement tax, and other costs involved in dealing with and escaping from the Nazi authorities. Second, life insurance was a relatively small and marginal part of Wiedergutmachung and hence is no basis for drawing large-scale conclusions about a unique effort, however fawed, to recognize and (insofar as possible) make some recompense for the despoli-ation perpetrated by the National Socialist regime. True, a prominent Jewish lawyer who sought refuge in Honduras in 1939 may in 1956 have received only 
105.67 DM for his 10,000-RM life insurance policy. The more important ques-tion in judging Wiedergutmachung, however, is what he received for his claims for the destruction of his valuable home furnishings and art works by SA thugs in the November Pogrom, his incarceration in Dachau, the loss of his lucrative career 每 estimated by him to be worth 500,000 RM 每 and the sale of his posses-sions at prices far below their real value. There were also the costs of obtaining visas and passage for himself and his family, as well as suitable tropical clothing. Moreover, the gold discount bank did not allow him to take more than 1,447 RM (or 6%) of the 24,128 RM remaining to him so that he might begin a new life in a far-away country 每 to which he would never have dreamed of emigrating had he not been told by the camp commandant at Dachau that the purpose of his incarceration (and also of his fellow Jews) was to persuade them to leave Ger-many and that they would not survive a second stay in Dachau. The insurance fle in question does not reveal how many of these claims were compensated nor how much this individual received for all his claims, and much more research needs to be done before a proper evaluation of the postwar compensation effort can be made.202 
Life insurance looms large in this study for obvious reasons, but the purpose of the discussion is not to determine whether more could or should have been paid or whether some other formula should have been found for insurance com-pensation; rather, our purpose is to explore the mentality and attitude of the 
201 The law in question was the 4. Durchfrungsverordnung zum BEG vom 15. M.rz 1957 (BGBl, 
1957,I,p. 281). For an illustration, see Allianz an den Regierungspr.sidenten in Kassel, 21. Juni 
1961, and other relevant documents in HessHStA, Abt. 518/14011. 202 AZLB, F 257045. The case is especially interesting because of the detailed accounts and esti-
mates of losses contained in the claim (made by this former corporate lawyer in 1949), which 
happens to be included in the insurance fle. 
businessmen who dealt with the problem in the postwar years. That was a men-tality of putting behind them all they had been doing in the National Socialist period and all the ugly things that had happened. While Allianz employees were flling out the tedious compensation forms, the concern was prospering once again, and no one was celebrating this more in public than Artur Lauinger. In an article of May 1956, he reported that Allianz Leben had raised its capital shares from 5.25 to 12.25 million DM, that it was paying an 8% dividend (which refected its steady and moderate policy in this regard), and that 每 despite Ger-many＊s shrunken size 每 its life insurance portfolio had almost attained the value of 1938 while its premium intake exceeded that of 1938. The growth of large insurance policies was especially notable. At the same time, costs had been re-duced thanks to rationalization measures. In other articles, Lauinger was no less enthusiastic about the development of Allianz and Munich Re, and he particu-larly celebrated the return of the latter to international markets after 1954.He was what he had always been, a critical but strong supporter of a private German insurance industry as part of a liberal and cosmopolitan international insurance business: ※The German insurance business abroad and with the outside world had a very signifcant volume before the war, and it demonstrated itself to be a strong source of foreign exchange. The return to normal relations can be greeted on all sides.§203 Indeed, the Third Reich appeared as an ugly and almost irrel-evant intermezzo in more ways than one. Thus, when Lauinger received the Commander＊s Cross of the Order of Merit at the end of 1952, Hilgard rushed to congratulate him: ※Whoever like myself could observe over the decades what you have done for the German insurance business as an incorruptible journalist knows how much you have earned this decoration.§ Lauinger was happy to hear from Hilgard and shared the latter＊s desire to get together again and, ※as in the old days, talk not only about the German insurance business but also about the world in which we live and which has changed so much.§204 Lauinger proba-bly never knew, and Hilgard had either repressed or forgotten, how enraged the latter had been at the former in 1935 and how Hilgard had threatened to use the fact that Lauinger was a Jew to silence him.205 In any case, it was easy enough and certainly more pleasant to skip over the recent past and concentrate on such previous achievements as the handling of the Favag affair and on the current pos-itive situation of the insurance business. 
There are limits, however, to adaptation and forgetting, and they were cer-tainly reached when Allianz celebrated its centenary in 1990. Neither Gen-eral Director Wolfgang Schieren nor the invited speaker on the occasion, the 
203 Lauinger an die Wirtschaftsredaktion der Frankfurter Neuen Presse, 3.Feb. 1959, his article en-
titled ※Wieder Fremdw.hrungsversicherungen,§ and his articles on Allianz Leben, Allianz, and 
Munich Re of 1956, Institut f Stadtgeschichte Frankfurt am Main, S 1/48 (Nachla. Lauinger), 
Nr. 22. 204 Hilgard an Lauinger, 4. Jan. 1953, and Lauinger an Hilgard, 23. Jan. 1953, ibid. 205 See Chapter 4, pp. 166每7. 
prominent journalist and Hitler biographer Joachim Fest, gave even a suggestion that Allianz might in any way have been implicated in the Third Reich. Schieren did, to be sure, mention that He. had replaced Schmitt in 1933, but the reason for Schmitt＊s departure was simply left unmentioned. As for the Second World War, it had ※initially destroyed all hopes§ and then cut deeply into Allianz＊s per-sonnel and leadership and caused losses of domestic and international markets as well as of valuable physical assets. The speech given by Fest was primarily a broad historical overview stressing the follies of utopianism, as demonstrated especially by the recent collapse of communism. Allianz did also commission a history for the occasion in which the Nazi period received some coverage but in which the weight of interpretation was given to efforts by He. and others to help Jews and contacts with the Resistance. The book, of course, was intended to cover a century, but it is a very different interpretation of Allianz in the Third Reich from that presented here and, in this author＊s opinion, must be viewed as a lost opportunity to deal with this part of Allianz＊s past.206 
The opportunity would arise again under most unexpected circumstances. Seven years later, Allianz and some of its subsidiaries 每 along with a host of other companies, some non-German 每 were forced to confront the past as a re-sult of a class action fled against them in the State of New York for refusing to pay Jewish life insurance policyholders or their heirs. Along with this came revelations about Allianz＊s involvement in the insuring of concentration camp factories.207 Whether ignorance is ever bliss is an arguable point, but it certainly had ceased to be so in 1997. It must also be said 每 to the credit of the present leadership of Allianz 每 that some of its members had been very unhappy about the superfcial treatment of the concern＊s role in the Third Reich as described in the commissioned history of 1990. The effort to correct that situation led to the commissioning of this book, which is one of a number of such studies requested by German concerns and companies who have decided to open their archives and support independent scholarly research into what is also inevitably a most un-happy chapter in their histories. Perhaps this could only be done by a generation of managers who were too young to have been involved with the Third Reich and whose education and development took place in the much more liberal and cosmopolitan context of Germany in the last few decades. Certainly ※global-ization§ and doing business in the United States has been a powerful infuence on the willingness of German and other business enterprises to face the past, and it is hard to imagine that the opening up of archives and the confronting of various compensation issues would have taken place as they have absent the peculiarities of American tort law and the American regulatory and political 
206 100 Jahre Allianz. Festansprachen 9. M.rz 1990 (Munich, 1990), esp. pp. 28每9 and 59每95; 
Borscheid, 100 Jahre Allianz, esp. pp. 105每33. Here I fnd myself in complete agreement with 
the remarks of Arno Surminski in his useful overview, Versicherung unterm Hakenkreuz (Berlin, 
1999), esp. pp. 260每7. 207 See ※Das ＆Wagnis Auschwitz＊,§ Der Spiegel, Heft 23 (June 1997), pp. 50每63. 
system. Recent revelations about the past of prominent German historians and other professionals, who faced no lawsuits and are anything but ※globalized,§ have also demonstrated that Germany＊s business enterprises are not alone in the slowness with which they confront the past 每 as well as in the need for a measure of external and public pressure to force them to do so. 
Historians can no more evade the public controversies involved in this study than can businessmen. It would be improper to conclude this study without saying something about the issue to which it owes its existence: the question of unpaid Jewish insurance policies.208 For reasons involving the manner in which German Jews were despoiled and the way in which restitution was organized, it is most unlikely that signifcant life insurance assets remain unpaid. Allianz and other German insurance companies had no interest in hiding them, since the bill would be paid by the government anyway. Obviously, every effort should be made to satisfy unmet claims that are justifed, but the search for unpaid policies should be subject to cost每beneft considerations 每 above all, in consider-ation of the needs of surviving victims of National Socialism in Eastern Europe. Also, insurance assets were differently treated in different national venues, and it is important not to lump together truly unpaid insurance assets in the former communist countries once held by Italian (or even German) companies, whose holdings were nationalized, with the policies of German or former German cit-izens held by German (or non-German) companies operating in Germany. 
It is understandable that lawyers concentrate on what is actionable rather than on what is simply awful. The latter seems to be the province of the historian and, as this study has tried to show, Allianz and its leaders were implicated in various ways in the evils of the Nazi regime. There were certainly much worse compa-nies and businessmen, but the Allianz of today has at least been proactive and taken a leading role in facing the moral issues involved and in dealing with the social responsibilities arising from them. Restitution and compensation must nevertheless come to their inevitable closure, but the history discussed here 每 and in other studies dealing with the National Socialist period 每 should remain open to future correction and refection and thus to inclusion as part of both corporate and general history. 
This is not to say that the events of 1933每45 can or should be ※historicized.§ The twelve-year reign of National Socialism was and hopefully will remain a unique descent into barbarism by a highly advanced industrial society. The most depressing fnding of this book is that the German business community, of which the insurance business was a vital member, not only failed to defend civ-ilized values but all too often actively engaged in their destruction. This began even before the National Socialists came to power, when Schmitt and Hilgard 
208 For my general views on this subject see Gerald D. Feldman, ※Unternehmensgeschichte im Drit-ten Reich und die Verwantwortung der Historiker. Raubgold und Versicherungen, Arisierung und Zwangsarbeit,§ in Norbert Frei, Dirk van Laak, & Michael Stolleis (eds.), Geschichte vor Gericht. Historiker, Richter und die Suche nach Gerechtigkeit (Munich, 2000), pp. 103每29. 
lunched with Ging and then assumed a proactive posture toward the National Socialist regime after it came to power. In doing so, they set the tone for the Al-lianz Concern and for the insurance industry generally, as well as for the business community. Schmitt＊s acceptance of the position of Reich Economics Minister was an act of national and international import that sent a signal that the busi-ness community could and would work with the regime. Similarly, Hilgard＊s assumption of the leadership of the Reich Group, his adoption of Nazi language and principles in his public performances, his willingness to violate basic prin-ciples of liberal economics in accepting state direction of the economy, and his participation in the imperialist ambitions of the Third Reich during the war in-volved a great deal more than ※preventing the worst.§ Perhaps that is the way he felt after a hard day of running from ministry to ministry and dealing with people like Schwede-Coburg, and it certainly was the way he felt after 1945, but the truth is that Hilgard＊s was an extraordinarily skillful effort to conduct interest-group politics under the stressful conditions of National Socialist rule and that this effort had little or no moral content. 
The leadership of Allianz were not not rabid anti-Semites, but they were suf-fciently anti-Semitic to approve of early National Socialist measures and then to put up relatively little resistance as the regime increased its persecution of the Jews. As the events surrounding the Pogrom of November 1938 demonstrated, little remained of business ethics when it came to the treatment of Jews, and thus the way was paved for active participation in the despoliation of Jews, including Jews who worked for the concern, in the ※Aryanization§ process. Various acts of genuine decency and of assistance to Jews on the part of Allianz executives (such as Hans He.) and offcials notwithstanding, Nazi Germany had turned anti-Semitism into a national and international endeavor in which Allianz be-came a participant. Its role in Lodz and in insuring SS factories was the end result of a process that began at Restaurant Hiller. 
Of course, those who lunched with Ging did not want 每 and could not have imagined 每 what National Socialism would bring, but they also failed to ac-knowledge their engagement and responsibility after it had all taken place. The pretension of Allianz (and of the German business community generally) after 1945 that they were ※victims§ of National Socialism was truly appalling, and it infected the postwar restitution effort as well. There is, of course, no reason why corporations and businessmen should be better than the society of which they are a part, and there was nothing particularly unique about their attitudes in postwar Germany. They are certainly not the last group in German society that needs to own up to its past. Nevertheless, capitalist institutions and those who guide them do have a special responsibility in societies organized on the basis of private property and liberal economic principles. This was a responsibility that they not only failed to meet but also betrayed under National Socialism. As this book has tried to show, the question was not merely a matter of survival in a totalitarian state, since this survival involved a mixture of willing participation and spineless conformism, of narrow professionalism and self-interested pursuit of proft, and, above all, of opportunism. It would be unhistorical and unrealis-tic to expect businessmen to have been resistance leaders, and Wilhelm Arendts became one only as a high offcer in the German military, but as his case (and those of Hans He. and Johannes Tiedke) demonstrated, it was possible to set limits to one＊s engagement with the regime. Of course, more than such distanc-ing was needed, since what was totally lacking was a commitment to democratic values. 


