OF PERMANENT VALUE

The story of Warren Buffett



PART 1 OF 3





By Andrew Kilpatrick







Since the early 1990s, with each successive edition, Of Permanent Value has had a different theme. Here is a quick review of the most recent:

• The 2006 edition had a literary flavor, indicated with a blue cover in honor of the original 1922 edition of James Joyce’s Ulysses. Joyce’s Leopold Bloom and Buffett were portrayed as comparable modern-day heroes.

• In 2007, the book took on an international flavor, reflecting Berkshire’s $4 billion purchase of Iscar of Israel in 2006.

• In 2008, the theme was “cosmic.” Berkshire rose from nothing into a cosmos. Mark Twainisms began popping up in the cosmic scenery.

• The 2009 edition played a musical refrain when it was dedicated to Woodstock. It was written to honor the massive gatherings, fun, music, and fellowship that occur during Berkshire Hathaway’s annual meeting weekends—and in remembrance of the 40th anniversary of the Woodstock music festival.

• The 2010 edition was entitled Trilogy Edition, as it was the first (and only) version to be published in three volumes. Too cumbersome.

• The 2011 Travel and Adventure Edition, in a single volume with two columns (dubba-wide, if you will), echoed the heroics of past literary heroes.

• This then is the 2012 Odyssey Edition.

Previous Editions

Previous editions include:

the 2006 Literary Edition, the 2007 International Edition,

the 2008 Cosmic Edition, the 2009 Woodstock Edition,

the 2010 Trilogy Edition, and the 2011 Travel and Adventure Edition



(Photo by Mary Porter)



A 1951 photo of Buffett stands at the center of the front cover. Surrounding him are a few of Berkshire’s products, available for modern-day odysseys — a Burlington Northern Railway train, a NetJets aircraft, and a BYD electric car. The back cover carries a shot of a holiday banquet for Berkshire employees — all of them — who work at World Headquarters in Omaha. The lower back cover shows Buffett’s assistant Debbie Bosanek, who famously has a higher tax rate than Buffett. Also, it shows a tongue-in-cheek plaque next to Burlington Northern bridge in honor of Buffett’s sidekick, Charles Munger. Finally, Buffett was so taken with the 2010 IBM Annual Report that he decided to invest more than $10 billion in “Big Blue.”



Cover by Pamela Engelhard

The Donning Company Publishers

2012 Odyssey Edition Cover

Introduction The Story of Warren Buffett





IN HOMAGE


Greetings Gentle Reader:

I’m forever thankful to Don Pippen who helped in every conceivable way for many years. Don died May 11, 1997, after years of battling cancer. He loved Sewanee, books, and Smyer Lake near Birmingham, Alabama. Never once did I hear him complain about anything, including his disease. Not even on his deathbed. Don was 44 when he died.

He was a perfect gentleman and a caring friend. There was little to be gained in this endeavor of mine for Don, but my concern for the book became his concern. The day before the 1994 version went to press, I mentioned that there were still too many typos. Late that afternoon, Don came by and said, “Well, Andy, give me half.” He took half and I the other, and we worked until late that night giving the book its final proofreading. That’s probably not the way it is done at Random House, but that is how it is done here at Random Thoughts.

A hat in the air to Harvey Terrell, also known as Mr. Birmingham, because he gave almost everyone in town a first loan. He died in 1997 at age 92.

Writing a book is an odyssey, and I couldn’t have made the journey alone. I offer thanks to my wife Pat. Pat has dubbed herself the “Book Widow,” such it seems with my absences from the home’s hearth. Upon first seeing this book, Pat said, “The Word of God isn’t that long—and that included the Creation.”

Pat identifies with Tom Wolfe’s wife: After the exasperating length of time it took Wolfe to compose The Right Stuff, he told his wife he still had to get the men to the moon. “Not in this house,” she replied.

IN HALF THE TIME

It turns out that James Joyce’s wife Nora, while maintaining warm feelings for him, also had little patience for his work. “Stop that silly writing and take in more language students,” she once demanded (Carol Loeb Shloss, Lucia Joyce, p. 58).

To paraphrase P. G. Wodehouse’s dedication in The Heart of a Goof: To my wife, Pat, without whose never-failing sympathy and encouragement, this odyssey would have been finished in half the time.

I have reveled in writing this book so much I have asked to be buried in the book office. Pat insists this can be arranged. In that vein, once we were flying over the Atlantic, and I could not figure out how to get the seat to lean back. Perturbed at my lack of mechanical ability, she quickly hit the right button and said, “Would you like me to send you out?” When we travel, I take along the latest working printout of the book in a black satchel. Pat calls it the “nuclear football.”

MICHAEL “THE ORACLE” ASSAEL

The person most helpful with editing over the years has been Michael Assael of New York City. Starting at 14 as a door-to-door floor wax salesman, he moved on to become a Columbia Business School graduate and is now a lawyer, accountant, author, and investor. Michael has Warren Buffett’s autograph on a 1934 first-edition Security Analysis. The asking price at Julian’s Books in New York for a first-edition, second-printing copy signed by author Ben Graham is $24,000. The Wall Street Journal (May 8, 2001) stated that a first edition copy was being offered on the Internet for $30,000.

Michael is truly a Renaissance man. Certainly these pages can be rewritten; but until Michael came on the scene, I shared Molly Ivins’ view: “The strongest human emotion is in neither love nor hate. It is one person’s desire to f... with another person’s copy.” Michael is the spiritual guide for this book, and his influence can best be seen in the chapter about Berkshire’s Annual Report for 2060. Thanks also to his wife Eiko.

MORE THANKS

I owe a lot of thanks to a lot of people. Salutations with thanks go to Phil “The Gentleman” McCaull of Greenwich, Connecticut; Allan Maxwell, a one-man clipping service, and Terry Haney, both of Omaha, Nebraska; ace photographer Michael O’Brien of Austin, Texas; LaVerne Ramsey, former stockbroker and current photographer-at-heart of Birmingham; and George Morgan, commander in chief of Buffett wannabes, of Omaha, Nebraska.

Other dear companions throughout this journey were Nancy Line Jacobs of Omaha; Jane Liss of Columbus, Nebraska; and Nancy “Miss Acworth” Burgess of Acworth, Georgia. All are true friends of the book. Many thanks to the folks at the Omaha Public Library and the Omaha World-Herald, who were particularly helpful with stories and photos. Joan Carroll with AP/Wide World Photos in New York is a steady hand at filling requests.

The roll call continues. The amazing Mary Porter of Birmingham, who fashioned the index and the photo index. Writing a book is one thing; creating an index is quite another. She did a terrific job of gun-running monthly typed printouts created from my graffiti, and at times, worked true miracles. Thanks also to Herb Sklenar; Earl Bloom; Bobby Luckie; Andy Campbell; Rick Ebbinghouse; Beverly Marquis and her daughter Amy (if you have a daughter or granddaughter in 2012, name her Beverly or Amy); Doris Garner—all of Birmingham, Alabama. Lisa Nichols of Tyler, Texas, helped the book in a variety of ways, including turning scattered piles of photos into a professionally-organized set and proofing the book.

Hosannas in the highest to Jean “Sensational Wordsmith” Baswell of Leesburg, Alabama. I sing her praises for lassoing any number of howlers. Jean kneels at the foot of the cross. Thanks to MaryAnn “Typing at the Tower” Lucas. Many thanks to Nancy “Wears 1,000 Hats” Pierce of Birmingham. Thanks to Roland Schank of Hawthorne, California; Ralph Sipper and Jim Pepper of Santa Barbara, California; particularly longtime Berkshire follower Bill “Go Gators” Scargle of San Francisco; Anthony Breckner of Buffalo, New York; the late Don Danly of Pensacola, Florida, Buffett’s early partner in the Wilson Coin-Operated Machine Co.; Tom Juengel of Costa Mesa, California and his granddaughter, Shaunna Schnitker; and Sidarta Tanu of Richmond, Virginia.

Skillful and steady Anne “Extraordinaire” Feller was an immense help as was perfectionist Vickie Barnes. Author Anne Nall Stallworth pitched in at the last minute. I also offer my thanks to Dr. Frank Kilpatrick, Mary Jo, Robert, John, and Sarah of Madison, Wisconsin; and to Judith Goodnow Prus of Grosse Pointe Farms, Michigan—talk about class.

Now a salute to my children: Jack and Anna, both superb writers who may one day write their own books. Jack has started two novels and developed an interest in Berkshire. Who knows? Maybe this book will have sequels into the next millennium. A salute also goes to Pat’s children, our rock stars: Tommy, Michael, and Mark Terrell.

Thanks are offered to Floyd Jones of Seattle, Washington; Steve Wallman of Madison, Wisconsin; Rick Smith of Huntsville, Alabama; John Gass and his son Charles of Denver, Colorado; and Peter Bradford of Peru, Vermont. In our earlier days, Peter and I played a lot of tennis. Because Peter is about a foot taller than I am, we were known to some as “Mutt and Jeff.”

Thanks to Sarah Brueggemann, a gifted proofreader and to Curtis Ralya who created the Web site for the book at andykilpatrick.com.

A bow also goes to Saint Debbie Bosanek, whose duties can extend to momentarily running Berkshire.

Finally, a special thank you goes to the steady hand of Dwight Tompkins, project director with Donning Company Publishers.



Don Pippen

(Photo courtesy

of Ann Eady)



(Photo by Arthur Burgess)

Po’, Po’, and Rich

Andy “Book Crazy” Kilpatrick, Pat “Book Widow” Kilpatrick, and Warren “The Book” Buffett enjoying a moment during Berkshire’s annual meeting weekend in 2000. When I told Pat in 2007 I was planning yet another edition, she said, “Quoth the raven, ‘Nevermore!’” I asked, “Who do you think you are, Edgar Allan Poe?” She replied, “Yeah, po’ you and po’ me.’”



Oracle of Omaha’s Word to Book Widow

“Heard Andy sold six books this year!”

(Photo by

Arthur Burgess)



(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Heart of a Goof

by P. G. Wodehouse



Michael Assael

Looking like a

pre-Woodstock Arlo Guthrie, the Oracle of New York provided unquantifiable help.

Omaha World-Herald

Of Permanent Value Introduction



LaVerne Ramsey

in Disguise

LaVerne takes on the body and dress of Mrs. See.

(Photo

courtesy of LaVerne “Shutterbug” Ramsey)



Rocking Mary “Do Your Magic” Porter



Rick “Counselor” Ebbinghouse



MaryAnn “Typing at the Tower” Lucas



Amy Marquis and Saint Beverly Marquis



Lisa “It’s Done” Nichols



Nancy “The Blonde” Jacobs



Tom Juengel

(Photo courtesy of Tom Juengel)



Shaunna Schnitker



The Minstrels Three

“Those boys”: Mark, Michael, and Tommy

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)



Vickie Barnes



Dwight

Tompkins

Introduction The Story of Warren Buffett



1


IBM—2011: A SPACE ODYSSEY

Back in the early 1960s, a young investor named Warren Buffett put about $14 million into Berkshire Hathaway, a textile mill company.

In the late 1980s, Buffett invested about $1 billion in stock of The Coca-Cola Company, a global brand.

In 2011, he poured almost $11 billion into another global brand. This time it was the iconic company International Business Machines (IBM).

Buffett is still doing the same thing he has always done. His job is the same. “I allocate capital” is his self-described job description.

Although his job is the same, the numbers are bigger—much bigger.

Buffett’s announcement that he had bought $10.9-billion worth of IBM stock came on CNBC’s Squawk Box show on November 14, 2011.

Much of the 64-million-share stake was accumulated after reading the 2010 IBM Annual Report in March 2011. His 5.5% stake made him one of IBM’s two largest shareholders along with State Street Global Advisors, which also owns about 5.5% of IBM’s stock.

Buffett’s own version of the Occupy Wall Street movement, it seems, was to occupy ownership of billions in IBM stock.

The announcement came in an interview with Becky Quick when he was asked about a big buying spree noticed because the cost of his stock position had risen by about $7 billion in the third quarter of 2011.

Buffett said he’d give a hint for the name of the purchase. It was, he said to blank stares, “Harold.”

Buffett later explained that Harold is connected to its nickname Hal (another obscure hint Buffett gave, which also was met with stares; the letters IBM follow the letters HAL by one letter in the alphabet). Another connection, HAL 9000, was the name of the computer in the 1968 movie 2001: A Space Odyssey and is often associated with IBM. Buffett said for viewers to “think” about the answer. “THINK” was IBM’s long-running slogan and the mantra from early CEO Thomas J. Watson.

It was Watson who spearheaded the company’s growth into an international firm from 1914 to 1956. He crafted IBM’s distinctive management style and culture (dress neatly for the customer, i.e., stiff white shirts and suits; refrain from alcohol) and transformed IBM’s culture into a superior sales organization.

A self-made industrialist, Watson started out as an obscure cash register salesman for National Cash Register, where his career there ended in an antitrust scandal. The case eventually washed out on appeal perhaps a bit due to NCR’s heroic efforts during a flood in Dayton, Ohio, during which time it provided train cars and supplies. Watson turned the setback around and eventually became one of the richest men of his time and was regarded as the world’s greatest salesman when he died in 1956. For example, he convinced Dwight Eisenhower to become president of Columbia University.

Watson held a strong interest in international relations, both diplomatic and business related. He was elected president of the International Chamber of Commerce in 1937. However, he was heavily criticized when he accepted an award from Nazi Germany in 1937 at a time when he thought he had Hitler’s promise of no war. He later returned the award.

IBM, which sells information processing worldwide to governments, corporations, and the military, was founded in 1911 as the Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company (C-T-R). Watson took charge of struggling C-T-R in 1914. It adopted the name of International Business Machines in 1924. In the 1930s, Watson invested heavily in research and development when most companies were cutting back. With the information demands of Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal, IBM flourished and was at the ready to meet the need for tabulating machinery.

Like father, like son. Watson’s son, Thomas J. Watson Jr., succeeded his father as IBM chairman and later served as Ambassador to the Soviet Union under Jimmy Carter. The younger Watson wrote a book entitled, Father, Son & Co. Under Watson Jr., IBM became the world’s largest computing company.

Buffett said he had always followed IBM through its annual reports, but he had read it with a “different lens” in 2011.

“It’s a company that helps IT departments do their job better,” he said. He said management was honest with shareholders, and this company was buying back its stock.

Not known for investing in high-tech companies, Buffett said he had changed his mind about IBM after reading its reports and talking with IT departments at Berkshire subsidiaries. He said he should have realized earlier that IBM’s business is simply offering service and equipment to IT departments. Today IBM largely helps governments and businesses automate themselves. Also, he added, “There’s a fair amount of presumption in many places that if you’re with IBM, that you stick with them.”

Buffett, who bought his shares at an average price of about $170 a share, was well ahead in his investment by the time of his announcement.

Based in Armonk, New York, and known as “Big Blue,” IBM has said it plans to keep growing its software business and to invest about $20 billion in acquisitions between 2011 and 2015. The company has predicted its operating profits will top that figure by the end of 2015.

As of 2011, it was the 18th largest firm in the U.S. and the 7th most profitable. Its more than 425,000 employees (sometimes called IBMers and sometimes called “I’ve Been Moved”) operate in more than 200 countries.

IBM holds more patents than any other U.S. tech company and has nine research labs around the world.

IBM’s famous inventions include the automated teller machine (ATM), the floppy disk, the hard disk drive, the magnetic strip card, the Universal Product Code (UPC), the financial swap, the SABRE airline reservation system, and Watson artificial intelligence.

Buffett went on to say he had not talked with then IBM CEO Sam Palmisano about the purchases. Buffett said he was an admirer of former CEO Lou Gerstner, once CEO of RJR Nabisco, and had read Gerstner’s book, Who Says Elephants Can’t Dance? Gerstner’s book tells of bringing IBM back from near insolvency.

Back in the early 1990s, IBM racked up losses of $16 billion as its PC business floundered. In 1993 Gerstner was brought in to deal with IBM’s losses, its huge size and insular culture. Gerstner slashed prices and demanded that managers re-establish its mission. IBM recovered.

Since then, IBM has enjoyed rising profits as Palmisano, who became CEO in 2002, transformed the company by selling its PC unit to Lenovo Group in 2005. IBM has bought new businesses and now is the biggest computer-services provider.

At Palmisano’s retirement from the CEO position, Virginia “Ginni’” Rometty, a 30-year veteran who oversaw IBM’s purchase of PricewaterhouseCoopers in 2003, succeeded him as president and CEO on January 1, 2012.

Buffett’s mentor Ben Graham had a long history with IBM (The Wall Street Journal, November 14, 2011). While a student at Columbia, Graham had a night job at a company called U.S. Express where he programmed punch cards on a Hollerith machine, a proto-computer that U.S. Express leased from what Graham called “a weakly financed and poorly regarded company called Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company. Graham went on to be a senior partner of the Newberger, Henderson, and Loeb firm where he worked as an analyst and said he thought the stock was cheap, but his boss said it was no good. Graham was so taken aback by his boss’s opinion that he never bought a share of IBM.

In later years, Graham would say that IBM had brought great rewards to shareholders. If not to Graham, perhaps to Buffett.

Buffett was granted secrecy while he accumulated his massive position in IBM throughout much of 2011. Large investors, who do not want to be copycatted, can request such permission.

Asked about why he didn’t buy stock in Microsoft, Buffett said he wouldn’t do that because he’s friends with Bill Gates and people might think he had inside information.

All along IBM has bought back huge amounts of its stock, demonstrating confidence in its own strength. Buffett evidently likes the statement that makes.

TECHNOLOGY STOCKS FOR BUFFETT?

Over the years, Buffett has famously said he’s not smart enough to predict future earnings of technology companies because the industry changes so much.

Buffett has recently said he wished he had studied technology more in his youth. Does this now mean he’s on the trail of tech stocks? Probably not. What Buffett saw in IBM was akin to what he saw in his big purchase two decades ago of Coca-Cola stock: big brand name, global recognition, steady earnings growth, a durable competitive advantage, loyal customers, and competent management.

In his early days, Buffett passed on such tech stocks as Intel, but then he also avoided many tech demises.

Buffett’s sidekick, Charles Munger, the more tech savvy of the two men, has commented that Google has large competitive advantages. And Buffett on his holiday card in 2011 jokingly asked Santa for Google as a company he’d like to buy. Who knows what the next two decades will bring. For now, IBM is the pick.

IBM, which met its previous five-year plan, says that over the next five years it plans to spend $50 billion buying back its stock, $20 billion on dividends and $25 billion on capital expenditures.

Apparently Buffett likes the sound of those numbers.

IBM’s 2010 Annual Report

After reading this report, Buffett decided to sock billions into Big Blue.



(Photo by Mary Porter)



IBM Logo

The Story of Warren Buffett

TRANSCRIPT OF BUYING “HAROLD”

Buffett’s huge stake in IBM was revealed on CNBC on November 14, 2011, when he was questioned by Becky Quick, Joe Kernen, and Andrew Ross Sorkin. Here’s part of the transcript:

BECKY: All right. Welcome back, everybody. This is Squawk Box, and we’re speaking with Berkshire Hathaway chairman and CEO Warren Buffett this morning. And he just gave us the best tease we’ve probably ever had in the history of Squawk Box. We said that he would tell us what he’s been buying over the last quarter when we came back from the break.

JOE: I have no audio.

BECKY: You don’t hear, Joe? I hear you. But...

JOE: OK, now I’ve got it.

BECKY:: ...we’ve been trying to figure it out. Tell us again—tell us again your...

JOE: How do you spell...

BECKY: ...clue?

JOE: How do you spell Harold?

BUFFETT: Harold...

JOE: How do you spell Harold?

BUFFETT: Harold was spelled H-A-R-O-L-D.

JOE: So it’s not Macy’s.

BECKY: All right, there was—there was a tweet that came in—oh, that’s good. Herald Square from Macy’s. There was a tweet that came in guessing that maybe it’s Halliburton because the ticker...

JOE: Right.

BECKY: ...symbol is HAL.

BUFFETT: Well, it’s—that’s a good guess, and it actually may be going in the right direction, but it’s not correct.

BECKY: Oil and services?

JOE: Well, then it’s not Harold Hamm? It doesn’t have anything to do with Harold Hamm, does it?

BUFFETT: No, he’s a friend of mine, but...

JOE: It doesn’t have anything to do with him.

BECKY: All right, tell...

BUFFETT: Have you given me your best shot, Joe?

JOE: No, I’m still thinking. I don’t want to give up yet.

ANDREW: I think we’re going to have to give up.

BUFFETT: Well, keep thinking.

ANDREW: Oh, come on, let’s just...

JOE: I’m going to hurt myself.

BECKY: Give us one more hint.

ANDREW: One more hint. Come on, Warren.

BUFFETT: No, I’ve—the next hint would give it away, so I’ll just tell myself.

JOE: OK, then tell us. OK, I’m ready.

ANDREW: OK, so tell us. We’ll—we’re OK.

BUFFETT: OK, well, what I would have told you is that we have bought about—and it extends over more than the three months, but it’s all been this year, but it was more in the third quarter than in the earlier two quarters. We bought about $10.7 billion worth of one stock, and there were several clues in what I said to you. First of all, I referenced a movie. Harold is somebody that’s known as the abbreviation—or the common shortening of that is Hal. Now, if you think about movies...

ANDREW: Oh, wait...

BUFFETT: ...with Hal...

ANDREW: Oh, I know this.

BUFFETT: ...if you go back to “2001...

ANDREW: 2001.

BUFFETT:...A Space Odyssey”...

BECKY: I know this!

BUFFETT:...2001...

BECKY: Yeah, yeah.

BUFFETT:...Hal was the computer, right?

BECKY: IBM. It’s...

BUFFETT: And Hal, if you take H plus one letter is I, A plus one letter is B, and L plus one letter is M.

JOE: Yeah. IBM.

BUFFETT: IBM.

BECKY: You—wait, you bought over $10 billion in IBM?

BUFFETT: That’s correct. But I also told you multiple times, “Think about it.” And if you remember, “Think” was the slogan of IBM for decades.

JOE: Ah, jeez. That’s too—that’s too many—too many dots. Go from Harold to shorten it to Hal, add a letter to get the IBM. That’s—oh, boy!

BUFFETT: Well, but that was—“Space Odyssey 2001” was—or “2001 Space”—was—they referenced many times in that, in writing about it, that Hal was thought...

ANDREW: Right. You’re right.

BUFFETT:...to be IBM.

ANDREW: You’re right.

BECKY: Wait. Wait a second, IBM is a tech company, and you don’t buy tech companies. Why have you been buying IBM?

BUFFETT: Well, I didn’t buy railroad companies for a long time either. I—it’s interesting. I have probably—I’ve had two interesting incidents in my life connected with IBM, but I’ve probably read the annual report of IBM every year for 50 years. And this year it came in on a Saturday, and I read it. And I got a different slant on it, which I then proceeded to do some checking out of. But I just—I read it through a different lens.

JOE: What’s the different lens? What’s the different slant?

BUFFETT: Well, just like—just like I did with—just like I did with the railroads. And incidentally, the company laid it out extremely well. I don’t think there’s any company that’s—that I can think of, big company, that’s done a better job of laying out where they’re going to go and then having gone there. They have laid out a road map and I should have paid more attention to it five years ago where they were going to go in five years ending in 2010. Now they’ve laid out another road map for 2015. They’ve done an incredible job. First, Lou Gerstner, when he came in, he saved the company from bankruptcy. I read his book a second time, actually, after I read the annual report. You know, Who Said Elephants Can’t Dance? I read it when it first came out and then I went back and reread it. And then we went around to all of our companies to see how their IT departments functioned and why they made the decisions they made. And I just came away with a different view of the position that IBM holds within IT departments and why they hold it and the stickiness and a whole bunch of things. And also, I read very carefully what Sam Palmisamo...

JOE: Palmisano.

BECKY: Palmisano.

BUFFETT:...Palmisano, yes, has said about where they’re going to be and he’s delivered big time on his—on his—on his first venture along those lines.

JOE: Incredible.

BUFFETT: But anyway, we...

JOE: And...

BUFFETT: ...bought about 64 million shares and it cost us about $10.6 or 7 billion.

JOE: Have you spent time with Sam?

BECKY: What does that mean, yeah?

JOE: (Unintelligible)

BECKY: What—how much—how much of the—how much of the company do you own?

BUFFETT: We own about 5 1/2 percent of the company.

BECKY: OK.

JOE: (Unintelligible)

BUFFETT: The other thing I would say about IBM, too, is that a few years back, they had 240 million options outstanding. Now they probably are down to about 30 million. They treat their stock with reverence which I find is unusual among big companies. Or they really—they are thinking about the shareholder.

BECKY: We...

JOE: But you’re buying this, Warren, you’re buying this on a high, which is really—most people think you got to buy things when they’re down. They look at 52-week high and lows, say, oh, I’m not going to buy it, it’s on a high, but stocks that are on highs hit new highs. I don’t know how many Dow components are at all-time highs, but IBM is one, maybe McDonald’s.

BUFFETT: No.

JOE: But you’re buying this after it’s really broken out the new highs this year, new all-time highs.

BUFFETT: We bought—we bought railroads on highs, too.

JOE: Yeah? They sent it—you know, stocks at new lows that, you know, can hit new lows where they...

BUFFETT: Right. I bought—I bought control of—I bought control of GEICO at its all-time high.

JOE: Yeah? Well, Warren...

BECKY: Yeah, we’re looking...

JOE: ...have you talked to Sam or to—or to Ginni, the new CEO?

BUFFETT: No, I never talked to Sam. I’ve never talked to Sam. I’ve got this—I competed with IBM 50 years ago, believe it or not. I was chairman of a company, had, and I testified for IBM in 1980 when the government was attacking about on the antitrust situation. But I’ve never—I have not talked to Sam or now Ginni.

JOE: And you have a view on the...

BECKY: Wait a second. The company’s finding out right now that you own 5 percent of the company by...

BUFFETT: Yeah, 5 1/2, yeah, yeah.

BECKY: ...5 1/2 percent by you talking about this right now?

BUFFETT: Yeah, right, right. I have not talked to the company.

JOE: And do you have a view...

BECKY: We’ve been watching the stock and it’s been—it’s been jumping on this. It’s up about 1 percent right now. I’ve seen it up as much as 1.5 percent. Would you continue to buy more?

BUFFETT: Yeah. No, I wouldn’t be talking about it if we weren’t pretty much done. I set out to buy about $10 billion worth and we bought a little more than that. We started in March. I got the annual report I think very early in March and then I did some work and then we started—we bought a little in the first quarter and more in the second and third quarter.

BECKY: I...

BUFFETT: And we—and we bought some in the fourth quarter. We bought some in the—our report that we will file tonight will not show the whole 64 million. Probably show 57 million or something like that because we bought some in October.

BECKY: Because you bought more since this quarter. So, how do you keep that hidden that you’re buying that much stock over that long of a period of time?

BUFFETT: I avoid talking to you.

BECKY: No, really, how do you—how do you hide that?

BUFFETT: Well, it’s important to us that we do. And what’s very interesting is here in a—what is it, seven-month period or something like that, eight months, maybe, we buy 5 1/2 percent of the company. At the same time, the company bought pretty much an equal amount. So here you have 11 percent of a huge company change hands and all kinds of people who’ve owned IBM forever. I mean, it’s an old—it’s an old company, it’s a big company, it’s amazing to me how much turnover there is in stocks, which means that, you know, investment has kind of gone by the boards and people just basically look at stocks as things to speculate in. But if you can buy 11 percent of a wonderful company in eight months or have that much trade just the two buyers without—of course, who knows how much we affected the price. We try not to affect the price. We usually buy a given percentage of what trades every day.

BECKY: You—this is the second time in the last several months that you’ve told us about a purchase you’ve made of a company you’ve been reading the annual reports for years.

BUFFETT: Right.

BECKY: Bank of America was the first.

BUFFETT: Right. I read those for 50 years.

_____________________________

HOW HARD IT IS TO COMPETE WITH IBM

In the same CNBC interview, Buffett spoke of a time he was actually in competition with IBM: “We actually started—I was the chairman of the board, believe it or not, of a tech company one time, and computers used to use zillions of tab cards and IBM in 1956 or ‘7 signed a consent decree and they had to get rid of half the capacity. So two friends of mine, one was a lawyer and one was an insurance agent, read the newspaper and they went into the tab card business and I went in with them. And we did a terrific job and built a nice little company. But every time we went into a place to sell them our tab cards at a lower price and with better delivery than IBM, the purchasing agent would say, nobody’s every gotten fired from buying—by buying from IBM. I mean, we probably heard that about a thousand times. That’s not as strong now, but I imagine as you go around the world that there are—there’s a fair amount of presumption in many places that if you’re with IBM, that you stick with them, and that if you haven’t been with anybody, you’re developing things, that

you certainly give them a fair shot at the business. And I think they’ve done a terrific job of developing that.”

Of Permanent Value IBM



HAL 9000



IBM Headquarters

IBM The Story of Warren Buffett



Father, Son & Co.

Of Permanent Value IBM



Sam Palmisano



Ginni Rometty

Back from the Brink

Who Says Elephants Can’t Dance?



IBM The Story of Warren Buffett

HUMAN BRAIN VS. COMPUTER VS. MALARIA

IBM’s Watson computer, named for IBM founder Thomas J. Watson, has shown itself to be smarter than the top quiz contestants on the TV game show Jeopardy!

Watson is a computer system created by IBM to see if a machine could compete with a human brain. In a human vs. computer contest, the Watson beat Ken Jennings, who holds the record for the longest win streak on Jeopardy!, and Brad Rutter, the biggest all-time money winner on the show. Racing through human language with astonishing results, The Watson could bring greater efficiency to the world. After all, IBM advertises its invention as: “Watson for a smarter planet.”

After easily beating the two former Jeopardy! stars in early 2011 (shortly before Buffett made the decision to invest in IBM), the Watson used some of its $1-million prize money to help try to find a cure for the millions of people with malaria.

IBM, teaming up with The Scripps Research Institute, is putting to task a worldwide grid of computers. The World Community Grid, which has been called a “supercomputer of the people” and is dedicated to tackling projects that benefit humanity, is sponsored by IBM and is a network of more than two million PCs whose idle central processing unit (CPU) time has been donated by people around the world. When a computer on the grid is not being used by its owner, that computer’s time may be put to use, searching for compounds that may advance the development of drugs to cure mutant, drug-resistant strains of malaria. The shared CPU time will hopefully allow 100 years of computations to be carried out in approximately one year. In 2012, Citigroup picked the Watson Computer to help with risk and portfolio management.

In recent years, IBM has launched a series of “Smarter Planet” ads which document major technological breakthroughs by the company. In the ads, Big Blue fights not only the scourge of counterfeit medicine, but also global warming, improvements in the Washington DC sewer system, better prediction of traffic in Singapore and better preparation against flooding emergencies in Rio. (Bloomberg, March 19, 2012)

DOING BUSINESS IN CHINA

In early 2012, IBM and the City of Zhenjiang in China said they would collaborate to build a smarter city. The city plans to use the hardware, software, services and technologies of IBM to transform the city’s public transportation system.

The cultural city of Zhenjiang in eastern China, which is enjoying rapid economic growth, has become an important regional transportation hub. To boost economic development, increase tourism and public welfare, the city started “Smarter Zhenjiang, Smarter Tourism” which includes plans to upgrade 400 bus stations and more than 1,000 public transportation vehicles. The IBM assistance will help city managers view the transportation network to improve bus schedules and to better manage traffic patterns.

IBM has gained expertise from more than 2,000 Smart City projects around the world, projects which may help cities with water management and public safety.

Of Permanent Value IBM





2


ODYSSEYS

“By now the other warriors, those that had escaped headlong ruin by sea or in battle, were safely home.” (Homer)

CHINA

A small group of Berkshire executives flew to China in late September 2010, for a showcase look at plants belonging to BYD, the Chinese car and battery company that is 10% owned by Berkshire.

The first stop was in Shenzhen, a boomtown in South China near Hong Kong. Among the travelers were Warren Buffett, known in China as “the god of stocks,” David Sokol, and Berkshire board members Charles Munger, Bill Gates, Walter Scott, and Ron Olson. Buffett took part in a signing ceremony that marked an agreement between BYD and China Southern Power Grid to build an energy storage plant. Also, a celebration was held for BYD’s one-millionth car sale.

Buffett praised BYD’s home base Shenzhen, for taking the lead in using electric vehicles as taxis to help control pollution. “Each taxi will produce one-tenth pollution of the regular sedan,” Buffett said.

BYD shipped its first electric car, the E6, earlier in 2010. All the cars were used as Shenzhen taxis.

Buffett repeated his support for BYD in Shenzhen and nearby Huizhou. His original 2008 $230-million investment had soared to $2.5 billion, then fell back to $1.5 billion as car sales slumped in 2010.

During the four-day trip, the Berkshire party also visited Beijing and Changsha.

In Beijing, the evening’s main dish was philanthropy was on the menu for dinner. The Buffett-Gates gala, known locally as the “Barbie Banquet” because the combination of Gates and Buffett’s Chinese names sounds similar to the Chinese name for the doll. About 50 of China’s wealthiest attended the banquet at the exclusive Chateau Beijing Laffitte. A second dinner for ordinary citizens was held later at a Holiday Inn Express, more in keeping with Buffett’s casual style.

The meeting with the Chinese leaders was an effort to exchange philanthropic views. Afterwards, Buffett proclaimed it a “complete success.”

The Buffett and Gates duo didn’t actively seek pledges for their Giving Pledge program. They were there to listen and to learn, and what they learned was that many Chinese were reluctant to attend the dinner for fear of exposing large fortunes or inviting unwanted attention from tax collectors or the less fortunate. Some Chinese fear giving to charitable efforts that may be corrupt. Still, China does have a history of philanthropy.

At the final stop in Changsha, Buffett visited a BYD site where the company displayed its first electric buses. Speaking at an event there, Buffett said that China is a logical place to invest and that the nation offers “large investment opportunities.” He applauded China’s progress as being unlike anything in history!

Along his odyssey, Buffett slipped in a visit to a Berkshire-owned Dairy Queen in Beijing to mark the company’s expansion plans in China. Dairy Queen plans to have more than 500 stores in China by the end of 2011.

TRAVELING MAN

Earlier in 2010, Buffett flew to Germany for a General Re meeting. He also appeared in a conference shown in Israel, and he planned trips in 2011 to Japan and India to seek possible investments. And as usual, Buffett is firing up the jet engines for trips to Sun Valley, Idaho, for the yearly media mogul conferences as well as trips to New York and Washington DC. Buffett has been known to travel around the country to talk with business students at such places as Stanford, Columbia, Notre Dame, and Florida; but recently those visits have occurred with the students coming to see him in Omaha.

___________________

In recent years, Buffett has expressed ever-growing interest in buying businesses, in China and elsewhere and elsewhere overseas. Iscar, an Israeli metalworking operation, was his first purchase of a private, foreign business. Following that 2006 acquisition, his worldwide search began in earnest.

In a passing remark at the Berkshire annual meeting in 2007, Buffett said that he and Iscar Chairman Eitan Wertheimer had come up with a plan to help Berkshire become better known internationally. The plan unfolded in October 2007, when Buffett burst forth on the global scene with trips to Canada, China, and Korea. Wertheimer joked that “Buffett calls me his international travel agent.”

EVENING IN TORONTO

Buffett attended a dinner in Toronto on October 11, 2007, for the benefit of Rambam Health Care Campus in Haifa, Israel. Buffett had been impressed during a previous visit to the campus in 2006. Another beneficiary of the event was Toronto General Hospital, one of the foremost medical centers in the world. Other hospitals associated with the University Health Network (UHN) reaped benefits as well.

Wertheimer invited Buffett to the candlelit, red-carpet event held at Toronto’s Royal Ontario Museum. Each table of participants donated $250,000, resulting in a total of more than $4 million, toward the building of a biotechnology discovery center on its campus.

A number of billionaires from Canada, the U.S., Russia, and Israel attended the cosmopolitan event along with a Nobel Prize winner in chemistry who works with Rambam. “He [Buffett] was warmly received,” said Jeff Hull, a Canadian working on his third TV documentary about Buffett.

While in Toronto, Buffett predicted in a Q&A session that the Canadian currency would go higher than the U.S. dollar and that the Alberta oil sands held big promise on the energy front, holding more known reserves for oil conversion than any nation except Saudi Arabia.

Buffett’s first investment in Canada came almost half a century ago when he bought stock in Toronto Iron Works, a company now defunct.

2007 CHINA TRIP

Circling back to Dalian, China, Buffett helped with the opening of the first Chinese Iscar plant in 2007, joking that the extent of his duties was “ribbon cutting.”

On October 23 of that year, Buffett, CNBC’s Becky Quick, and several Nebraska Furniture executives boarded a G-5 for China. CNBC footage shows Buffett waving Quick aboard the plane. Quick reported that before she had even boarded, he had already read some papers and checked with his office about opening market predictions, the futures, and the price of oil.

“What’s the best currency to own?” was the burning question on the minds of Quick and CNBC’s Mark Haines. “Not the dollar,” Buffett replied. Quick then told Haines, “Mark, I don’t know what you said, but Warren just threw the phone back to me.” Quick reported that by the time they reached

the refueling stop in Anchorage, Buffett had sped through a number of publications and that every day he reads The Wall Street Journal, Financial Times, The New York Times, USAToday, Omaha World-Herald, and American Banker.

In a write-up about the trip published November 29, 2007, Quick commented on Buffett’s reading habits: “Buffett brought along, I’m not kidding here, files and files of boxes of things to read on the plane. … He reads publications I’ve never heard of, weekly publications that come out, daily publications that come out.” He also makes sure he reads annual reports constantly. He made a joke about this on the plane, “Some men read Playboy. I read financial reports.”

Quick also wrote about Buffett’s energy level on this trip: “This is a guy who went for about 28, 29 hours straight at the beginning. He didn’t even bother to sleep or take a nap. This man has energy like you wouldn’t believe.”

Buffett was greeted in China by bands, flowers, gifts, and fireworks and was feted at a dinner party with confetti and balloons. Press reports from China quoted Buffett giving high praise to Iscar, which he said would soon be supplying many businesses in China. He also said he was a believer in the Chinese economy, but that its stock market had rallied too fast.

STOPOVER IN DAEGU, SOUTH KOREA

“The Korean stock market a few years ago was by far the most undervalued market in the world,” Buffett wrote in an e-mail interview with Seoul-based Maeil Business Newspaper (October 20, 2007). “Since then, there has been a huge advance in the Korean market and the [Korean] won has appreciated against the [U.S.] dollar. Nevertheless, many Korean stocks still sell at more attractive prices than stocks in other major countries.”

On October 23, 2007, Buffett inspected a nine-year-old TaeguTec plant owned by Iscar in Daegu, located about 150 miles southeast of Seoul.

Buffett was met by local politicians, business leaders, and a marching band. He told reporters there that the Korean stock market remains attractive despite a run-up—adding that he still likes his investment in POSCO, Asia’s biggest steelmaker. Not only did POSCO stock more than double in 2007, but also the Korean currency, the won, advanced against the dollar, making the POSCO investment even more valuable. Buffett said he had no plans to sell his POSCO shares.

Buffett said that Berkshire had bought shares of Kia Motors Corp., Shinyoung Securities, and Hyundai Steel in Korea earlier but now owned only shares in POSCO. He personally held one additional Korean stock in his own portfolio.

Still negative on the prospects for the dollar, Buffett had this to say: “We are now gaining our foreign-currency exposure, which I like. We’re gaining that through owning businesses that produce earnings in other currencies rather than direct currency investments. In the U.K., for example, it’s a matter of record we bought stock in Tesco, but we also own two or three others there.”

Buffett was treated like a rock legend at Iscar’s TaeguTec unit as he signed autographs and took questions. In answering an inquiry about the subprime problem in the U.S., Buffett was quoted as saying, “One of the lessons that investors seem to have to learn over and over again … is that not only can you not turn a toad into a prince by kissing a frog, but you also can’t turn a toad into a prince by repackaging it.”

At a Q&A session with TaeguTec employees, Buffett was asked who his hero was. “My father,” he answered. When asked how much money he had on him, he replied, “I would say about six hundred dollars.” Then he opened his wallet and counted out the bills—to huge laughter.

“I was overwhelmed, overwhelmed by his humble appearance,” commented Jinny Lee, a TaeguTec employee, speaking a soft “Bye-bye Mr. Buffett” as the Berkshire CEO drove away. “He’s a big star,” she said (Associated Press, October 28, 2007).

The worldwide publicity from the trip to China and Korea, coupled with Berkshire’s triple-A credit rating in a time of nearly unprecedented turmoil in the credit markets, may be among the reasons for Berkshire’s stock rising to the moon in late 2007.

CNBC’s Quick wrote about Buffett’s reception in South Korea, “I’ve never seen anything like the response that he got when we arrived. … There were literally a hundred or more reporters and camera crews that were waiting for his arrival at the airport. There was a band that kicked off a big tune when he walked through the doors. It was a Beatles song, ‘I Want to Hold Your Hand.’”

A Korean band playing a Beatles’ song for Buffett?—Now that is incredible!

POSTCARD FROM EUROPE

Buffett went to Europe in May 2008 to scout for possible acquisitions of privately held businesses. “The purpose of the trip was to meet owners of family companies, the typical European dynasties,” Angelo Moratti, vice president of Milan-based Saras SpA, said in an interview with Bloomberg (April 22, 2008). “His idea is that sooner or later one of these great businesses will fall into his hands.”

Moratti and Iscar’s Wertheimer organized the trip in which Buffett met with dozens of Europe’s business leaders. The trip included several stops: Frankfurt, Germany, where he said, “I’m not looking for Pet Rock or Hula-Hoop businesses”; Lausanne, Switzerland; Madrid, Spain, where Buffett met the king; and Milan, Italy.

Back in 2001, NetJets’ then-CEO Richard Santulli had approached Moratti to arrange a dinner for Buffett. About 50 people came to Moratti’s home in Milan, where Buffett sat on Moratti’s sofa for an hour and a half fielding questions. Guests’ reaction to Buffett was “fantastic,” said Moratti (Bloomberg, April 24, 2008).

Moratti, who meets with Buffett at least four times a year to brief him about companies in Europe, described Buffett as being the wisest and happiest person he has ever met.

Buffett consulted Moratti when the Moratti family was considering going public in 2005. The Saras IPO raised about two billion euros, and the Moratti family still owns about two-thirds of the company. The Moratti family also owns the soccer club, FC Internazionale Milano.

In the spring of 2010, Moratti said that Buffett is now well-known in Europe and that odds of an acquisition there have improved (Bloomberg, May 20, 2010).

BACK TO CANADA: A TRAIN TRIP

On June 11, 2010, Buffett returned to Canada, stopping first in Calgary where he and family members had a hamburger dinner at Laurier Lounge. After Buffett’s visit, owner Martin Maheux changed the name of his burger to the W. B. Burger.

From there, Buffett caught a train, which went through the Rockies to Vancouver.

No advance word was released about the train trip.

Rumors were generated in 2008 after Buffett and Gates toured Alberta, sparking speculation about possible investments in Calgary-based oil sands. Buffett later said an investment was not imminent, but that the trip provided industry background.

So was Buffett checking on oil sand investments, an investment in railroads, or hamburgers? Or maybe all of the above?

TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

A Berkshire board meeting in late 2010 struck up the travel and adventure theme. The adventure began with a meeting in Omaha and the travel was a train trip on Berkshire’s Burlington Northern railroad to Wyoming’s Powder River Basin, the single largest source of coal mined in the United States.

TORONTO ONE MORE TIME

In late November 2010, Buffett flew back to Toronto for a gala fund-raiser benefiting Canadians needing organ transplants. The event, promoted by 15-time Grammy Award winner David Foster, included a will-not-be-forgotten-anytime-soon serenade by Lionel Richie to Muhammad Ali. Crouching and singing in Ali’s face, Richie sang, “Three Times a Champion” (National Post, November 27, 2010).

TRAVELING TO THE SUPER BOWL

Still traveling far and wide in early 2011, Buffett flew from Omaha to Fort Worth, then drove a distance before boarding a Burlington Northern train—appropriately, since he owns the line. The train meandered to a point near the monster Dallas Cowboys Stadium in Arlington, Texas, where Buffett watched the Packers upend the Steelers 31–25 in the Super Bowl XLV.

WHITE HOUSE VISIT

Less than a week after the Super Bowl, Buffett was off to Washington DC where he received the Presidential Medal of Freedom at the White House. President Obama said the 15 recipients of the nation’s highest civilian award “reveal the best of who we are and who we aspire to be.”

A TRIP TO ASIA

In March 2011, Buffett made a week-long trip to Asia. The stop in Japan was canceled because of the earthquake and resulting tsunami which devastated the country. Indeed, Berkshire’s Iscar unit evacuated 1,400 employees from its local Tungaloy headquarters in Fukushima near where the nuclear-power plant leaked radiation. The disaster postponed the opening of a second plant nearby.

Buffett flew on to Korea (with 72 cans of Cherry Cokes and 24 diet Cokes aboard), visited Iscar plants there, and met with the Korean president. Then he flew to Bangalore and New Delhi, India where he visited Iscar plants and opened up a Berkshire car insurance business with Indian-born Ajit Jain who heads Berkshire’s reinsurance operations. While in India, Buffett met with Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and reportedly said, “If you have any more like him (Ajit Jain), send them over to me.” Buffett also told the prime minister, “The shareholders of my company have more faith in Jain then in me.”

He met up with Bill and Melinda Gates to discuss their “Giving Pledge” with wealthy Indians.

As Buffett walked to the front of a hotel ballroom at one event in New Delhi, someone in the audience yelled out, “The greatest man on the planet!”

JAPAN

Buffett made a visit to Japan on November 21, 2011 to attend a plant opening ceremony of Iscar-owned Tungaloy Corp. in Iwaki City in the Fukushima prefecture. Tungaloy makes tools for cars and planes. Buffett had canceled a trip there in March after a record earthquake and tsunami hit northeastern Japan March 21, 2011, crippling a nuclear power plant in Fukushima prompting Buffett to put off his trip there.

In Japan, Buffett said he was also looking for opportunities for Berkshire to invest in Japan. “Japan is one of our radar screens,” he said (The Wall Street Journal, November 22, 2011).

BUFFETT SINGS TO CHINA

Reaching out to millions of Chinese, Buffett issued a New Year’s greeting for an online version of China’s annual Spring Festival gala. Originally, a Chinese statement had said he would sing. The gala was broadcast on the website of China’s Television Network Television on CNTV.cn on the first day of the Chinese New Year which fell on January 23, 2012. Reuters reported that millions tuned in for the extravaganza filled with comedy skits, singing and dancing.

In the end, Buffett did make a cameo appearance with his ukulele and sang, “I’ve Been Working on the Railroad.”

ODYSSEY TO WASHINGTON DC

Not to be outdone by her boss, Buffett’s Assistant Debbie Bosanek took an unusual odyssey of her own. Accepting an invitation from the White House, she flew (commercial) to Washington to hear President Obama’s State of the Union address on January 24, 2012. She sat in the box with First Lady Michelle Obama as news cameras captured her appearance for viewers around the world. Rarely giving interviews, she did tell reporters she was “excited” to be there. Bosanek has gained fame as the person Buffett has said unfairly has a higher tax rate than he does. Obama’s talk stressed that middle-class families shouldn’t have to pay higher taxes than the wealthy.

During her visit, Bosanek met President Obama.

Bosanek did not talk tax policy. “I never discuss that,” she told The Washington Post (January 24, 2012). “But I have such great respect for the office of the president and for our country—really, any American citizen would be thrilled to get to do what I’m doing tonight.”



Marco Polo Arrives in China

Berkshire’s Walter Scott, Munger, and Buffett toured BYD’s factories in Shenzhen, China.

All Aboard Buffett’s Gulfstream

Buffett and then NetJets CEO David Sokol boarded a Gulfstream IV large-cabin business jet in Omaha in September 2010 for a grand tour of the BYD car and battery company in the faraway land of the People’s Republic of China. The plane, operated by Berkshire’s NetJets unit, flew to Boeing Field near Seattle to rendezvous with West Coast passengers. Two ultra long-range NetJets’ Gulfstream V-SP’s then soared the mighty heavens thousands of miles to Shenzhen near Hong Kong after a brief refueling stop in Anchorage.





How BYD Makes Cars

Buffett’s entourage toured a car assembly plant at BYD.

(Photos courtesy of

CNBC Producer Lacy O’Toole)

Discover the History

Buffett & Company had a tour of a BYD museum in the headquarters building. Standing, from left, are Walter Scott, Ron Olson, Buffett and Bill Gates (back showing).



Recreation Joined with Car Making

Walter Scott, David Sokol and Buffett, Mr. Number 1 fan of the Nebraska Cornhuskers, journeyed half way around the world to a soccer field at BYD headquarters.



r

Of Permanent Value Odysseys



(Photos Courtesy of

CNBC Producer Lacy O’Toole)

Colorful Welcome

Buffett and Gates joined Chinese executives for a colorful welcoming ceremony at a bus facility in Changsha, China.



Wang, Munger, and Buffett in China

They celebrated BYD’s one-millionth car sale.



Business Decaplets

David Sokol, Wang Chaungfu, Walter Scott, Buffett, Munger, and Ron Olson are pictured at BYD event at a hotel in Shenzhen.



Wang, Munger, Buffett, and Bill Gates in China

Odysseys The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo courtesy of Jeff Hull)

Fun-Raisers

Buffett, Canadian Finance Minister Jim Flaherty, and Buffett TV documentary producer Jeff Hull stopped for a photo op at the hospital fund-raiser in Toronto.

Of Permanent Value Odysseys



Adventurers Go West to Go East

The top photo shows Buffett and CNBC’s Becky Quick at the start of their trip. The middle photos show Buffett in China, and the bottom photos show him in Korea. In China, he cut the ribbon for a new Iscar plant; and in Korea, he visited one that was up and running. On the whirlwind tour from Omaha to Asia and back, which took about 70 hours, Buffett slept a mere 10 hours.

(Photo collage by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Odysseys The Story of Warren Buffett



Angelo Moratti



Lionel Richie



Muhammad Ali

Of Permanent Value Odysseys



(Courtesy of

Warren Buffett)

More Travel and Adventure

Buffett’s Christmas card in 2010 highlighted travel and adventure in Canada

with his family.

2010



Celebrating Freedom Medal

Warren Buffett and his sister, Doris Buffett, are shown in Washington DC shortly after Buffett received the Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Obama at the White House on February 15, 2011.

(Courtesy of Alex Rozek)

Honored

Buffett received the Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Obama at the White House on February 15, 2011. Buffett’s daughter Susie was at the ceremony and shot this photo.



(Photo by Susie Buffett)

Odysseys The Story of Warren Buffett



Tungaloy’s Home Office in Fukusima



Poster Lady of the Middle Class

After her moment in the national spotlight, Bosanek was besieged with interview requests and even offers to write op-ed pieces. Maybe a reality show is coming.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Odysseys



3

ONE OF BUFFETT’S FINEST HOURS

The year 2008 was rocking and rolling, but unfortunately, also reeling.

In that annus horribilis, the world saw an economic meltdown of biblical proportions with unprecedented collapses in both the housing and credit markets. During this widespread financial panic, Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway slumped along with the world stock markets for much of the year. Berkshire’s stock price plunged 32%, beginning the year at $141,600 and ending at $96,600, with short-lived extremes of $147,000 and $74,100 along the way (hitting a new low of $70,050 in 2009). Sadly, this memorable year was Berkshire’s worst annual slump ever and the largest annual percentage slump in three decades. Still, Berkshire’s 2008 results compared somewhat favorably, if you will, with the 38% decline in the S&P 500 index.

As the year mercifully drew to a close, Buffett said that this wasn’t the first time Berkshire had seen big declines. “It’s happened to me three other times in my life, too. It happened when it went from 90 to 40 back in 1974, and it happened in 1987. It went down 50% in 1998 to 2000. I mean, I hope I live long enough so it happens a couple more times to me” (Fox Business Network, November 21, 2008).

Even in the midst of the 2008 financial crisis, Buffett and his powerful investment vehicle, Berkshire Hathaway, had a golden hour.

By September 15, 2008, the financial system was on the brink of catastrophe. With its many mutations, a global recession was in full throttle. The prior weekend, Lehman Brothers filed for the biggest bankruptcy in history; Merrill Lynch was hastily sold to Bank of America; and the stock of AIG, once the world’s largest insurance company, plunged. Countrywide Financial Corp. had collapsed. Bear Stearns was bought for a song by JP Morgan. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were nationalized the previous week. Brokers were joking about going to 50% cash, 40% canned goods, and 10% ammunition.

Bank and brokerage stocks skidded as the Dow plunged 504 points that dreadful mid-September Monday; it was the worst day for the U.S. markets since the 9/11 attacks. And the month wasn’t over. U.S. stocks plunged 26% in what was left of September. Major American corporations were vanishing altogether.

After suffering losses tied to commercial paper from Lehman Brothers, some money-market funds were hit with a wave of redemptions. Commercial-paper markets help finance day-to-day business operations. On September 6, 2008, the Reserve Primary Fund, a big money market fund rated triple-A by ratings agencies, “broke the buck” with its per-share net asset value dropping below $1. All hell broke loose as investors around the world fled funds and brokerages and resorted to mattresses.

“I felt that this is something like I’ve never seen before, and the American public and Congress don’t fully understand the gravity,” Buffett recalls. “I thought, we are really looking into the abyss” (The Wall Street Journal, December 12–13, 2009).

Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson seemed to be acting as president of the United States. Or was it really Buffett in that role? After all, the government sought Buffett’s advice about its proposed $700-billion bailout package.

Buffett later told The New York Times (June 21, 2009) that he called the leaders of money management firms to offer an idea about the crises: “I called Bill Gross and Mohamed el-Erian and said, ‘I’ve got this idea. If it goes forward, I hope you guys would manage it and would do it on a pro bono basis.’” The plan at the time was for Pimco to help buy troubled mortgage assets. In the end, the Treasury did it through the Troubled Asset Relief Plan (TARP), but later the Obama administration embraced the public-private partnership plan that Buffett and Pimco had proposed. Government officials had also consulted with Buffett about the formation of TARP.

AIG, the once-huge insurer and still large fixture in the landscape of finance, was having trouble handling its own risk. The night of September 15, the federal government bailed out AIG with an $85-billion loan, taking over ownership of 80% of the company, making it a ward of the state. After this turn of events, where would you turn thus an insurance policy for an airplane, for a windstorm, or for an earthquake?

During the September 15, 2008, weekend, Buffett was called by both Lehman and AIG. Lehman asked him to insure assets, but Buffett said he didn’t get the information he needed to make a decision. Buffett still didn’t seem to get the information he wanted after reading AIG’s 500-page

10-K report on a Friday night in March 2009. When AIG asked Buffett if he would buy its property and casualty unit for $25 billion, Buffett passed on the deal (CNBC, September 15, 2009).

Berkshire’s insurance guru Buffett was in Omaha in talks to try to provide AIG with a reinsurance deal, thinking this was a possibility. He left for a dinner at Happy Hollow Country Club with Google co-founder Sergey Brin and his wife Anne and was expecting to review the terms after dinner; but by then, AIG’s financial troubles had proved to be too complex. Days later, an AIG subsidiary announced it had arranged reinsurance coverage with a Berkshire unit. Weeks later the U.S. Government announced an $85-billion bailout of AIG (The Wall Street Journal, December 12–13, 2009).

At the dinner with the Brins, Buffett said, “You may have saved me a lot of money. If it wasn’t for getting here on time, I may have bought something” (Andrew Ross Sorkin, Too Big to Fail, p. 369).

A year after the September 15, 2008 collapse and months after Barclays approached Buffett about buying collapsing Lehman, he learned that he had missed a voicemail. He had been in Edmonton, Alberta, for a charity concert featuring Seal and Paul Anka benefiting families with children in need of organ transplants. He had told Barclays to fax the information, but Barclays left a message late that night on his mobile phone; and ever the unsavvy technophobe, Buffett missed it. Ten months later, Buffett asked his daughter Susie what a funny symbol meant on the screen of his phone. It turned out to refer to the message from Barclays. With no offer, Lehman declared itself bankrupt. It’s doubtful Buffett would have invested in Lehman in any event. Buffett would later joke about the incident, “Don’t try to get in touch with me by cell phone,” he told a Fortune conference in San Diego.

Yes, Lehman reached out to Buffett for an investment during the crisis; but a 2000-page report about the demise of Lehman showed Buffett to be wary of the firm’s finances, including its “real estate and high yield investments, lending-related commitments, derivatives and the related credit-market risk, … and Lehman’s securitization activity.” The report also said Buffett didn’t feel that Lehman had been totally forthcoming with him about a certain issue.

Buffett also told the Fortune conference that Bank of America CEO Ken Lewis was an “ironic hero” who “inadvertently” saved the financial system by buying Merrill Lynch. Buffett portrayed Lewis “as a sort of Mr. Magoo of global finance, bumbling into trouble in stubborn pursuit of banking greatness—and unintentionally saving the world in the process.”

Buffett said Lewis’ decision to buy Merrill on September 14, 2008, the day before Lehman collapsed, may have prevented a total financial meltdown by saving Merrill Lynch from also collapsing. “If you think Lehman Brothers was bad, imagine Lehman compounded by Merrill Lynch.”

But Buffett did question Lewis’ decision to pay such a high price: “Why pay x for Merrill on Sunday when you could have had it for pennies on Monday?”

Buffett expanded on this in a Fortune interview (October 19, 2010) while talking about a slow recovery taking place. “It’s already coming. It’s already happening, and it will pick up. Look, we needed a really big stimulus in the fall of 2008—a really, really big stimulus. We didn’t get it. It was a miracle that Bank of America bought Merrill for $29 [a share] when it was probably worth 29 cents if left on its own for a few days. If that hadn’t happened, everything would have collapsed. The whole commercial-paper market would have stopped. Every domino would have fallen. Berkshire would have been the last, but it would have fallen too. Ken Lewis saved the whole system for a while, until TARP could rescue it.”

The Dow Jones Industrial Average remained in free fall. Commercial paper was, well ... paper. During this period, for the first time since the 1930s, Treasuries went negative, meaning that investors were willing to accept a negative return for safety.

When a total financial meltdown seemed a certainty, word came of a government plan to bail out troubled mortgage-related assets at a possible cost of hundreds of billions of dollars, the most sweeping intervention in the financial markets since the Great Depression. Still, Berkshire held up reasonably well compared with the stocks of many other companies. This may have been caused by the seeming brilliance of its $4.7-billion purchase agreement (later undone—even dismantled—although still to Berkshire’s sizeable profit) with Constellation Energy at what seemed to be half-price because of an ongoing flight to preserve Berkshire’s triple-A credit rating.

Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson worked long hours trying to stem off a Depression-like financial panic. John McCain, the 2008 Republican presidential candidate, at first said that he didn’t favor a bailout. Later, McCain endorsed a bailout version that Democratic presidential contender Barack Obama favored after conferring with Warren Buffett. (Immediately after being elected president, Obama named Buffett one of his economic advisers.)

The following week, September 22, Washington Mutual failed and was sold to JP Morgan.

Like dominoes, American institutions continued to fall.

Before that mournful September ended, Buffett turned down a request to invest up to $10 billion in Wachovia because he thought the bank was too exposed to subprime mortgages (The Wall Street Journal, December 12–13, 2009).

Buffett was quoted as saying that current economic conditions were like an

“economic Pearl Harbor,” adding that he supported Paulson’s plan for a $700 billion bailout of bad mortgage-related debts.

In the midst of the devastation, Buffett said, “I am betting on the Congress doing the right thing for the American public and passing this bill. I certainly have a vote of confidence in Paulson and vote of confidence in Congress” (CNBC, September 24, 2008).

Arguing for passage of the bailout bill, Buffett told CNBC that if it were not passed, “There was just no telling what would happen.” He continued: “Last week we were at the brink of something that would have made anything that’s happened in financial history look pale. We were very, very close to a system that was totally dysfunctional and would have not only gummed-up the financial markets, but gummed up the economy in a way that would take us years and years to repair. We’ve got enough problems to deal with anyway. I’m not saying the Paulson plan eliminates those problems. But it was absolutely and is absolutely necessary, in my view, to really avoid going over the precipice.”

NOTES FROM THE CRISIS

With Congress bickering over the bailout bill, Buffett still urged its passage. He stated that if the legislation were not passed, the nation would face the “biggest financial meltdown in American history.”

He expressed that the bailout might even make money for the government in the long run and that he would buy damaged loans if he could get $700 billion on the government’s terms. After having spent about $10 billion in investments within a week, he added, “Unfortunately, I’m tapped out.”

Buffett’s September 2008 investment in Goldman Sachs seemed to temporarily bolster confidence in Goldman and other markets in general. But on September 29, the Dow took a record 778-point plunge in response to the House of Representatives’ initial rejection of the bailout bill.

Even the record plunge did not stop Buffett from placing his bets. Despite his claim to be “tapped out,” only eight days after the Goldman deal, he tilted the Berkshire keg for another purchase and found $3 billion more to invest in a preferred stock position in General Electric. The GE investment was especially appealing because it carried a whopping 10% dividend and the right to buy billions more in stock.

Then three days after the GE deal, as its stock plunged, Citigroup tried to buy most of Wachovia at bottom dollar. However, Wells Fargo, a Berkshire investee, swept in to buy the beleaguered company.

In an op-ed piece in The New York Times (October 17, 2008) entitled “Buy American. I am.” Buffett said, “I’ve been buying American stocks. This is my personal account I’m talking about, in which I previously owned nothing but United States government bonds.”

Characterized by day after day of triple-digit drops in the stock market, the financial world continued to spiral toward financial Armageddon. Meanwhile, Buffett stood by with cash on hand. His presence and activity were so powerful that he was mentioned by both McCain and Obama as a potential Treasury Department Secretary. The sudden endorsement by both candidates at the same time caused Buffett’s phone to ring off the hook.

His role in bolstering finances and confidence was compared with JP Morgan’s role in coming to the government’s rescue during the Panic of 1907 (The New York Times, October 6, 2008).

The Panic of 2008 was eventually calmed by the passage into law of the bailout bill. The historical and terrifying period put into high relief one of Buffett’s finest hours. Buffett took this opportunity to fire off one of his classic quips: “I may go back to delivering newspapers.”

Actually, it looked as though Buffett was going into movies. He played himself in Wall Street: Money Never Sleeps, and Ed Asner played Buffett in the HBO movie version of Andrew Ross Sorkin’s book on the financial crisis, Too Big to Fail.

Buffett and Asner met at the movie’s premier in New York on May 16, 2011. They laughed about their look-alike status. Buffett joked, “We’re going to remake the movie Twins together.”

––––––––––––––––––––

In an Op Ed piece in The New York Times (November 17, 2010), Buffett praised government’s role in the bailout of the financial crisis of 2008–2009. Starting out, “Dear Uncle Sam,” he wrote: “My mother told me to send thank-you notes promptly. I’ve been remiss.

“Many of our largest industrial companies, dependent on commercial paper financing that had disappeared, were weeks away from exhausting their cash resources. Indeed, all of corporate America’s dominoes were lined up, ready to topple at lightning speed. My own company, Berkshire Hathaway, might have been the last to fall, but that distinction provided little solace...

“I don’t know precisely how you orchestrated these. But I did have a pretty good seat as events unfolded, and I would like to commend a few of your troops. In the darkest of days, Ben Bernanke, Hank Paulson, Tim Geithner and Sheila Bair grasped the gravity of the situation and acted with courage and dispatch. And though I never voted for George W. Bush, I give him great credit for leading, even as Congress postured and squabbled...

“So, again, Uncle Sam, thanks to you and your aides. Often you are wasteful, and sometimes you are bullying. On occasion, you are downright maddening. But in this extraordinary emergency, you came through — and the world would look far different now if you had not.

Your grateful nephew,

Warren

THE MEDAL OF FREEDOM

President Obama named Buffett as one of fifteen winners of the 2010 Medal of Freedom. Buffett and the other winners were honored at the White House in early 2011. The Medal of Freedom is given to people deemed to have made particularly noteworthy contributions to the United States.

Among the other honorees were former President George H. W. Bush, poet Maya Angelou, basketball’s Bill Russell, and baseball’s Stan Musial.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value One of Buffett’s Finest Hours

Paulson’s Book Addressing the

Economic Crisis.



(Photo by Mary Porter)

One of Buffett’s Finest Hours The Story of Warren Buffett



Buffett and Paulson

Buffett and former Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson talk about the economic meltdown that began in 2008 at an event at the Greater Omaha Chamber of Commerce on February 9, 2010. This followed after the release of Paulson’s book entitled On the Brink.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Ed Asner



Too Big To Fail

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value One of Buffett’s Finest Hours





4


ONE OF THE WORLD’S RICHEST PEOPLE

In March of 2008, with a $62 billion fortune, Buffett was named the richest person on the planet by Forbes magazine.

Buffett’s wealth ranks with the fortunes of Andrew Carnegie and

J. P. Morgan in their days. Accounting for his staggering fortune is Buffett’s ownership of 32% of the Class A shares and 18% of the Class B shares of Berkshire Hathaway, the textile mill of old that Buffett built into a more than $200-billion-plus enterprise.

The Forbes ranking moved the Oracle of Omaha, for the first time, past his friend Bill Gates, founder of Microsoft, who held the top spot for 13 years. Gates, with $58 billion, dropped to third place behind Mexican telecommunications tycoon Carlos Slim Helú, whose net worth is valued at a mere $60 billion.

During an informal phone conversation with Becky Quick of CNBC, Buffett noted that he was able to slip by Gates because he [Buffett] spends less. Only a bit tongue-in-cheek, Buffett suggested his newly announced ranking in the realm of wealth was “a tribute to thriftiness” (CNBC, March 6, 2008).

At that point in 2008, Gates had given away more money than Buffett had to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.

Gates was quoted as saying, “Since both Warren and I have committed the bulk of our wealth to charity, we probably don’t belong on the list at all. However, I couldn’t be happier to cede the position to Warren. This weekend when we played golf, he saved money by not buying a golf glove and using Band-Aids instead. It didn’t work too well, but it saved a few bucks.”

In its September 17, 2008 issue, Forbes announced that Gates was once again ahead of Buffett in wealth. When the magazine updated its report on October 9, 2008, Buffett had regained the top spot on the wealthiest in America list. Because of the ups and downs of Berkshire and Microsoft stock, determining whether Buffett or Gates is richer remains a hard call and, at their level of wealth, is really inconsequential. The seesaw ride has continued; and in 2009, Forbes proclaimed Gates the richest with $50 billion and Buffett the second richest with $40 billion. Forbes figured that Buffett lost $1.1 million an hour in the previous year, and that Gates lost only $800,000 an hour.

The richest race aside, in the calamitous year of 2008, Buffett was the one who rose to the top as the most sought-after CEO in the world as he made one eye-popping multibillion-dollar deal after another. With his billions of dollars in financial ammunition, he was the big-game hunter of the day. Previously, Buffett had said, “I’ve got an elephant gun; I just can’t find the elephant.”

He watched and waited while Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae, AIG, Washington Mutual, and other financial institutions virtually vanished from the American landscape. Buffett had wide-open shots at some of these corporations and many others as they came into his sight, but he chose to do little. Displaying his characteristic discipline, he mainly kept his powder dry.

Then suddenly—with panic and gloom rampant—Buffett, adhering to his view to “be fearful when others are greedy and greedy when others are fearful,” made billions of dollars in fresh investments.

Buffett declared to The New York Times (October 17, 2008) that the financial world was a mess and headlines would continue to be scary but that he was buying U.S. stocks for his personal account.

In other words, he reached for his fully-loaded elephant gun and fired shots heard around the world.

OVERSEXED FOR THE FIRST TIME SINCE 1974

In the midst of the 1973–1974 recession, Forbes reported that when Buffett was asked how he felt about the stock market, he replied: “Like an oversexed guy in a whorehouse. ... Now is the time to invest and get rich.”

The multimedia financial-services company The Motley Fool, remembering that 1974 comment from Buffett and noting his business activities in the dreadful economic environment in 2008, came out with this headline on October 21, 2008: “Buffett Oversexed for the First Time Since 1974.”

Through Buffett’s eyes, the 2008 markets must have been enticing with stocks going for such low prices. Maybe he bought a lot of stocks too early … but maybe not in the long run. In any event, the hunt continues.

OVERSEXED IN 2011

As markets plummeted in the third quarter of 2011, Buffett went to work pouring $23.9 billion in the market. In addition to the purchase of Lubrizol Corp. and a $5 billion preferred stake in Bank of America, Buffett bought $6.9 billion worth of stocks. Buffett told interviewer Charlie Rose that Berkshire spent more on stocks on August 8, 2011 than on any day during the year. That was the day the market fell 6% on news of Standard & Poor’s downgrade of U.S. Government debt.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value One of the World’s Richest People





5


BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY

Warren Buffett took small cash streams out of early dollars hard won from a struggling textile mill called Berkshire Hathaway. Using investment wizardry honed during his early years, along with plain old stock-picking virtuosity, he “spun” money through mergers and acquisitions. These financial maneuvers gave birth to unequaled returns on capital, multiplied by the magic of compounding, to create today’s unparalleled, global Berkshire.

Today’s Berkshire is a powerhouse which generates earnings at a breathtaking speed of $2 to $3 billion per calendar quarter, with an overall stock market value of more than $200 billion. This accomplishment is of great value to more than just Buffett and Berkshire shareholders because Buffett has arranged for the bulk of his shares to “go back to society.” This gift is definitely the largest philanthropic donation in history. That’s ever!

From 1965 to 1985, Buffett’s investments such as See’s Candies, The Washington Post Co., GEICO, and Nebraska Furniture Mart, were vastly different; but they were all unwaveringly American.

Berkshire’s emergence as a global firm began in the 1990s with investments in Coca-Cola and Gillette (now part of Procter & Gamble). Although these are American companies, both conduct a large portion of their businesses overseas.

Many of Berkshire’s investees, including such bellwethers as IBM, ConocoPhillips, General Electric, Johnson & Johnson, Kraft Foods, UPS, Walmart, and Wrigley’s, have global reach. One could argue that Berkshire’s billions of dollars invested in railroads, such as Burlington Northern, are part of the global supply chain. (Maybe this is part of a plan to ship Berkshire’s huge variety of products throughout the world.) Also, many of Berkshire’s operating firms have assets overseas. For example, Berkshire’s MidAmerican Energy has large utility holdings in the United Kingdom, making it the third largest distributor of electricity there.

In an effort to compete more effectively, Berkshire has moved a few of its operating businesses abroad, including some operations of its Dexter Shoe Companies, Fruit of the Loom, and the Russell Corporation.

In 1998, Berkshire bought General Re, a giant reinsurance company that conducts business worldwide, particularly in Europe. In 2003, Berkshire took a stake in PetroChina, an East-meets-West energy investment that mushroomed into a winning investment of giant proportions, one that has now been sold for a profit in the billions.

Foreign investing has been building for years. “We probably bought our first non-U.S. stocks 50 years ago,” Buffett said at Berkshire’s 2007 Annual Meeting. In recent years, stakes in international holdings have surfaced with investments in Tesco, the U.K. grocery and retailing giant; Diageo, which sells Guinness beer; and POSCO, a South Korean steel firm that is the third largest in the world. Berkshire also has a handful of British and Japanese stocks that are below the threshold of its disclosure requirements. In addition, Berkshire owns two German stocks. “We’re looking everywhere but Antarctica,” Buffett has said.

Believing the dollar would weaken because of the U.S. current account and trade deficits, Buffett set in motion a series of foreign currency buys earlier this decade. Most of those positions have been sold.

In Berkshire’s 2005 Annual Report, Buffett said that a way to reinforce his bet that the dollar would weaken was “by purchasing equities whose prices are denominated in a variety of foreign currencies and that earn a large part of their profits internationally.” In 2006, hints emerged of more overseas investments. In 2007, hints about a foreign currency investment turned out to represent one in the Brazilian currency, the real.

GOING GLOBAL

Berkshire’s breakthrough moment of directly investing overseas came in 2006 when it bought Iscar Metalworking Companies of Israel. This behemoth operates not only in Israel, but also in more than 60 other countries around the world, including fast-developing South Korea. In late 2007, a plant was opened in China as well. The Berkshire-Iscar merger was quickly ruled a “conglomerate merger.”

Israeli authorities found that many Berkshire companies were already operating in their country. Gen Re provides insurance products there. Berkshire Hathaway Group offers Israeli annuity policies, Scott Fetzer Companies sell vacuum cleaners and compressors, and Shaw provides carpets and flooring in that country. NetJets, a fractional ownership jet service, flies there. And Berkshire’s CTB International, which makes systems for poultry, hog, and egg production, bought a small Israeli firm called AgroLogic several days after the Berkshire-Iscar announcement.

As Berkshire develops a worldly face, its shareholder base also takes on an increasingly international look. In addition to representation from all 50 U.S. states, about 700 people from foreign lands were among the 31,000 attendees who made the odyssey to Berkshire’s 2008 Annual Meeting in Omaha.

The ultimate example of Berkshire’s global proportions came with Buffett’s announcement in June 2006 that he would be giving most of his wealth to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. This foundation is now a philanthropic leviathan that touches lives throughout the world, fighting AIDS and enhancing health in Third World countries. As Buffett follows through with this commitment, he is fulfilling his expressed desire that the bulk of his fortune go not only to American society, but also to the world at large. Buffett has orchestrated an international company so strikingly successful that he and other shareholders can make meaningful contributions in areas of great need around the globe. This announcement has been the incandescent, culminating event—of permanent value.

The gift has been growing since Berkshire’s stock hit $100,000 per share on October 5, 2006, and even momentarily pierced $150,000 per share in late 2007, closing the year at $141,600. However, 2008 was another story when the stock ranged from $77,000 to $147,000 and ended close to that $100,000 benchmark. In early 2010, Berkshire’s stock soared to above $120,000 with word of a 50 for 1 stock split for its B shares and its inclusion on the S&P’s Index.

Buffett giving his enormous fortune to an existing up-and-running foundation is classic Buffett. Why reinvent the wheel and why self-aggrandize when a process that accomplishes your goal of improving life for so many is already in place and is so superbly run?

EXPANDING GLOBALLY

In October 2006, Berkshire was already well on its way to becoming international with a $7-billion groundbreaking takeover of the remaining insurance liabilities held by thousands of Lloyd’s of London “Names.”

Continuing its ascent, Berkshire announced in December 2007, that it planned to buy 60% of Marmon Holdings for $4.5 billion from Chicago’s Pritzker family and that the rest of the company would be sold in stages over the next five or six years.

Marmon Holdings is a privately held company and an international association of 130 manufacturing and service businesses with total sales of approximately $7 billion a year. Marmon employs about 21,000 people at more than 250 facilities, mainly in North America, the United Kingdom, Europe, and China.

Reminiscent of baseball player Ernie Banks’s cry of “Let’s play two,” Berkshire, only days after its Marmon announcement, started a bond insurance company—Berkshire Hathaway Assurance Corp. Doubling up on the breaking news for the day, Berkshire agreed to buy the reinsurance unit of Dutch banking and insurance company ING for $440 million.

Berkshire’s new bond insurer opened for business in New York on December 31, 2007. In order to write insurance for municipal bonds, it seeks business from local governments at a time of possible slippage in credit ratings for other insurers. During the huge credit crisis, Buffett told The Wall Street Journal (December 28, 2007) that Berkshire’s new bond affiliate would seek to do business in California, Puerto Rico, Texas, Illinois, and Florida.

Berkshire could be due for a name change to Berkshire Hathaway International, an investment engine focused on the world.

Barron’s—whose coverage of Berkshire over the years has ranged from “spotty” (the “Warren, What’s Wrong?” cover story of December 27, 1999) to “spot-on”—announced in a cover story of September 8, 2007, that its annual survey of the business landscape concluded that Berkshire is “the most respected company in the world.”

Yet few recognize the possibility of Berkshire’s future growth. This expansion is not limited to any one product, any one industry, or even any one country—as this business supernova expands to all corners of the world.

In keeping with all the above, in late 2007, Buffett traveled to Canada for a fund-raiser and then on to China and Korea for a look at Iscar plants. Scores of reporters followed the events, generating worldwide publicity. Upon leaving China, Buffett, more well known than any other person in the global investment community, waved and told CNBC’s Becky Quick, “I’d say good-bye in Chinese, but then I’d be showing off.”

Although 2008 was not Berkshire’s finest year, it did survive a frosty housing market and credit crunch, a weak insurance market, an oil shock, and a sloppy stock market better than most companies. It took its lumps and survived as perhaps the best example of capitalism in the world.





6

OF PERMANENT VALUE

Long before Berkshire was a global contender and charitable benefactor, it was merely a stirring in the brain of Warren Buffett. He sat on a sunporch in Omaha, reading and thinking about how to create value, permanent value.

About seven billion people exist in this world. Of this mass of humanity, Warren Buffett is one of the richest, and now and then, he tops the chart.

Buffett is known as being one of the world’s smartest people, but what is less known is that he is also one of the funniest. His trademarks of integrity, personality, laser-like focus, clarity, and blinding speed in business activities assure him an exalted place in the Who’s Who of human striving.

If you had given Warren Edward Buffett $10,000 in 1956 to invest, today it would be worth more than $500 million—AFTER TAX!

The ride for shareholders has by no means been a straight highway. Berkshire Hathaway took a terrible hit in the severe recession of 1973–1974, when the stock dropped from about $90 to $40 a share. It also took a licking in the 1987 stock market crash, dropping from roughly $4,000 to $3,000. It got clobbered in the months leading up to the Gulf War in 1990–1991, plummeting from $8,900 to $5,500. But with each hit, Berkshire has continued to pick itself up, dust itself off, and move forward.

Berkshire took a nose dive again during the 1998–2000 period after buying giant reinsurer General Re. Soft pricing and an unusual number of natural disasters rocked General Re’s performance, and some of Berkshire’s high-profile investments, such as Coke and Gillette, stumbled badly. Rising interest rates whacked Berkshire’s big bond portfolio at the same time.

Berkshire fared better than some non-Internet companies; but, as Buffett said, “You can’t eat a relative performance sandwich.”

Berkshire’s stock price plunged from about $80,000 in mid-1998 to $40,800 in early 2000. In short, 1999—an annus horribilis—was a bummer for Berkshire shareholders and has been hereinafter referred to as the “Bummer of ’99.” The stock once again hit the skids in early 2000 during a series of rumors about Buffett’s health, bogus press releases on the Internet, and dozens of news reports about how Buffett had lost his marbles during the Internet bubble.

Indeed, Buffett’s value-investing approach came under fire as many investors seized on momentum and tech-driven styles. Julian Robertson’s Tiger funds, which had a long, successful record of adhering to value investing, shut down because of poor performance and redemptions.

Berkshire finally hit a low of $40,800 on March 10, 2000, a five-alarm moment for the company (and any shareholders on margin). In a column that day, Wall Street’s Jim Cramer wrote a doom and gloom report about Berkshire: “At the end of the week, I found myself repeatedly drawn to shorting Berkshire Hathaway. That premium-selling repository of brands that once sold at a premium seems right for the banging.” It turned out that Cramer’s TheStreet.com took a banging of its own while Berkshire slowly recovered.

In Berkshire’s 2001 Annual Report, Buffett noted an interesting point: “Here’s one for those who enjoy an odd coincidence: The Great Bubble ended on March 10, 2000 (though we didn’t realize that fact until some months later). On that day, the NASDAQ (recently 1,731) hit its all-time high of 5,132. That same day, Berkshire shares traded at $40,800, their lowest price since mid-1997.” At that moment, Berkshire didn’t seem worth even an eight-track tape.

At Berkshire’s low point, some dubbed the company “Berkshire Halfaway.”

You may remember Shakespeare’s foreshadowing all of this: “You are not for all markets” (As You Like It, Act III, V. 60).

LOCKER ROOM TALK

During the late 1990s, nothing seemed to work for Berkshire. It was a bit like how Coach Bear Bryant described one of his early Texas A&M teams: “Half the team is smaller than a monkey’s cojones. The other half is slower than smoke off shit.”

Yet Alabama Coach Nick Saban may have quoted Bryant in summarizing the modern financial world. Barely squeaking by Auburn in 2007 with a score of 26-19, Saban at the 14–14 halftime was quoted as saying his team is in the middle of a “shit storm.”

Berkshire’s price back in the late 90s (which preceded the “shitstorm” of 2008) was only 1.13 times the estimated book value (accounting value), about $38,000 a share, the lowest ratio since 1983 when it reached 1.04 times. Although the stock price had plunged, book value of the company was roughly the same as the previous year. Many analysts thought Berkshire’s intrinsic value—its true value in the real world set by rational would-be buyers and sellers rather than the fearful and greedy at the edge of the market—ranged from $70,000 to $110,000 or so.

With the financial crisis of 2008–2009, Berkshire was trading at 1.18 times book value when it traded at about $100,000 in December 2009. Over the years, Berkshire has traded at about 1.7 times book.

Still, here’s what has happened over the long haul: Buffett bought Berkshire, a struggling textile mill—a daffodil of free enterprise—in the 1960s on the cheap. Berkshire at that time was a “used cigar butt,” Buffett’s term for a dramatically cheap investment with only “one puff left.” Today, Berkshire is one of the largest publicly traded companies in the world, as measured by standard accounting stockholders’ equity (net worth). In the U.S., Berkshire is near the top in rankings of net worth.

If some 45 years ago your grandparents gave you $10,000 and didn’t tell you to invest with Buffett, well, you should consider adopting a new set of grandparents. Actually, don’t be too hard on them. Almost no one else’s forefathers thought of hitching their horse to Buffett’s wagon.

Had you invested in the Buffett Partnership—started in 1956 and disbanded in 1969—you could have chosen to reinvest in an ongoing textile business called Berkshire Hathaway, which Buffett also ran. If you were so lucky, or shall we say insightful, you would have earned a glittering return of more than 50,000-fold in an era when the Dow Jones Industrial Average rose only ten-fold. And the Dow Jones number is a pretax figure and, thus, overinflated.

Before fees, a few of which existed in the original partnership but after all taxes, that $10,000 would have mushroomed to more than $500 million by the time Berkshire traded above $100,000 a share. Before all fees and taxes, that original $10,000 would have skyrocketed to more than $600 million! That’s why some have called Berkshire “the gift that keeps hurting.” If you didn’t invest with Buffett early on, it’s enough to make you want to lie facedown in the bathtub.

Even if you arrived late to the party and didn’t invest with stock market marvel Buffett until 1965 when he took over Berkshire, a $10,000 investment then would be worth about $100 million now. Had you put $10,000 in the Standard & Poor’s 500 stock index that same year, it would be worth about $600,000 now.

By the way, very few investors beat the S&P. The S&P “outperformed 91% of all equity mutual funds over the 16-year period that ended December 31, 1997” (Tweedy, Browne report).

Ben Graham, “the Father of Value Investing,” taught and molded Buffett at Columbia University and served as a broker to Buffett in the 1960s.

Money manager Chris Browne has lamented that with Graham’s firm serving as Buffett’s financial advisor, ethics barred him from investing in Berkshire Hathaway. Worse, his father gave Browne’s younger brother $1,000 worth of Berkshire stock as a wedding present in September 1970, when Berkshire was trading at about $40 a share. Sadly, the brother sold the shares to pay for his wedding. “That was just for the honeymoon, not even the wedding,” Browne said. Little brother’s youthful splurge cost him about $25 million in today’s money. Browne’s only defense: “It was 30 years ago.” However you dress it up, it was an expensive honeymoon.

When Buffett took over Berkshire in the spring of 1965, Berkshire’s stock price was in the teens; the Dow was at almost 1,000. In 1983, Berkshire’s stock price and the Dow were both at about 1,000. In 2007, the Dow briefly hit 14,000. Berkshire’s stock price then surpassed $120,000, hitting that rarefied number on August 20, 2007. By another measure, the NASDAQ, created in 1971, traded at about 100 back then. Berkshire’s high for that year was $74.

At the point in 1965 when Buffett took over, Berkshire had sales of $49 million and a book value of $24 million. It’s much bigger now: book value, more than $50 billion; market value, about $170 billion.

Through Buffett’s partnership and later through Berkshire, Buffett built a financial empire beyond anyone’s wildest dreams. Buffett and Berkshire now own pieces of some of the world’s most prominent businesses, including an 8.6% stake in The Coca-Cola Company.

Though he didn’t inherit any money, Buffett made himself a billionaire many times over. He now owns more than 30% of the stock of Berkshire, an investment holding company that has vast stock, bond, cash, and other holdings, as well as many operating businesses.

With his huge stake in the company, Buffett is in many ways Berkshire, and Berkshire is his brainchild.

Buffett calls Berkshire his canvas. “I feel very good about my work,” Buffett said in 1985, savoring his outlook. “When I go to my office every morning, I feel like I’m going to the Sistine Chapel to paint” (Women’s Wear Daily, October 10, 1985). “What could be more fun? It’s like an unfinished painting. If I want to paint blue or red on the canvas, I can do it. No one criticizes. Someone else may not like the painting, but I like it” (San Antonio Express-News, March 20, 1999).

Maybe one reason Buffett bought Benjamin Moore Paints in 2000 is because he needed more hues for his ever-growing canvas. In recent years, the demigod of finance has been splashing paint as boldly as Jackson Pollock.

Of his canvas, Buffett has said, “I hope it’s an example in some ways of corporate action that people might emulate over time” (WOWT-TV in Omaha, October 14, 1993). On his canvas, Buffett paints sweeping, nearly priceless investment works of art.

Buffett has been called the Prophet of Profit, the Sultan of Savings, indeed, he is the Michelangelo of Business. The enterprises Berkshire owns with their “mouth-watering economics” represent the lion’s share of the art collection. An emperor of the business, Buffett, in his 80s now, is erecting supreme corporate galleries.

All this is reminiscent of the adage, “Find a job you like, and you’ll never work a day in your life.”

It is true that Berkshire’s growth slowed in the past decade more or less to S&P levels. Although Berkshire’s performance appeared headed for a poor year in 2008, it still outperformed the S&P and the world at large.

Berkshire’s record vies with almost any other in American business. Yet Buffett—ultrafamous in financial circles—was largely unknown until he stepped in to save the Wall Street firm of Salomon Brothers in 1991. He manages one of America’s largest corporations from a small office in a nondescript building in midtown Omaha, Nebraska (roughly the geographical center of the United States), a city known for sensible living and baseball’s College World Series.

Over the years, as Buffett has sat in the office, reading and thinking, he has spawned billions of dollars in shareholder value, making multimillionaires of dozens of early investors and mere millionaires of hundreds more.

Berkshire’s stock trades higher than any other stock on the New York Stock Exchange and sky-high above its giveaway price of $12 that day back in 1965.

“On the date that Buffett took over Berkshire Hathaway—May 10, 1965—its shares stood at $18. If the Dow Jones Industrial Average had matched Buffett’s returns ever since, the index would have ended April 2004 not at its actual level of 10,226 but at 4,832,777” ( Jason Zweig, Money, July 2004).

So how did Buffett multiply his money by more than 50,000 times [less in light of 2008] in little more than half a century since he formed the Buffett Partnership in 1956?

For one thing, Buffett has been compounding things over a long life. “The trick to building a snowball is to start at the top of the hill,” he says.

Even so, for most investors the snow melts somewhere along the way. Here’s what Buffett has done that keeps the snow accumulating: He invests in only a few sectors of the economy.

“We like simple businesses,” Buffett says. He means plain-Jane businesses in which extensive product change is not expected and where there are clear competitive advantages. Not much research and development occur in Berkshire’s businesses; they exist simply to make a profit. (A profit, mind you, is not a religious person to whom and through whom God speaks.)

Buffett likes an easy button. “Our company manufactures beverage concentrates and syrups and, in certain instances, finished beverages, which we sell to bottling and canning operations, authorized fountain wholesalers, and some fountain retailers.” That’s Coca-Cola talking—from its 1999 Annual Report—but it could have been in any of its reports over more than a century.

Berkshire, it seems, often follows Lord Falkland’s precept: “When it is not necessary to change, it is necessary not to change.”

Simplicity and permanence are what Buffett ferrets out and treasures in a business. As a persistent corporate buyer who loves to buy and hates to sell, Buffett tends to shy away from businesses saddled with large plants and lots of fast-changing technology. He avoids those requiring high health costs, big pension funds, and constant product changes. He’s not in favor of employee changes either. In 35 years, Berkshire has rarely lost a manager of any of its operating units—except through death or retirement.

Buffett has joked that nothing ever changes at Berkshire. Buffett himself, having run Berkshire for 46 years, is the longest-running CEO of a major corporation in America.

Likewise, not much changes with his personal life—same city, same house, same car, same food, same friends. He used the same old battered hip-pocket wallet for 20 years before auctioning it off in 1999 for the benefit of a charity, Girls Inc. of Omaha (The Wall Street Journal, December 1, 1999).

“There’s nothing special about the wallet,” said Buffett. “It goes back a long time. My suits are old, my wallet’s old, my car’s old. I’ve lived in the same house since 1958, so I hang on to things” (Omaha World-Herald, December 2, 1999).

By the way, how much does the owner of one of the world’s greatest fortunes carry around in that wallet? “Let me see,” he responded, getting out his wallet and counting eight or so $100 bills. “I usually carry somewhere around $1,000,” he said (St. Petersburg Times, December 15, 1999).

Over the years, he has compounded money faster than a speeding bullet. Just how he achieved his remarkable results—through his trademark value-oriented, marathon-distance investing—is even more remarkable.

All along the way, after Buffett’s slice, the Buffett Partnership witnessed an average annual 29% spurt while the limited partners gained a handsome 22% yearly as Buffett created an enterprise of permanent value … enormous permanent value.

In 13 years, the partnership never had a down year, despite some nasty bear

markets. Berkshire’s own annual increase in stock price—about 25% a year—has exceeded its annual return on book value of 22%. Its best was a 59% return on book value in 1976.

Until 2001, Berkshire didn’t have a losing year for returns on stockholders’

equity. The streak did end, however, as did so many things, with the September 11th terrorist attack. Also, declines in value in such big stock holdings as Coca-Cola and American Express put a stop to the long-lasting streak. Berkshire stock actually gained about 7%, but its book value declined 6.2%, still ahead of the S&P, which dropped by 11.9%.

Indeed, Buffett’s letter to the shareholders in Berkshire’s 2001 Annual Report began, “Berkshire’s loss in net worth during 2001 was $3.77 billion, which decreased per share value of both our Class A and Class B stock by 6.2%.” However, Berkshire’s book value grew $6.1 billion in 2002. The 10% gain clobbered the S&P, which was down 22%.

Among Berkshire’s worst years were 1973 and 1974 when Buffett was selling stocks he’d recently bought at three times earnings to buy stocks selling at two times earnings, and when Berkshire grew its book value by 4.7% and 5.5%, respectively. Although those numbers sound only mediocre, the S&P was down 14.8% and 26.4%, respectively. Thus, Berkshire’s results relative to the market were up 19.5 percentage points in 1973, and up 31.9 percentage points in 1974—a sensational performance since more than 90% of money managers can’t beat the market.

(Even if one bought Buffett’s stock picks months after his purchases, the strategy would have delivered twice the return of the S&P 500 Index, according to a study in 2007 by Gerald Martin of American University and John Puthenpurackal of the University of Nevada.)

The average performance of money managers is just average; and with frictional costs like commissions, the average performance sinks below average. Therefore, Buffett insists that most money managers, compared with average stock performance, bring no new value to the table.

Back in 1986, V. Eugene Shahan, a Columbia University Business School alumnus and portfolio manager, wrote a follow-up article to Buffett’s classic, “The Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville.” In his article titled, “Are Short-Term Performance and Value Investing Mutually Exclusive?” Shahan posed this question: How appropriate is it to measure a money manager’s skill on the basis of short-term performance? He noted that, with the exception of Buffett himself, many of the people Buffett described as “superinvestors”—undeniably skilled, undeniably successful—faced periods of short-term underperformance.

In a money-management version of the tortoise and the hare, Shahan said: “It may be another of life’s ironies that investors principally concerned with short-term performance may very well achieve it, but at the expense of long-term results. The outstanding records of the Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville [Columbia teachers Ben Graham and David Dodd] were compiled with apparent indifference to short-term performance.” He pointed out, in today’s mutual-fund-performance derby, many of the superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville would have been overlooked.

The Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville

Number Number Underperformance

of years of of years of as a % of all

performance underperformance years measured

[John Maynard] Keynes 18 6 33

[Warren] Buffett 13 0 0

[Charles] Munger 14 5 36

[Bill] Ruane 27 10 37

[Lou] Simpson 17 4 24

Buffett’s Berkshire was created by making a few large, staggeringly successful decisions. More than half Buffett’s net worth came from less than a dozen large investments. Buffett mainly buys at distressed times and bargain prices, then holds for the long term. Long term in some investment quarters means settlement date or the posting of the next quarter’s earnings. Buffett instead holds on to many of his investments for years, for decades, through good times and bad. When investing, Buffett is a marathon man capturing a greater piece of the world’s financial turf.

The investment shots he takes are lay-ups. He puts money to work in places he’s sure about and then holds on. “Our favorite holding period is forever,” he says. Benjamin Graham in The Intelligent Investor looked at the long term as being 25 years. That’s a different attitude from such trader talk as, “I wouldn’t go home long tonight,” or brokerage squawk box talk such as, “If you’re a long-term bull, say, six to 12 months …” Buffett tries to buy companies that will be here decades from now. He’s more of a decade trader than a day trader.

One problem with the Buffett/Berkshire “Buy Low, Don’t Sell” philosophy is that it seems improbable. People are skeptical because most investors almost drown treading water. Therefore, it’s hard for them to relate to making millions upon millions of dollars … even billions of dollars.

It’s all a little like Mark Twain’s saying, “Of course truth is stranger than fiction. Fiction has to make sense.”

Beyond the dollars Buffett has accumulated, beyond the worth of the businesses, stocks, bonds, and cash Berkshire holds, an even greater value exists. The permanent value he has created is a statement—a statement about how to do things the right way as well as doing them ethically, sensibly, simply, and inexpensively.

Also: Don’t waste.

Buffett, who would get no objection from Berkshire shareholders were he to pay himself $10 million a year, has kept his annual salary at $100,000 (no options, no bonuses) for more than three decades. This made him the lowest paid of all the Fortune 500 CEOs until the Google Guys took executive pay further in the right direction at $1 a year. Buffett is also easily the best price-to-performance money manager on the planet. Buffett’s salary is roughly equal to a 0.01% fee, whereas the average mutual fund fee is about 1.4%. Reporters have computed that Buffett’s salary is equal to Alex Rodriguez swinging at six pitches.

Asked if he lived within his salary, Buffett wrote, “Most definitely not!”

In Berkshire’s 1998 Annual Report, he wrote: “And now a small hint to Berkshire directors. Last year I spent more than nine times my salary at Borsheims and EJA [NetJets]. Just think how Berkshire’s business would boom if you’d only spring for a raise.” For Berkshire’s Class A shareholders, he’s working for far less than a dime a share per year, and for the Class B shareholders, for less than a penny a share. No mutual fund expenses or wrap fees are found here.

Here’s the big picture for Berkshire shareholders: Buffett is your partner, and he’s working for you. He builds no monuments to himself at shareholder expense—no Buffett Tower, no Buffett Plaza, no airports, roads, or zoos.

And Buffett offers no touting of Berkshire shares. If anything, he downplays the historic compounding of their worth and tells shareholders next year’s return probably won’t be as good as last year’s. Buffett’s style is underpromise and overdeliver.

Cosmetics are not applied by splitting the stock. In Buffett’s view, that’s a meaningless exercise of valuing ten $1 dollar bills over one $10 bill, and Buffett doesn’t want shareholders who don’t understand that. By usually refusing to split the shares, Buffett provides a clear lesson in the true value of long-term investments and compounding interest. For example, if Coke had never split its stock, a single share would be a price many times higher than it is. This concept gets diluted in the splitting.

However, in 1996, a “do-it-yourself stock split” was declared with the creation of a Class B, or “Baby Berkshire” shares, which trade at about 1/30 of the big Class A share (see “A Do-It-Yourself-Stock Split” chapter). A 50 for 1 split of the B shares occurred in 2010 to facilitate the purchase of the BNSF railway. Now A and B shareholders total in more than 600,000.

At Berkshire, money is not spent for extraneous purposes. For example, no company logo has been created for Berkshire, unless you count the fist full of dollars emblazoned on T-shirts and caps you can buy at the annual meeting.

“A truly ‘closet’ logo,” explains shareholder Michael Assael. “Now they’re collectors’ items.”

Berkshire itself makes little effort to be known. Despite Berkshire’s extraordinary success and Buffett’s fame, Wall Street has largely ignored Berkshire. Only a few analysts follow it, and stockbrokers almost never mention it to investors. It is rarely written up as a stock to consider. It was not present on many major Blue Chip corporate lists. You have to discover it for yourself.

The company’s plain-looking annual report is outrageously popular famous among its fans but otherwise unknown outside of Berkshire circles. It has no photos, no bar charts, and no graphs. The annual report is the company’s only real communication to the public. What it lacks in gloss, it makes up for in permanent value. The reports offer a unique literary style spiced with wit and wisdom about the human condition. The anticipated letter to shareholders is written by Warren “Shakespeare” Buffett himself.

Once you have read a Berkshire annual report, nothing else in the business world can compare. The report, for some the bible of business and finance, is a brilliant accounting. It contains humor, common sense, and insight into the business world and human nature, as well as praise for the managers of its disparate group of businesses. Candor, something some companies avoid, is also present. If Buffett makes a mistake, he’s the first to admit it. Some Berkshire reports even include a “Mistake du Jour” section.

Buffett’s literary pyrotechnics in the report offer commentary on Berkshire’s major properties, huge interests—far north of $1 billion in many cases—in some of the country’s major apple-pie businesses. The holdings include Coca-Cola, American Express, Johnson & Johnson, Procter & Gamble, and Wells Fargo—an extravaganza of brand names.

The Berkshire annual meeting is also unique. A happy tribe of more than 30,000 shareholders from all over the world now make the pilgrimage to investment mecca in Omaha each spring. After Buffett dispenses with company business in five to ten minutes, he and Munger answer questions most of the remainder of the day.

“The meeting of Berkshire Hathaway is adjourned,” Buffett announces almost as soon as it begins. “Any questions?”

Buffett, normally self-effacing, non-flamboyant, and low-key, describes his principles as “simple, old, and few.”

Buoyed by a supportive family, he started from scratch early and plans to stay late in his career. After all, it’s the compounding of money in the later years that really counts if you want to amass wealth. If Buffett continues compounding at only half his historic rate, he could end up controlling dozens of the world’s greatest companies before he stops.

In the early days, young crewcut Buffett operated his investment partnership from his upstairs bedroom and sun porch in his $31,500 Omaha home. He bought the three-story Dutch colonial home in 1958 and has never moved. His home is now assessed at $690,000 with an intrinsic value, in Buffett’s view, of about $500,000—a pretty lousy return percentage-wise compared with the run-up in Berkshire’s stock price.

During a time when Bill Gates was designated the richest person, Buffett said in a talk at the University of Nebraska in Lincoln, “The only reason Gates was ahead is that they counted his house,” referring to Gates’ 57-room house (October 10, 1994). In 2010, Forbes ranked Gates the richest person in the U.S. with $54 billion and Buffett second with $45 billion.

In 2011, Gates was still No. 1 in the country with $59 billion compared with Buffett’s No. 2 position of $39 billion. Buffett’s net worth had dropped because of a decline in Berkshire’s stock price and because of his ongoing gifts to the Gates Foundation.

Buffett’s house, with a “Welcome” sign at the door, is in the Dundee section of Omaha, near Happy Hollow Boulevard in the Elmwood Park area. He lives in a “blighted” area of the Missouri River metropolis (population 720,000). The 35.822-acre area of east Omaha was declared blighted in an effort to win tax incentives for the Aksarben (Nebraska spelled backwards) property development nearby. The area includes both wealthy and deteriorating sections. The name Omaha comes from Native Americans and means “above all others on the water” which seems quite appropriate.

LIVING BENEATH HIS MEANS

Buffett always has lived beneath his means. He insists on rock-bottom operating costs, plenty of cash on hand, and little debt. For example, it was not until he was in his late 20s and well on his way to becoming a millionaire that he splurged on a $295 IBM typewriter for the partnership. (So there was the original hint about Berkshire’s IBM investment.)

“He was always saying he didn’t need it,” recalls William O’Connor, a vice

president of Mutual of Omaha, who had been an IBM salesman for 30 years. In his early days, O’Connor made the strenuous sale to Buffett. “It was an IBM Standard Model electric typewriter. He bought the standard model rather than the more costly executive model.”

Usually tightfisted, Buffett has occasionally dipped into his fortune to add rooms to his house and, perhaps his biggest splurge, a handball court.

In his garage and home entranceway, he stores cases of Cherry Coke, which he is notorious for drinking. He buys the Cokes himself at a good discount. Fifty 12-packs at a time. It requires fewer trips to the store that way. His habit helps the bottom line at Berkshire, about one-tenth of a penny for every Coke he drinks.

Buffett is a beacon of simplicity and sanity—a prairie genius. Rationality and common sense, actually uncommon sense, are his guiding lights. For example, he bought Coca-Cola stock for many reasons; but it was mainly because human beings worldwide get thirsty, and history shows that once exposed to Coke, people continue to drink it.

In three words he has stated his job description: “I allocate capital.” He has also provided a verbose explanation: “My job is to figure out which businesses to invest in, with whom, and at what price.”

He recognizes the need to keep the managers of his businesses happy. They all make higher salaries than his $100,000 a year. Poor old Buffett hasn’t seen a pay raise since 1980. Three-fourths of the managers are worth more than $100 million, so they are financially fit already. Still, it doesn’t seem to just be about the money. Buffett trusts them and steps out of their way, in line with Teddy Roosevelt’s advice: “The best executive is one who has sense enough to pick good people to do what he wants done, and self-restraint enough to keep from meddling with them while they do it.”

Buffett famously dislikes full schedules, meetings, company rituals, and managing people. “I don’t call managers of my businesses;” he has said, “they call me.”

Every couple of years Buffett sends his managers a letter of less than two pages that essentially says they should run their business as if they owned it, and they should continually think about “how to create a moat” around their business so that “marauders won’t invade the castle.” Cell phones, computers, or personal digital assistants (PDAs) would be unusual finds in his office.

Along with business partner Charles Munger, who operates from Los Angeles, Buffett is the nerve center of a financial empire that’s reach and influence sprawl all across the land and beyond. Buffett manages this empire from his spartan Omaha office.

Far from the canyons of Wall Street and holed in Omaha in the heartland of America—a locale for steaks, cornstalks, peace and quiet—Buffett spends most of his time thinking and reading. “We read,” says Buffett. “That’s about it.” “They read, they choose, they love: they read forever, and what they read never passes away” (St. Augustine’s Confessions).

A key tenet at Berkshire is betting big and seldomly. You work in what Buffett calls your “circle of competence.” You find your edge in life and in investing. When on rare occasions you’re certain of that edge and you have a “fat pitch” in your “comfort zone,” you swing for the bleachers.

“We like to buy wonderful businesses at reasonable prices,” Buffett states. Usually Buffett invests when some temporary stigma or fear or misunderstanding surrounds a superb business. Such was the case when GEICO, the auto insurance firm, came dangerously close to bankruptcy in the mid-1970s. With his purchase of GEICO, (he now owns all of it) he multiplied his money about 40 times. Buffett mainly buys privately owned businesses outright or stocks representing pieces of publicly owned businesses.

What Buffett does not do is just as important as what he does do. He does not do program trading (although some Berkshire investees do). He places no fast bets on a company’s upcoming quarterly earnings. He mouths no threats and will not participate in hostile takeovers. He does not try to force things with debt, loud talk, or long shots.

The secret to making money, in his view, is not in taking risks, but in avoiding risks. “We’ve done better by avoiding dragons rather than by slaying them,” Buffett says.

On the question of ethics and integrity, well, there is no question. Buffett said, “I look for three things when hiring people. The first is personal integrity, the second is intelligence, and the third is a high energy level. But, if you don’t have the first, the other two will kill you.”

He says the best source of ethics is the Bible. “The best advice on corporate governance is in chapter 16, verse two of Luke, part of a parable in which a landlord asks his manager to ‘give an account of thy stewardship; for thou mayest be no longer steward’” (Speech given to Georgetown MBA students, November 14, 2002).

Buffett’s net worth now is roughly equal to the gross national product of oil-rich Kuwait. But he carries no debt.

For years his only debt was a mortgage he has since paid off. That mortgage was on a three-bedroom, two-bath second home he bought in 1971 in Laguna Beach, California, at Emerald Bay, overlooking the Pacific Ocean. Laguna Beach, where John Steinbeck wrote Tortilla Flat in 1935, is known for its Mediterranean climate and artsy atmosphere. He bought the home, now enlarged, for $150,000 when the assessed value was $185,000. Buffett sold the home after his first wife died in 2004. He sold at the top of the housing market 2005 for $5.45 million.

Buffett’s assets-to-debt ratio clearly qualifies as one of the most important concepts he wants in an investment: “Margin of Safety.”

Speaking on September 13, 1991, about his distaste for debt, Buffett said to Salomon clients: “You’re looking at a fellow who owes $70,000 on a second home in Laguna, and I’ve got that because of the low rate … and that’s all I’ve owed for I don’t know how many years.”

Buffett bought another home in Laguna right behind the first one in order to meet the needs of an ever-growing family. Later, he sold the second Laguna home for $3.5 million. At the Berkshire annual meeting in 2005, he said, “It was on about 2,000 square feet of land maybe a 20th of an acre, and the house might cost about $500,000 if you wanted to replace it. So the land sold for something like $60 million an acre,” he joked.

In addition to Buffett’s Omaha and Laguna Beach houses, he owns two units in San Francisco, neither of which carries any debt.

“If you’re smart, you don’t need debt. If you’re dumb, it’s poisonous,” Buffett says.

Actually Buffett’s aversion to debt in some sense is overstated. Through Berkshire, he’s happy to borrow money at very low rates or at no rate at all. Indeed, Berkshire’s insurance operation “borrows” billions of dollars from insurance policy-holders and invests much of that money in stocks.

BERKSHIRE’S SECRET TO SUCCESS

Berkshire’s real secret is that it’s a giant-sucking margin account where the best investor in the world works investments on interest-free margin.

With insurance “float” and deferred taxes, which might never be paid, Berkshire has a colossal interest-free loan in its hands. A rough guess has Berkshire’s return as maybe 15% instead of 24% even without the magic of interest-free leverage.

Buffett has a multiplier effect on his investment results while playing it safe. What Berkshire essentially aims to do is borrow money for free through its insurance operations and invest the money for returns of 12% or so.

Samuel Butler once wrote, “All progress is based upon a universal innate desire on the part of every organism to live beyond its income.” Buffett is the exception to Butler’s rule.

In the late 1980s, the Ivan Boeskys and Michael Milkens of the world—using inside information, lots of debt, threats, and fraudulent schemes—ultimately ran afoul of securities laws. Buffett’s friend Michael Yanney, chairman of America First Capital Associates in Omaha, refers to that era as a time when “greed on Wall Street exceeded its intellect.” This excess tends to repeat, as it did in 2007–2008.

What was Buffett doing in that era of frenzy? He was calmly running businesses, such as World Book encyclopedias, See’s Candies, and The Buffalo News, plus buying Coca-Cola stock. He still holds these investments. Buffett’s general idea is not so much buy-and-hold as it is buy-and-die.

His wealth aside, Buffett is the most influential investment mind and voice in the land. He has two concrete rules for those who seek riches:

Rule No. 1. Never lose money.

Rule No. 2. Never forget Rule No. 1.

The author’s view differs slightly:

Rule No. 1. Never listen to your broker.

Rule No. 2. Never forget Rule No. 1.

Resembling Jack Benny in appearance and manner, Buffett remains modest and dry-witted. For example, a Berkshire shareholder, knowing of Buffett’s love for bridge, once sent him an Omar “Acting is my profession; bridge is my passion” Sharif bridge tape. He thanked the shareholder in a note saying, “If I listen to it long enough, will I be as handsome as Omar Sharif?”

Before once speaking to University of Nebraska students, he was asked, “Do you want extra security here?” His reply was, “We don’t need any security; just ask the attendees to check any soft fruit at the door.”

Buffett described Berkshire’s acquisition policy this way to shareholders: “It’s very scientific. We just sit around and wait for the phone to ring. Sometimes it’s a wrong number.”

Buffett lives an extraordinarily simple life and says 99% of what he has will be “returned to society.” Indeed, Buffett has said he’ll leave the bulk of this fortune to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.

Before starting his plans to give to the Gates Foundation, Buffett had offered his trustees insight into how he would like his funds distributed back to society: “I want my trustees to swing for the fences on a few projects that do not have natural funding constituencies, but that are important to society. I tell them that if they start giving half a million to this hospital and half a million to that college, I will come back and haunt them. But if they spend a ton of money on something and it flops, God bless them” (Financial Times, May 17, 1999).

Buffett’s triple-A credit reputation, built block by block and stock by stock through value investing, has given him the status of rock-and-roll hall of fame heroes. He is America’s rock of ages.

Although he has chosen to keep working, he has become a ward of the state, receiving his Social Security checks.

When Buffett, the avatar of modern investing, wings off to money heaven, he has promised to keep in touch with us. Reflecting Berkshire’s no-retirement policy, he once told author Adam Smith, “I see myself running Berkshire as long as I live and working through seances afterward.” That sounds like the words of deadpan humorist Steven Wright: “I’m going to live forever. So far, so good.” The mystique of Warren Buffett is so out of this world, he just may

do that.

Sometimes a detractor comes along. One in particular looked odd in the process. Laszlo Birinyi, in a piece in Forbes (October 1, 2007), while expressing admiration for Buffett, wrote, “I submit that Buffett is not that much smarter or more capable than many people in the investment business.” He explained his conclusion in the next paragraph: “Over its first 37 years under Buffett, Berkshire shares climbed 238,000%, a compound annual return of 23%. Over the past five years the shares have been inching ahead at a 10% rate, trailing the S&P 500’s 11.8%.”

Birinyi went on to say Buffett’s annual reports should not be taken as “the tablets from Mount Sinai.” To the contrary, most Berkshire shareholders devoutly believe the annual report is a seminal document, indeed the flawless word.

Buffett was named one of the world’s most powerful people by Vanity Fair

(November 1997), which said, “His biggest job has become managing his own impact.”

Though some dismiss Buffett and Berkshire as just a cult, some agree that it’s “a cult above the rest.”

A Fortune survey in 2007 found that Berkshire placed fourth of the 10 most admired companies in the U.S. The list consists of the following: General Electric, Starbucks, Toyota Motor, Berkshire, Southwest Airlines, FedEx, Apple, Google, Johnson & Johnson, and Procter & Gamble.

In 2010, a survey by Harris Interactive revealed that Berkshire was the most admired company in the country.

Berkshire is no longer a small sapling, but the sequoia of capitalism and free enterprise.

BERKSHIRE: A VALUE INVESTMENT

From the small textile mill in New Bedford, Massachusetts, Buffett has built a single company into an international empire. With forays into foreign currencies and positions in foreign stocks, such as PetroChina, and finally with the purchase of Iscar Metalworking Co. of Israel in 2006, Berkshire transformed itself into a global firm.

Viewed as a conglomerate, Berkshire is now the world’s second largest, trailing only GE.

David Braverman, senior investment strategy officer for Standard & Poor’s Equity Services, has said, “Berkshire Hathaway is the investing success story of the 20th century.” Time (April 26, 2004), called it, “The most successful investment vehicle in history.”

As for the man who runs Berkshire, Buffett was named by Business Week as the most trustworthy CEO in America in 2002. Fortune (August 11, 2003) named Buffett the most powerful CEO in the U.S. (Gates was No. 2.) Among the reasons cited was a Duke University survey that asked MBA graduates whom they most admire. After their fathers, the second most-often-named person was Buffett.

Buffett joked that, “I didn’t realize that being able to bench press 70 pounds would qualify me” (Omaha World–Herald, August 1, 2003).

Back in 1400 B.C., the oracle in Delphi, a center for intellectual inquiry,

dispensed cryptic answers about quandries from declaring war to planting crops. In the modern world Oracle of Omaha offers answers about all things, business and beyond. Indeed, Fortune has called Buffett, “The Oracle of Everything.”

Calling him the “American Everyman,” Atlantic (November 2004) said, “He’s capable of influencing elections, galvanizing rock-concert-size crowds, and in general defining how we Americans feel about the system that underlies our wealth.”

Whether pumping up Arnold Schwarzenegger’s political life in California or inspiring students at Stanford Business School, Warren Buffett has left a large footprint. His herculean accomplishments include forging Berkshire Hathaway into a $200-billion corporation, one of the largest in the world. He has influenced corporate governance and even national public policy. His gift to the Gates Foundation is an enormous boost to the world’s largest charity. His legacy in the business world is unsurpassed. Ahead lies the uniquely American story of that legacy, one of unimaginable success as well as some setbacks. Buffett’s odyssey is distinguished by ethics of the highest order as well as a sense of humor that rivals Mark Twain’s. In his lifetime, he has ascended to the empyrean.

With his long and splendid record Buffett stands majestically alone, not just as the beating heart and bard of Berkshire, but as history’s value messiah.

013012 The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Lyle McIntosh)

Sanctum Sanctorum of the Financial World

Warren Buffett, the maestro of business, is shown here on August 28, 2000, in his Omaha office where he orchestrates a vast empire of investments. This is his “Pleasure Palace,” where he reads, thinks, cracks one-liners, makes block trades, and sometimes decides in five minutes to buy whole businesses. All this occurs largely in this small room and mainly from this big-bang brain. Buffett probably would refer to his brain as gnab gib (reverse of the big bang, which Newsweek said passes for humor among astronomers). From the creation of his business, Buffett, who says investing is simple but not easy, has forged an investment return of more than 50,000-fold.

Of Permanent Value Of Permanent Value



The Bear Speaks

Coach Bear “It’s kind of hard to rally around a math class” Bryant

(AP/Photo)



Coach Nick Saban

Surviving shit storms to national championships, winning the one in 2012 by a score of 21-zereaux.

(AP/Photo)

Of Permanent Value The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Mary Porter)

The 2005 Guide

The Visitor’s Guide for the Berkshire annual meeting in 2005 picked up the theme of the artist and his canvas.



Of Permanent Value Of Permanent Value



The Trail Boss and His Partner

Buffett, left, and Berkshire Vice Chairman Charles Munger conduct Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1999. The actual shareholders meeting itself lasts 5 to10 minutes. The Q&A goes on most of the day, and the lickety-split answers are parsed all year.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value The Story of Warren Buffett



Mark Twain

The rule of Mark Twain, Tom Sawyer’s alter ego, is “two fathoms deep,” the minimum depth for safe river navigation. In investments, steer clear of almost everything, operate only in “safe water.”

(AP/Photo)

Of Permanent Value Of Permanent Value



Buffett Groupies

The Berkshire 2007 Annual Meeting drew 27,000 cult members.

(Photo by Tommy Terrell)

Of Permanent Value The Story of Warren Buffett



Omaha

This photo, taken from the Gene Leahy Mall, shows the Omaha skyline (l-r): the small older building on the left is the earlier First National Bank of Omaha location; the “Twin Towers,” built first for ConAgra and Northern Natural Gas and now occupied by FirstComp, Woodmen of the World, the new First National tower; Union Pacific Railroad Building; and, at far right, Qwest, a building recently bought by the Omaha World-Herald.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Caveman

Referring to a GEICO commercial, Buffett says, “My job is so easy a caveman could

do it.”

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Of Permanent Value



Former Home in Laguna Beach



Omar “Dr. Zhivago” Sharif

(AP/Wide

World

Photos)

Of Permanent Value The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Of Permanent Value





7


WHO’S WARREN BUFFETT?

IT was on August 16, 1991, when news wires crackled with word of a scandal at Salomon, the giant securities firm that went to bed fat and jolly and woke up gasping for breath.

The reports began to flash like lightning in the financial skies:

“S&P puts Salomon ratings on credit watch: Negative.”

“Salomon stock, bonds plunge on spreading scandal news.”

“Salomon says Gutfreund, Strauss prepare to resign.”

At 2:27 p.m., as Salomon’s world was crashing, yet another bolt flashed: “Salomon says Buffett to become interim chairman.”

Perhaps Buffett’s worst moment as a Salomon shareholder came at 6:45 a.m., August 16, 1991, when he was awakened by his ringing phone. Was Buffett enjoying a lazy streak? If so, it would be his last for a long time. The call was from some of Salomon’s top officers telling him they planned to resign.

Throughout Buffett’s career, people have asked, “Who’s Warren Buffett?” A common follow-up question is, “Where’s Omaha?” Omaha, as shareholders are well aware, is in the state of Berkshire.

Over the years, Buffett has become more widely known, but his story was still not out fully in late 1995, as indicated by an inquiry from a reporter: “Is he American?”

At Buffett’s February 8, 1996, induction into the Nebraska Business Hall of Fame, the program featured an irreverent seven-minute video about Buffett, narrated by celebrity interviewer Robin Leach.

Leach: “Excuse me, sir, do you know who Warren Buffett is?”



Unidentified man: “Yeah, he’s that guy who’ll paint any car for $99.95.”



Despite his private ways, Buffett has become vastly famous to an ever-growing cadre of investors. He had managed to remain largely unrecognized by the rest of the world—at least until 1991—because of his down-home lifestyle and avoidance of interviews.

It was the 1991 bond trading scandal at Salomon—a firm in which Buffett was holding a $700-million investment—that first thrust him into the limelight.

In order for Buffett to become interim chairman, authorities required 12 sets of his fingerprints to meet a variety of securities business rules.

“There was also a rule that because I was an officer of a securities firm I had to take the Series 7 exam [for stockbrokers]. I kept delaying it until I left because I wasn’t sure I could pass it,” Buffett said.

The scandal at Salomon, caused by illegal trading activities and the failure to report them, forced the firm to turn to Buffett. It had no other choice. Buffett was the one person the firm, its clients, the U.S. Government, regulators, investigators, and investors all around the world could trust to set Salomon straight. Fortunately, Buffett was already sitting on the Salomon board.

Who is Warren Buffett—this modest, mild-mannered, tough-minded Midwesterner chosen to save Salomon from a mell of a hess?

Brilliant graduates of Harvard, Columbia, and Stanford, in unsolicited remarks, have used the word genius to describe this semieccentric financial wizard.

Buffett’s longtime counterpart, Berkshire vice chairman Charles Munger—no dim lightbulb himself, indeed, a magna cum laude graduate of Harvard Law School—had this to say about Buffett: “There were a thousand people in my Harvard law class. I knew all the top students. There was no one as able as Warren.”

Former Salomon spokesman Robert Baker, who spoke with Buffett often during the Salomon bond scandal crisis, spoke highly of him as well: “He’s everything as advertised and more. Every time I told him something, he was waiting at the end of the sentence for me … and his moral compass is due north.”

Rich. Smart. Honest? The people who know Buffett best, his children, say he’s the most honest person they’ve ever known.

Within hours of being called upon to serve as Salomon’s chairman, Buffett responded by charging up his corporate jet, one of the few expensive, worldly trappings the multibillionaire allows himself.

The airplane he’d dubbed The Indefensible—later redubbed The Indispensable (and now NetJets)—flew from Omaha to Teterboro, New Jersey. From there the billionaire made his way to 7 World Trade Center, Salomon’s then one-million-square-foot headquarters in New York City. This building was among those damaged in the terrorist attack of September 11, 2001.

As the crisis unfolded, Salomon’s stock plummeted with revelations of the firm’s traders buying up more than the legal limit of bonds at Treasury auctions. Salomon’s problems were compounded because top management knew about the bond trading violations for months but had failed to report them. This cover-up turned the deception into a full-blown scandal, one so intense some thought it capable of bringing down mighty Salomon.

This was not the first time that Buffett rescued Salomon. In 1987, corporate raider Revlon chairman Ronald Perelman—backed with financing from junk bond king Michael Milken—was threatening a takeover of Salomon. Buffett quickly stepped in with $700 million cash to halt the Perelman-Milken takeover.

In that case, Buffett’s investment in Salomon was untimely, coming three weeks before the October 19, 1987, stock market crash. The crash itself created deadly air pockets for Salomon and its Wall Street counterparts. Buffett faced no less rocky turbulence in his second effort to save Salomon, this time from a seemingly incomprehensible trading mess that appeared likely to cause the failure of a big engine of Wall Street.

In 1991, as Buffett prepared to take Salomon’s top position amidst client defections and financial panic, he immediately met with the managing directors and told them point-blank that Salomon’s reputation was on the line. Staying just within the bounds of the rules, Buffett warned, would NOT be acceptable. Salomon’s very future depended upon the firm’s reputation: No reputation, no Salomon—indeed, no jobs.

Buffett told Salomon’s managers that the firm faced a huge task in dealing with fines and litigation. He said that he would name a new chief operating officer and that following an emergency board meeting Sunday, August 18, 1991, he would hold a press conference. That in itself was newsworthy because Buffett rarely held press conferences or granted interviews. Impressed with Buffett’s straightforward approach, Salomon executives burst into applause.

During Sunday’s dramatic board meeting, Buffett accepted the resignations of Salomon’s top executives: John Gutfreund, the chairman once described as “King of Wall Street”; Thomas Strauss, president; and John Meriwether, Salomon Brothers’ vice-chairman. (The latter ran Long-Term Capital Management, a hedge fund that turned belly up in 1998.) These were key men who admitted knowing of the violations but failed to report them.

Within hours of the conclusion of that Sunday board meeting, the glass-encased directory on the main floor of the headquarters building was updated. The names of the top managers implicated in the scandal were removed, and one new name was inserted: Warren E. Buffett.

In combating the scandal, Buffett fired two men in the bond trading department and later fired Salomon’s law firm. He named the new chief operating officer and put into place tighter internal controls.

In the midst of chaos, Buffett convinced U.S. Treasury secretary Nicholas Brady to reverse a major portion of a potentially crippling, five-hour-old ban on Salomon’s highly profitable government securities trading. This allowed Salomon to continue bidding at government bond auctions for its own account, even though it was still banned from placing orders for customers. In the process of handling the crisis, Buffett drew Brady’s warm praise.

Buffett, already ensconced in Gutfreund’s 43rd-floor office with a new phone line, next went out to meet the press. He won them over in a split second by saying, “I will attempt to answer questions in the manner of a fellow who has never met a lawyer. We’ll stay as long as you wish.” In the next three hours, he took a tell-all approach, saying, “It looks to me, like in the case of the two people we fired, there were things done you and I would characterize as a cover-up.”

In his inimitable homespun style, Buffett described the Salomon atmosphere as “what some people might call macho and others cavalier.”

He added, “I don’t think the same things would have happened in a monastery.”

When asked if he had read Liar’s Poker, the book about Salomon’s rough-and-tumble corporate culture, Buffett said he had. Well? “I just don’t want there to be a second edition,” he replied.

The next day Buffett went to Washington to meet with regulators and continue his fast-paced mission to save Salomon.

About a week later, he gave the sales force a 15-minute pep talk which was beamed to Salomon offices around the world. He counseled, “I don’t want anyone playing close to the lines … You can do very well hitting down the middle of the court.” Later he expanded on that advice: “If you lose money for the firm by bad decisions, I will be very understanding. If you lose reputation for the firm, I will be ruthless.”

Buffett was forced into fast judgments about how best to keep clients, how to keep employees, and how to reassure Salomon’s creditors and the government. To keep Salomon competitive during this dangerous time, Buffett decided to sell about $40 billion of Salomon’s securities to finance its operations.

The government seemed reassured by Buffett’s leadership at the firm. Investors and clients breathed a sigh of relief, and Salomon’s stock, which had lost about one-third of its value during the ordeal, steadied and then rallied.

For Buffett, who far prefers his quiet existence in Omaha, it was an action-packed time of racing from Omaha to New York and Washington and living out of a suitcase. Asked if such a hectic pace were a problem, Buffett the Wit quipped, “My mother’s sewn my name in the underwear [Fruit of the Loom, most likely], so it’s all okay.”

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Who’s Warren Buffett?



(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

These underwear belong to

Warren E. Buffett.



“It’s all okay.”





8


WHAT BUFFETT WAS READING

Buffett was born on August 30, 1930. It’s guesswork at this point, but probably the first publication the precocious child read was the Omaha World-Herald.

Page one on the day of his birth reported that President Hoover had met with government officials about speeding up a public building construction program.

Also, Miss Ruth Roberts of Omaha, the 22-year-old Aksarben social event princess, revealed her secret two-day-old marriage. When her mother was contacted, she was quoted as saying, “No, it can’t be true.” A subsequent marriage license indicated otherwise.

The lead story reported that a bank robber serving life had escaped from prison with a self-made knife. Other items from the police blotter included a story about a wife-slayer blowing himself up with dynamite and a wealthy man’s son being held as a bank bandit.

A Des Moines man was named president of the Hay Fever Club of America. The Nebraska Fair had opened the previous day in Lincoln with about 20,000 people in attendance.

Perhaps the most interesting story was a three-paragraph wire story at the bottom of page one about a pastor resigning the pulpit to become janitor at another church. The Rev. V. W. Bell was quoted as saying the social obligations demanded of his ministry were simply too costly. He believed he could save more money as a janitor.

On page two, a story ran about a priest who gave a quart of blood to a man whom he had recently converted to Catholicism. This blood contributed to saving the man’s life.

In the sports section, Buffett would have seen that Chicago had defeated St. Louis 9 to 8, in 13 innings.

In the business section, he would have seen prices for a group of 90 stocks on the New York Stock Exchange rose slightly.

Buffett’s actual choices of reading material the day of his birth are lost to history, but possibly Buffett would then have picked up the August 30, 1930 issue of The Saturday Evening Post, which cost 5 cents (10 cents in Canada). The Post was founded in 1728 by Ben Franklin, Charlie Munger’s friend. (Not everyone knows that Munger and Franklin were contemporaries. More about that later.)

Democratic Nominee Alfred E. Smith wrote a lengthy piece about electioneering.

A two-page ad for a Chevrolet Six showed its costs to be $495.

All in all, August 30, 1930, was an ordinary day for Omaha, but would soon prove to be a monumental day for the world of investing.

On Buffett’s birth date, the Dow Jones Industrial Average hit a high for a long time to come, setting up a landscape for a value investor.

The Story of Warren Buffett



The Saturday Evening Post’s issue for

August 30, 1930

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value What Buffett Was Reading



9

ROOTS

Buffett was born on August 30, 1930, just blocks from where he now runs Berkshire. He weighed in at six pounds, and arrived early, apparently impatient to get to work.

William H. Taft, the 27th U.S. President (1909–1913), died that day, and the Federal Reserve Board met and announced no change in interest rates with short-term rates remaining at 2%. The Washington Senators beat the New York Yankees 12–6 at Griffith Stadium. Somewhat ominously, a mild earthquake occurred in Santa Monica Bay, California. No report was made that money fell from trees that day. It was, after all, the midst of the Great Depression.

What is certain is that Baby Buffett arrived with a genetic disposition toward making money.

The healthy child arrived at the old Doctors Hospital in downtown Omaha and was born into a family prominent for generations in the city’s political and commercial endeavors.

John Buffett, a serge weaver of French Huguenot descent, was the first Buffett to arrive in America. He married Hannah Titus in 1696. Buffett’s great-great-great grandfather was Zebulon Buffett, and his great-grandfather was Sidney Homan Buffett, the first in the family to reach Nebraska.

Sidney Buffett, originally of Dix Hills on Long Island, New York, opened a grocery store at 315 South 14th Street in Omaha on August 20, 1869. This was the same year that the transcontinental railroad was completed. Nebraska had become a state two years earlier. In the store’s early days, the delivery wagon was mule-drawn, and the mules were kept in a stable behind the store.

The Omaha World-Herald ran a story August 17, 1998, about the preservation of old documents. A sample item was a claim filed against an estate for $7.50 for groceries, including chicken, eggs (10 cents for a dozen eggs), oranges, lemons, and oil bought from the S. H. Buffett store at 486 14th Street. The store was described as a dealer in “foreign and domestic fruits, groceries, and confectionery.”

Ernest Buffett, Sidney Buffett’s son, began working with his father at the store on February 1, 1894. The store was moved to Omaha’s Dundee section in 1915. Ernest Buffett’s son Fred joined his father in the business at 50th Street and Underwood on June 1, 1929, one year before the birth of his nephew Warren. The store closed in 1969 (the year of Woodstock and America’s moon walk).

Buffett said at Berkshire’s 2001 Annual Meeting, “The infamous Buffett & Son grocery store” could support only one family “by hiring guys like Charlie [Munger] for slave wages.” Munger worked at Buffett & Son in the 1930s.

“I used to work on those delivery trucks,” Munger said, “and it was pretty damned inefficient. People would phone their orders in, and I’m sure we took ’em down with a pencil and an order pad instead of punching them into a computer. But when you start driving around the trucks and hauling the stuff off and everything, we ran into the same costs that [defunct Internet grocer] Webvan is running into now.”

Warren Buffett’s first cousin William Buffett also worked at the store as a youngster and joked that Munger’s comment was a bit like saying “steam engines were inefficient because today’s jets can get places faster.” William Buffett says his family pride calls on him to defend the reputation of the delivery trucks. “I spent many hours on those delivery trucks and am reluctant to see their reputation tarnished in any way.” Further, any of the trucks’ inefficiencies were made up for in personal relationships, which developed between drivers and customers, says William Buffett, recalling that one driver, Eddie Morell, worked for Buffett’s grocery for more than 50 years.

A strict employer, Ernest Buffett held strong political views. “‘He paid $2 for 12 hours of uninterrupted work. Social Security had just been enacted, and he used to require each boy to bring two pennies to the store to pay his contribution to the system,’ said Charlie [Munger]. At the end of the day, Charlie handed Ernest his two pennies and in return received two dollar bills, plus a lecture on the evils of socialism” (Janet Lowe, Damn Right! p. 31).

The Dundee News ran an ad for the Buffett & Son grocery store on June 16, 1950, with photos of Sidney, Ernest, and Fred Buffett under the headline, “81 years of selling foods in Omaha.” All the Buffetts were known as upright citizens.

A sign hanging in the door read, “Good Meat Priced Right is Better than Poor Meat Priced Low.” Maybe this is where Munger (and later Buffett himself) came up with the concept that paying up for a good business has merit.

Fred Buffett was not Ernest Buffett’s only child. Ernest also had an older son named Clarence, who was killed in a 1937 auto wreck in Texas; another son named Howard, Warren Buffett’s father; and a daughter, Alice.

Alice Buffett never married and was a revered teacher for 34 years (1935–1969) in the Omaha public school system, first at Benson High School and then at Central High. She died in 1970. The Alice Buffett Magnet Middle School was named in her honor in 2004.

Warren Buffett honors his Aunt Alice annually by awarding to 15 teachers $10,000 each. The money has no strings attached. As Buffett told NBC news anchor Tom Brokaw during an April 12, 1994, segment about education, “The teacher can blow it all in Las Vegas.”

Warren Buffett’s father, Howard Homan Buffett, was a rock-ribbed Republican U.S. Congressman known as being very sober minded. (The Garth Brooks lyrics, “Longneck bottle, let go of my hand,” probably would not have amused him.)

Howard Buffett, in his younger days, edited the Daily Nebraskan at the University of Nebraska, where in 1924, he met Warren’s mother, Leila, when she came calling for a job to earn college money. Leila had set type in her family’s printshop and was a reporter for her father’s weekly newspaper, the Cuming County Democrat, in West Point, Nebraska. Her IQ was tested at 139, although, her mother and grandmother had suffered from mental illness (Alice Schroeder, The Snowball: Warren Buffett and the Business of Life, p. 41).

Her father, John Stahl, had bought that newspaper in 1905, and his family lived on a top level of the newspaper building. John Stahl was also the school superintendent.

Howard H. Buffett later became a stockbroker who founded Buffett-Falk & Company in 1931. He also sold diamonds to clients who wanted an inflation hedge.

An isolationist opposed to Roosevelt’s New Deal and to the war, Howard Buffett served in Congress from 1942 to 1948 and again from 1950 to 1952. In 1948, when Howard Buffett was defeated for Congress, Thomas Dewey (Republican also) lost to Harry Truman. The elder Buffett was a straight shooter known as a forceful writer and astute observer of politics and commerce. On April 29, 1964, Howard Buffett died of cancer at age 60.

In a May 6, 1948, article in the Commercial and Financial Chronicle, when gold was illegal to own, Howard Buffett urged a return to sound money:

I warn you that politicians of both parties will oppose the restoration of gold, although they may outwardly seem to favor it. Also, those elements here and abroad who are getting rich from the continued American inflation will oppose a return to sound money. You must be prepared to meet their opposition intelligently and vigorously.



But unless you are willing to surrender your children and your country to galloping inflation, war and slavery, then this cause demands your support. For if human liberty is to survive in America, we must win the battle to restore a return to sound money. There is no more important challenge facing us than this issue—the restoration of your freedom to secure gold in exchange for the fruits of your labor.



In a speech to a group of Omaha businessmen in 1948, Congressman Buffett continued his campaign: “In a free country, the monetary unit rests upon a fixed foundation of gold or silver independent of the ruling politicians [and is] redeemable for a certain weight of gold, at the free option and choice of the holder of paper money. Our finances will never be brought to order until Congress is compelled to do so. Making our money redeemable in gold will create this compulsion” (MoneyWorld, June 1998). Congress didn’t listen to Buffett, but his son would one day load up on silver.

Warren Buffett’s sister Doris says of her father, “Mainly he had a fear of creeping socialism. And he worried about inflation. He was ahead of his time about inflation and wrote about it and was advising clients to hedge against it in 1932. He encouraged people to buy art and jewelry.”

Warren Buffett’s father, Howard—widely regarded for his staunch integrity and conservative views—was an early member of the John Birch Society in Nebraska; the controversial organization attracted him with its fierce opposition to communism.

Howard Buffett was interviewed for a story that was published in the Dundee and West Omaha Sun on April 6, 1961. The headline read, “Why I Joined Birch Society.” The story began, “The John Birch Society, which apparently has had just one member in Nebraska for the past 21/2 years, is likely to grow as a result of recent publicity.

“So says the lone acknowledged member, Howard H. Buffett, 2501 N. 53rd, a member of a pioneer family and a former congressman,” the story continued. “‘I’ve had half a dozen people ask me in the past day or so how they could join the society,’ Buffett told the Sun. ‘If my health permits, I plan to seek some new members.’”

Berkshire vice chairman Charles Munger once spoke of a contrast between Warren Buffett and his father, Howard:

There’s a very interesting history if you take Warren Buffett as an example of worldly wisdom. Warren adored his father, who was a wonderful man. But he was a very heavy ideologue (right wing, as it happened), who hung around with other very heavy ideologues (right wing, naturally).



Warren observed this as a kid. And he decided that ideology was dangerous—and that he was going to stay a long way from it. And he has throughout his whole life. That has enormously helped the accuracy of his cognition. (Outstanding Investor Digest, March 13, 1998)



Warren Buffett’s mother, Leila Stahl Buffett, was a lively woman with an easy, humorous manner. His sister, Doris Buffett, of Fredericksburg, Virginia, has said her mother could add numbers faster than an adding machine (A&E Biography Channel, December 2006). Mrs. Leila Buffett walked into the 1992 Berkshire Annual Meeting and announced, “I’m still here.” Twice widowed, she had taken back the Buffett name after the death of her second husband, Roy Ralph, because she had been married to Congressman Buffett for more than three decades. Leila Buffett died August 30, 1996, at age 92, on her son’s 66th birthday.

Buffett’s parents also had a second daughter, Roberta.

The three children, who all skipped grades in school, grew up in a respectable red brick home in the popular country club area of Omaha at the corner of 53rd and Lake Street, after living first at 4224 Barker.

Warren Buffett’s roots and heredity gave him a lifelong love of the newspaper industry in which he evolved from delivery boy to Pulitzer Prize winner to mass media owner.



(Photo courtesy of Historical Society of Douglas County/William Wentworth)

“Pretty Boy” Did Business Here.

This is the old Buffett & Son Grocery at 5015 Underwood in Omaha. Date of the photo is unknown. The store, originally located at 315 South 14th Street, was opened by Sidney Buffett on August 20, 1869. The date is especially important because that’s almost 100 years to the day before the Woodstock festival. Sidney’s son Ernest invested his money (sound familiar?) until he could buy an interest in the store. Buffett gave an interview to Liz Claman, co-anchor of CNBC’s Morning Call, on October 25, 2006. Standing outside, Buffett laughed about how the store sometimes put a turkey, named “Pretty Boy” inside the front window. Claman asked if it were really a live turkey and Buffett assured her it was. Now we know the likely reason Buffett left the store: He was tired of cleaning up turkey droppings.



Roots by Alex Haley

(Photo by Caroline Summers)

The Story of Warren Buffett



“Undignified to Run”

In 1915, Ernest Buffett moved his store to 5001 Underwood. In 1922, Baum and Barnes Druggist (shown here with the politically correct Coca-Cola sign) took over the building; and Buffett & Son moved across the street to 4949 Underwood. In 1929, Ernest’s son Fred Buffett and Fred’s wife Katherine took over the family business and moved it to 50th Street and Underwood. Their nephew Warren swept the floors and delivered groceries part-time in the summer. Warren Buffett has said (Berkshire Visitor’s Guide, 2003) that the work was his first—and last—“real” job involving physical labor. His distaste for it led him to bolt as quickly as possible. Asked why he’d walk away from a 25¢ an hour job, he said, “Because it would be undignified to run.” When Buffett’s was closed by Fred Buffett in 1969 after 100 years of service, it was the oldest independent grocery store in Nebraska. This location once occupied by Buffett’s meat department is now the location of the Dundee Bank.

(Photo courtesy of Historical Society of

Douglas County/William Wentworth)

A DESCENDANT OF

OSCAR DIGGS

Zubelon Buffett aside, Warren Buffett is a descendant of the Diggs family of Nebraska, namely Oscar Zoroaster Phadrig Isaac Norman Henkel Emmannuel Ambroise Diggs, a.k.a The Wizard of Oz in L. Frank Baum’s The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (1900). The Wizard of Oz, who has exceptional powers in the book (1900) and movie (1939), turns out to be a kind, ordinary man from Omaha.

Of Permanent Value Roots

Roots The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Allan Maxwell)

The House Katie Couric’s Grandfather Built for Warren Buffett’s Father

This is the home in Omaha where Buffett grew up—2501 North 53rd Street. He and his family once sang “America the Beautiful” in the living room for one of his father’s congressional campaigns in 1942. At Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1999, Buffett said, “My dad was elected to Congress on the back of that.” Buffett’s father had this home built in 1936. The architect and builder was Bert Hene, grandfather of news anchor Katie Couric. Hene designed many homes in the area in the 1920s and 1930s. Couric’s mother, Elinor, attended Dundee and Harrison Schools and graduated from Benson High School in 1940 before moving away.



Television Anchorwoman

Katie Couric

(AP/Wide World Photos)



(Photo courtesy

of Florence Sklenar St. Clair)

Senior Picture

Katie Couric’s mother, Elinor Hene, was pictured as a senior in the Benson High School 1940 annual.

Of Permanent Value Roots



“The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face” — Roberta Flack

At center in this early 1930s photo is Grandpa Ernest Buffett flanked by his four sons: George, Howard (holding his son Warren, the young investor, listening to a different drummer), Clarence, and Fred.

(Photo courtesy of Berkshire Hathaway)



10

DEAR KATHERINE

The Buffett family was quintessential heartland Nebraska. Howard Buffett’s brother Fred (see photo on the previous page) married Katherine Norris on June 30, 1929. After the death of “Katie” Buffett at the age of 98, her son William wrote a book, Dear Katherine, in honor of her long and good life.

Foreword



My mother was born Katherine Armina Norris on June 13, 1906 at her parents’ farm near Inavale, Webster County, Nebraska.



She died ninety-eight years later on August 17, 2004, in her home of sixty-eight years on Hickory Street in Omaha. Though she lived only two hundred miles from her birthplace, Katherine traveled far from home. As a child, she rode to her one-room school on horseback. Years later, she flew to Europe on the Concorde, which she outlived. She and my father, Fred, vacationed in Grindelwald, Switzerland and Death Valley, California on many different occasions. After Pops and my brother Fred died, Mother and I spoke on the phone almost every day. Through those years it became clear that my mother meant something special to many people. This book, celebrating her life, grows out of this realization. Arranged chronologically, the book includes tributes written about and to her after she died. It also includes photographs and excerpts from her diaries. As her friends and family know, her cards to them through the years often included words of inspiration and kindness. Some are included in this book. Although mother said to me, “I think your father wished I was a more exotic cook,” a few of her recipes are here, too. And, as in her life, there are also a few surprises. One morning during her last weeks, she finally mentioned a word for the first time. She looked up at me and in her now halting voice said, “I think I’m dying.” A little later I returned to her bedside and said, “I hope you don’t mind if I’m very sad.” “Why?” she asked. “Because of your talk about dying.” She looked away, then at me and asked, “How will we stay connected?” I assured her that we would. This book is part of that effort.



Warren Buffett wrote a tribute to his aunt Katie, which is included in the book:

Katie was like a second mother to me. On financial matters, I could put her mind at ease and in the later years we developed a routine. It’s very common for older people to worry about running out of money, no matter what their financial condition. In this respect, Katie would write me sometimes in a manner as follows (from an actual communication on January 27, 1999). “I get concerned with my added health expenses about having enough to take care of myself. Is this a foolish concern? Thank you for all you’ve done for me. Love you, Katie.” My usual response to her was. “Katie, you’re absolutely right. If you keep spending at the present rate and live for another 837 years, you are going to be broke.” She would laugh about this and then rephrase the question another six months or so later. It was a mathematical truism that Katie could never run out of money, but it was an equal truism that she never ran out of love to share with others.





The Heartland

This photo, the first page of the book, shows the scene where Katie grew up.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Dear Katherine



Foods

In 2008, Bill Buffett published Foods You Will Enjoy: The Story of Buffett’s Store.

(Photo by Mary Porter)



Signing Buffett & Son Grocery Store Book

Bill Buffett signs Foods You Will Enjoy: The Story of Buffett’s Store at the annual meeting in 2008.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



11





WOODROW WILSON HIGH SCHOOL


The Buffetts left Omaha after the elder Buffett was elected to Congress. Warren attended Alice Deal Junior High School, graduating in February 1995 at age 14. He went on to Woodrow Wilson High School in Washington, D.C. and graduated from there in June 1947, at 16.

Buffett was slated to graduate from Wilson in February 1948, but he took extra credits and graduated in 21/2 years instead of the usual three. It was considered better at the time to graduate in June because many colleges started classes in September.

Buffett showed signs of his investing and profit-making prowess at age 16 when he and classmate, Don Danly, 17, bought a 1928 Rolls-Royce in Baltimore for $350 and rented it out for $35 a day.

Classmate Norma Jean (Thurston) Perna, Danly’s girlfriend at the time, remembers the car: “I was in the car on that trip back from Baltimore. It came from a lot in Baltimore that looked like a junkyard to me. We were all really scared on the way back to D.C. … We didn’t know if the car would make it home and, of course, there were no tags… We all three painted the car blue. It was originally grey. Don and I did most of the painting, as I recall. Warren’s mother usually provided lunch.” (Maybe this is why Buffett now says, “We don’t do turnarounds.”)

Danly shares his recollections of that Baltimore trip: “The car was found in a junkyard south of Baltimore. (Norma says it looked like a junkyard—that’s because it was a junkyard.) The car had been sold for scrap, having little or no value as transportation. It was called a ‘lady’s shopping car,’ having a single bucket seat in front for the driver (presumably the chauffeur) and a double-wide seat set back behind the driver.

“Warren, Norma, and I drove to Baltimore in my dad’s ’38 Buick Special (our only car). The drive back to Washington was interesting, as the fuel system for the Rolls had a one-gallon gravity tank mounted on the fire wall, and gasoline was supposed to be drawn into this tank from the rear fuel tank via vacuum from the manifold. This didn’t work since the vacuum tank leaked. We had to remove the top from the one-gallon tank and pour in fuel about every six or seven miles. Since we had to drive about forty miles, this turned out to be a rather tedious process. However, with this exception the car did actually run, though not very fast. I drove the Rolls with Warren in the lady’s seat and Norma followed in the Buick.”

Danly continued, “When we got to D.C., we were stopped by the police because we didn’t have a tag; Warren pulled rank and said his father was a congressman and we were let go.

“We put the car in Warren’s garage. I’d work on it. I was the technical fellow and he was the finance guy. Some have said we worked on the car together, but Warren couldn’t put a nut on a bolt or do anything technical. He sat there and read business books to me. He read 100 business books before he left high school and other books as well. One was called How to Lose Friends and Alienate People. Often Buffett entertained friends by reading a page from a book and reciting it back all but verbatim.”

Danly, who went to Cornell, remembers Buffett as being sharp with figures.

“Sometimes he’d have me give him about 20 two-digit numbers to add in his head.” Danly would add the figures with the aid of paper and pencil. “He’d be right,” Danly marveled.

Danly was one of 11 students to tie for first place academically in the 1947 class at Woodrow Wilson. He said Buffett was 16th in the class of about 350. “He did that without even trying. I hit the books hard.”

Buffett’s bio in the 1947 Woodrow Wilson yearbook is a little thin compared with his classmates: “W. Club, Debate Team, Golf Team. A sportsman … basketball and golf: the favorites … likes math … a future stock broker.”

The two youngsters rented out the Rolls a few times. All his life Danly kept a photo of the two entrepreneurs standing by the Rolls. In the photo, Buffett is wearing a coat and tie, the tie stopping about four inches above his belt. “It was rare for Warren to be in a coat and tie,” Danly said. Between them in that photo is Norma Jean Thurston (Perna), bearing a resemblance to another Norma Jean. Norma Jean Thurston was known as “Peroxide,” despite being a natural blonde. Danly was nicknamed “Duck.” So it’s fair to say Buffett’s early business partner was Donald Duck.

In addition to the Rolls rent-a-car business, the two had other enterprises. “We had a peanut vending machine and a pinball machine business.” They called the pinball machine business Wilson Coin-Operated Machine Company. Danly said, “I knew then that he was a winner.”

Buffett’s license plate frame says nothing about Berkshire. For several years, it read: “Wilson Coin-Operated Machine Co.”

A DONALD DANLY ANECDOTE

“A Berkshire stockholder from Laguna Beach, California, Keith Baim, sent Warren the ‘Wilson Coin-Operated Machine Co.’ frame in January 1998. Warren mailed me [Danly] a Xerox of it and a copy of the letter he had received from Keith. I then wrote to Keith and explained that I was Warren’s partner in this 1947 enterprise and greatly admired the frame he had sent to Warren. I then went on to express a concern as to whether the paper frame I received from Warren would hold up in our humid Florida climate. I asked him if he might be able to acquire a more durable version (at my expense).

“Keith wrote back to me, thanking me for my letter and went on to say, ‘I share your concern about the paper frame holding up in the humid Florida climate. Perhaps relocating to a somewhat colder part of the country, say North Dakota, would solve such a problem. Though I’d suggest talking it over with Vera before any final decision.’”

Later, Danly continued his ancedote:

“He [Keith] closed this first letter to me with a P.S., ‘Are there any other former partners, employees, suppliers, subcontractors, or shareholders of Wilson I should expect to hear from?’

“After a couple of letters back and forth it was agreed that he would bring another license plate frame to the annual Berkshire meeting in May in exchange for some personal tales of Warren’s high school days. I met with Keith and his father at the Embassy Suites during the weekend prior to the meeting, receiving and immediately mounting my frame.”

Once when Buffett was at the University of Pennsylvania and Danly was at Cornell, Buffett called Danly to see if he would come to Philadelphia and ride on a Harley Davidson with him to D.C. The wind-swept youngsters arrived after a five-hour trip huddled together in the same seat.

There was another time when Danly towed Buffett, who was behind him on a motorcycle. At a curve, the motorcycle and Buffett took a bad spill. “I almost killed him,” Danly said.

The two stayed in touch over the years and attended their 50-year reunion together at Woodrow Wilson High in 1997. Mrs. Perna said that at the reunion, a number of classmates said in reference to Buffett, “I wish I had known him better back then.”

Danly was glad he didn’t share those regrets. Having partnered with Buffett early on, he knew him well enough to jest: “In 1993, on his way to a Coke board meeting, Warren stopped in for dinner. I reminded him that we had agreed (in our early business ventures) we’d split everything 50/50.”

Danly aslo knew Buffett well enough to trust him with his personal funds.

After Danly’s parents died early, he inherited about $6,000, which he turned over to Buffett to invest. Starting in 1951, Buffett sent Danly a series of letters telling him how the money was being invested. Danly saved Buffett’s letters because he thought Buffett was special “But,” he said, “I didn’t know it was going to come to this.”

Yes, Buffett’s old pinball machine partner struggled along very well with a $25,000 investment he made in the Buffett Partnership in 1961. He later took Berkshire stock and never sold a share.

Danly wrote the following on the “Berkshire message board” on America Online September 13, 1997: “I must confess that I’m one of those who is guilty of checking the BRK price several times each day. I can’t sign on to AOL without clicking that crooked arrow that suggests the price is going up. In a way I long for the ‘old days’ of Buffett Partnership Limited, when I received a statement once a year giving the value of my holding (it was always up). I’ve had my BRK stock over 30 years and never sold any, so today’s price has little significance (no plans to sell). Having said that, I’m sure I’ll continue to check the price at least daily.”

Buffett made that 1993 visit to the Danlys in Pensacola (“a quaint little fishing village with a drinking problem”), at their home overlooking Mackey Cove. They took him to dinner and came back home, all the while talking about the old days and business. “Then he excused himself and went to the bedroom and made telephone calls for two or three hours,” Danly said. “He was on the phone long after we went to bed. He works very hard.”

The next day, Buffett and the Danlys boarded Berkshire’s plane and flew to Atlanta, where Buffett arranged a tour of the Coca-Cola Museum for them while he went off to a Coca-Cola board meeting.

Danly said the two had maintained an interest in antique cars, and that in the 1980s, Buffett made an offer for Harrah’s antique car museum in Reno, Nevada, but a price was not agreed upon.

Buffett told Danly that he had seen Norma Jean Perna in 1993. When asked if she still looked good, Buffett replied: “She looked like her daughter, actually her granddaughter.”

Mrs. Perna, of Potomac, Maryland, said Buffett’s humor was always there. “He hasn’t changed at all since I knew him.” Sharing a few memories, she said, “I was never in the businesses they started, but I was interested in them.” She continued: “We were like the three musketeers. I’d go with them to pick up the money from the pinball machines. Warren was always picking up the money, and Don was always repairing the machines.

“I remember when Warren got going on golf balls. He got them from a golf course. He’d clean them and sell them.

“He told me he’d be a millionaire by the time he was 30 and I believed him.”

On February 7, 1997, Danly posted the following on the Internet:

As a BRK-watcher for 27 years (when I discovered I owned the stock upon the liquidation of Buffett Partnership Ltd.), I am delighted to have found this bulletin board. I have tried to find something on BRK in a number of chatrooms to no avail.



My bit of memorabilia is that this is the 50th anniversary of Wilson Coin-Operated Machine Co., which Warren and I formed during our high school days in Washington. Would you believe that Warren typed up a monthly income/loss statement for this enterprise? Warren provided the capital, and I was director of technology (fixed the machines). The company was sold later that year when Warren went off to U. of Penn and I to Cornell.



I find the bulletin board comments on LTEPS [look-through earnings per share] fascinating, as they tend to give me a warm feeling. Looking forward to more.



Danly’s former wife, Charlotte Colby Danly of Connecticut, recalled getting to know Buffett when he was the best man at her wedding.

“I was 19 and Warren and Susie were recently married.” she recalled.

Over the years, the Danlys occasionally visited the Buffetts in Omaha. “I remember Susie and Peter [Buffett’s second son] jamming on a piano, long after midnight,” Mrs. Danly said.

Years later, they attended Buffett’s 50th birthday party at the Metropolitan Club in New York. Mrs. Danly described the event: “There were [business] leaders from all over there. Gary Cooper’s daughter, Maria, an artist, was there who is married to Byron Janis, the famous classical pianist…. Buffett’s friend, Fred Stanback of Salisbury, North Carolina, a longtime Berkshire investor [and Buffett’s classmate at Columbia, best man at Buffett’s wedding, and a backer of environmental causes], was there. Susie had written a song for Warren on his birthday and sang it with her piano accompanist from San Francisco. His birthday cake was in the shape of a Pepsi, which he drank at the time. It was one of the most memorable of nights.”

Danly retired after many years as Director of Technology for Monsanto. He and his second wife, Vera, lived in Pensacola, Florida, until his death in 2002.

Danly’s first wife has written Buffett on occasion for advice about house sales. She recalled, “He’s always written back in three days. I try not to write much. He has a prodigious memory, and he’s very loyal to old friends.”

Mrs. Danly has Berkshire stock, which she and her former husband got as a result of investing in the Buffett Partnership. She said she has sold shares on some occasions but only rarely. The cost basis of some of the stock is $19. On the day she gave the interview, Berkshire closed at $43,000. “It’s like a money tree,” she said.



Pinball Economics

Early photo of Woodrow Wilson High School in Washington, D.C., where Buffett showed up for class, but his mind was really pinball economics. The school, oddly enough, is located along Nebraska Avenue.

(Photo courtesy of Frances Kilpatrick)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Maybe this is where Buffett latched onto his jaundiced view of the car industry. He has called General Motors “a terrible life/health benefits company with an auto business attached.” His broader view is that investors shouldn’t confuse social progress with a chance to make money. Autos and airlines are examples of real social progress with little payoff to investors.



(Photo courtesy of Norma Perna)

The Bill Gates Look-Alike Contest

The 1945 Alice Deal Junior High School class album shows blonde Norma Jean Thurston (Perna), lower left, about 40 billion style points ahead of her classmate, 14-year-old, bespectacled Warren Buffett. Her future husband Bill Perna, and his first cousin, Lou Battistone.

Of Permanent Value Woodrow Wilson High School



World’s Smartest 17-Year-Old

This photo of the Woodrow Wilson High School class of June 1947 shows Buffett in glasses and a crew cut. Beside Buffett stands Don Danly, wearing a white coat. These two teenaged entrepreneurs are the brains behind the Wilson Coin-Operated Machine Company.

Gentlemen Prefer Blondes

Classmates Lou Battistone, Norma Perna, and Buffett reminisce at their Woodrow Wilson High School 50-year reunion October 17, 1997.



(Photos courtesy

of Norma Perna)



Post-Pinball Period

Don Danly, Mrs. Susan Buffett, and Warren Buffett pose for the camera at the Woodrow Wilson High School reunion October 17, 1997—Buffett’s post-pinball period at about $30 billion later.

Wives of the Wilson Coin-Operated Machine Co. Entrepreneurs

Mrs. Vera Danly and Mrs. Susan Buffett relax at the Wilson reunion.



(Photos courtesy of Don Danly)

Woodrow Wilson High School The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Jim Maves)

The Thrifty Nickel

“Wilson Coin-Operated Machine Co.” is displayed on the frame for THRIFTY license plate on Buffett’s car which in 2006 became a GM Cadillac in honor of GM chairman’s Rick Wagoner’s effort to turn around the company. Buffett dispatched his daughter Susan to find the car. She picked a DTS Sedan for $41,990. Buffett paid cash (Fortune, May 29, 2006).

Of Permanent Value Woodrow Wilson High School

Buffett’s friend, Fred Stanback is the son of Fred Stanback Sr., and the nephew of Tom Stanback, the founder of the Stanback Headache Powder company where Fred once worked. The slogan for their company was “Snapback with Stanback.” Fred Stanback, the best man at Buffett’s wedding, invested $125,000 in 1962 in the Buffett Partnership (Forbes, October 12, 1998).



Siberian Oil Barons of 1947?

Actually, Two Teenaged Secondhand Car Dealer Dandies

Don Danly, left, and Buffett stand in front of their Rolls-Royce outside Buffett’s house on 49th Street in Washington, D.C., in the fall of 1947. The teenagers are dressed to kill! Buffett dressed in a raccoon fur coat just for the fun of it. Sometimes he wore it to the high school football games. Danly said, “My camel hair coat was my regular winter attire except when I rode my bike to school.”

(Photo courtesy of Don Danly)



12





WHAT BUFFETT WAS THINKING


A

t the age of 20, Buffett wrote Barron’s a letter that was published in the “The Market Laboratory” column of the business weekly.

The magazine had invited readers to comment on how they used “The Market Laboratory.” Of the 15 letters sent, several, including Buffett’s, were printed in the December 25, 1950 issue.

The writer of the column, Arnold Corrigan, noted that a full explanation of odd-lot trading had come in from “Mr. Warren Buffett of Omaha”:

Among the more interesting statistics that you publish are the figures for member trading and odd-lot trading. These two groups characteristically show a tendency to be on the opposite sides of the fence; that is, when the members are buying on balance the odd-lot traders have a selling balance, and vice versa.

The odd-lot figures must be modified to reflect a tendency for a long-term buying balance due to small investors putting away a few shares of investment stocks from time to time. Therefore the trend of relationship between odd-lot buying and selling is more important than the actual balance. When the odd-lot trader has become increasingly bullish in a rising market or increasingly bearish in a declining market. It has generally been advantageous to expect his change of sentiment to be wrong.

A recent example was the increased bearishness of the public from January to June, 1949, as the market irregularly declined to the 160 level, from which point it then climbed steadily.

From a logical point of view the theory seems to be valid, since an unsuccessful trader in stocks eventually finds his capital reduced to the point where he is forced to trade either in “penny” issues or in odd lots. On the other hand, a small successful trader will soon accrue enough profits to graduate to the round-lot class.

The other side of the picture is represented by the member trading statistics. These reflect the trading of men whose business centers about the fluctuations of stocks. It should be expected that this group as a whole will trade profitably, although some of its members naturally may fail to do so.

The rise in the market that began in June of 1949 could have been foretold by a study of the members’ trading activities. The members’ trading balance had been slightly on the selling side through the early part of 1949, but during the late spring and summer their purchases began exceeding their sales by large margins, often as much as 500,000 shares a week. Although some of this undoubtedly reflected purchase of Commonwealth & Southern for its breakup potentialities, it is still apparent that there was a decided change in market sentiment on the part of the exchange members, a change just opposite to that of the odd-lot public. The members proved to be correct in their judgment while the odd-lot trader was, as usual, switching to the wrong side.

No attempt should be made to read too much into these sets of data: minor fluctuations will constantly occur that are incapable of analysis. However, when divergent trends of the two groups have appeared, it has proven profitable to trade on the side of the member and against the odd-lotter.

Here’s what Buffett was thinking on December 24, 1962, according to his letter to Barron’s:

To the Editor:

I have just finished reading your articles regarding publicly owned real estate companies, which were most interesting and perceptive. This is a story that needed to be told.

An item fully as important as the lack of quantitative coverage of dividends may well turn out to be the dubious quality of the income of many of these companies. Whereas it is somewhat difficult in many cases to determine this quality, there are certain known instances which literally shout for disclosure, and I think there is reason to believe that continued probing would develop still more instances.

To give you an example of the sort of thing I have in mind, let me cite two instances, to which you referred, from the Kratter Corp. prospectus of 1961, prepared in connection with the debenture issue which never materialized:

1. On page 50 of the “red herring” prospectus, reference is made to 140,000 containers under lease to F. & M. Schafer Brewing Co. These containers were purchased by a joint venture in August 1958, for $2,800,000 and immediately net leased back to the brewery for five years at $710,000 annually. What this really amounted to, of course, was a financing transaction for the brewing company. However, the impression the public stockholder gets is that this $710,000, comingled with other operating income from real estate, has the same quality and expected longevity that might be expected from a first-class office building. Therefore, if the casual stockholder takes the $710,000 and capitalizes it at 9%, he immediately attributes a value of almost $8 million to something which initially only had a value of $2,800,000 and whose value is declining at an extreme rate. Various brokerage offices have issued reports involving just this sort of valuation. This would appear to be trading upon the lower level of intelligence in Wall Street.

2. On the same page in the “red herring,” reference is made to various machines acquired from Dashew Business Machines and under lease either to Standard Oil of California or Dashew, itself. There are two arrangements here, but suffice to say that the eight machines leased to Dashew were purchased for $660,000 in August 1960 and leased back for five years for $153,000 per annum with the subsequent five years available to Dashew at $9,900 per annum. Anyone assuming that the $153,000, which is contributing just that much to the current operating income of Kratter, has the aspect of long-term prime real estate income is due for a real shock when the renewal period comes up.

This sort of transaction is very similar to buying a royalty on a short-lived oil well. If the gross receipts are spent each year, one soon finds out that the capital is not self-replacing.

To ignore the concept of amortization or depreciation on such transactions is dubious, if not fraudulent.

I think you have done a real public service in taking a good, hard look at the “advanced accounting techniques” of this new industry. It has many of the aspects of a chain letter scheme or a “Ponzi” operation, and the sooner articles such as yours are given wide circulation, the less likelihood of serious harm to the public.

WARREN E. BUFFETT

Genl. Ptr.

Buffett Partnership Ltd.

Omaha, Nebr.

(Articles located by Jose Mitamura)

Barron’s had no idea at the time that it was being handed down words from the Oracle of Omaha.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value What Buffett Was Thinking



13





“FIREBALL” WITH A MONEY CHANGER


“But I reckon I got to light out for the Territory ahead of the rest….”

—Beginning of the last sentence of Mark Twain’s Huckleberry Finn

“I was conceived during the stock market crash” in the fall of 1929, Buffett said.

“I’m quite fond of 1929, since that’s when it all began for me. My dad was a stock salesman at the time, and after the Crash came in the fall, he was afraid to call anyone—all those people who’d been burned. So he just stayed home in the afternoons. And there wasn’t television then. Soooo, I was conceived on or about November 30, 1929 (arriving nine months later, on August 30, 1930), and I’ve forever had a kind of warm feeling about the Crash” (Fortune, November 22, 1999).

Buffett’s parents moved to a house at 4224 Barker Avenue shortly after their marriage in 1925. Buffett lived in that house for six years before his parents moved to a larger home.

Had his father enough business to be out making his regular calls at the time, Buffett says there’s “no telling what might have happened” (WOWT-TV in Omaha, October 14, 1993).

A defining, crushing moment for the Buffett family occurred on August 13, 1931, just shy of Warren’s first birthday, when the bank where his father worked closed. Howard Buffett lost his job and his savings—yet another victim of the Great Depression. Howard Buffett soon found another job and his fortunes quickly recovered, but it was still a searing experience for the family.

Those times of economic upheaval apparently affected young Warren. One of his first and favorite toys was a metal money changer he strapped around his waist. “He loved it,” recalls his older sister, Doris, who describes young Warren as a “typical younger brother.”

Like a Good Humor ice cream man, Buffett went around making change. He was fascinated by the process and loved keeping track of the money. Making math calculations, particularly when it concerned compounding money at a blistering pace, was a pastime that absorbed him from his earliest days.

“As a child, he was so cautious he walked with his knees bent so he wouldn’t have too far to fall, but as an adult he was capable of grand gestures … It was a broad stroke,” Doris Buffett said decades after Buffett purchased $1 billion of Coke stock.

It was surprising then that one of young Buffett’s first real business ventures was in soft drinks. He now owns billions of dollars worth of Coca-Cola stock. His mother recalled that her son’s first appreciation of free enterprise occurred when Buffett was six years old. The escapade involved peddling—what else—Coca-Colas.

“We were at Lake Okoboji in Iowa. Warren paid twenty-five cents for a six-pack of Coke and sold it for five cents a bottle. Warren always had a fascination for numbers in connection with earning money,” Doris Buffett recalled. Those 20% returns have remained pretty consistent throughout Buffett’s entire business career—hence his multi-billionaire status.

Buffett also bought Coca-Cola from his grandfather’s grocery store in Omaha and sold it to neighbors.

In Buffett’s 1989 letter to the shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway, Buffett wrote of his early Coca-Cola experience: “I believe I had my first Coca-Cola in either 1935 or 1936. Of a certainty, it was in 1936 that I started buying Cokes at the rate of six for 25 cents from Buffett & Son, the family grocery store, to sell around the neighborhood for 5 cents each. In this excursion into high-margin retailing, I duly observed the extraordinary consumer attractiveness and commercial possibilities of the product.”

At age 7, Buffett reportedly asked Santa Claus for a book about bonds.

When Buffett was 8 years old, he began reading his father’s books on the stock market that he found around the house. He said he became interested in stocks when he was 6 or 7. “And I’ve always been upset that I didn’t start earlier” (Omaha World-Herald, February 22, 2000).

At age 10, Buffett’s choice of soft drink for selling was Pepsi. He later explained to Berkshire shareholder Paul Cassidy of North Andover, Massachusetts, “I originally started on the Pepsi because at the time (1940) Pepsi came in 12-ounce bottles and Coke came in 6-ounce bottles, and the price was the same. That was a pretty powerful argument.”

By the time he was 10, he had checked out every investment book from his local library (Seattle Post-Intelligencer, July 21, 2001). He was also posting quotes and filing stock and bond certificates at his father’s brokerage office.

He lived and breathed numbers, family members have said. Buffett’s recall for numbers, an important aptitude for any businessman, may have come from both parents—his father was a stockbroker and his mother calculated numbers well.

“While most youngsters were content to get sodas out of machines and never give things a further thought, Buffett was retrieving the discarded bottle caps from soda pop machines, sorting, and counting them to find out which soda brand was really selling,” says early investor Irving Fenster from Tulsa, Oklahoma, a Berkshire shareholder.

Buffett’s instinct as an auditor—the ability to get at the real numbers, not the supposed numbers passed along by others—remains one of his trademarks.

He has never relied on traditional wisdom. After all, he says, “Traditional wisdom can be long on tradition and short on wisdom.”

AHEAD OF THE REST

The precocious youngster memorized all sorts of numbers: from the number of bottle caps to statistics on baseball cards to license plates to the number of cars that passed his house. He could spout off the populations of U.S. cities. At Rosehill Elementary School, a kindergarten through eighth grade school in Omaha where Buffett skipped a grade, young Buffett was known more as an “egghead” than as an athlete. He liked to open the Omaha World-Herald and count how often each letter of the alphabet appeared (Rocky Mountain News, May 11, 2002).

“What I had forgotten, but he remembered, is that he was out for three weeks with appendicitis,” recalled Marie Madsen, his second-grade teacher. “He was very ill and the other students wrote him.

“He was never a problem or I would have remembered that. He was a good boy. He was a good student and kept his nose to the grindstone. I don’t remember how good he was in math, but I’m sure he was good. I know he was good in English because he corrected me once. It had to do with a contraction of a word, and he was right.

“I remember him standing up in the back of the room looking around. If he was funny, I don’t remember it. He may have been with his classmates.”

She said her overall impression of him during his years at Rosehill was as a young fellow “who wanted to go off and do something himself.”

Buffett has said, “Next to my parents and wife, the teachers at Rosehill Elementary School had as much to do with my success as anybody … I think my seven years at Rosehill were more important than my university years. I could name every teacher I had at Rosehill.”

While Buffett was still a Rosehill student, he started his literary career by publishing (indeed, self-publishing!) a racetrack tip sheet, called Stable-boy Selections, about handicapping and betting on horses. He printed the sheets in his parents’ basement and sold them for a quarter. He and a friend used math to develop a system for picking the winners of horse races. The business, however, was soon shut down by racing authorities for lacking a license.

The stock market continued to enrapture him as he charted the rise and fall of stock prices. “I was fascinated with anything to do with numbers and money,” he said (Linda Grant, Los Angeles Times, April 7, 1991). Buffett later called charting and most things away from fundamental analysis of a company just “chicken tracks.”

He has said timing and charting were “profitless but a lot of fun.” He’s joked that he has even turned charts “upside down” (Vintage Buffett: Warren Buffett Shares His Wealth video, October 14, 2003).

Taken from a “Li’l Abner” character of the time, he picked up the nickname “Bathless Buffett” while at Rosehill. Thankfully, it didn’t stick long. Buffett had a private, independent streak. Yet, he always got along well with peers.

This independent streak prevailed when Buffett’s father encouraged Warren and his sister Doris to spend part of a summer at the Elmer Benne farm near West Point, Nebraska. The idea, recalls Doris, was to instill farm values in the children. Buffett knows the lessons of hard work and independence, but apparently he didn’t learn them by being a field hand from dawn to drop. Hot and heavy labor never interested him.

“I never saw him behind a plow. He was reading a lot of the time,” his sister said, adding that they only stayed at the farm about three weeks. “We were not cut out for farm life” (Fredericksburg.com, July 4, 2004).

Those who knew Buffett were aware of his abilities, but those who knew him only casually may not have taken note because of his lack of outward success. Perhaps he reminded people of Joseph Heller’s saying: “He was a self-made man who owed his lack of success to nobody.”

Kathryn Haskell Smith recalls a story her deceased sister Carolyn Haskell Hallquist told her: “He wanted to be around the guys and he would play basketball with them; and then while the others were still playing, he’d be over reading The Wall Street Journal. The others would just say, ‘That’s Warren.’ He’d play a little basketball with the guys, then go off and read the Journal and come back and play with them again.”

Buffett often dropped over to see Carolyn Haskell when the Buffett and Haskell families lived a few blocks from one another in the country club section of Omaha. The area had a golf course until about 1926 when the Omaha Country Club moved to a new site in northwest Omaha.

Some evenings the young pair struck up a duet with Buffett on the ukulele and Carolyn on the piano.

One hot summer evening, as young Buffett was strumming along, Kathryn Smith recalls him saying, “All we need now is some mint juleps.”

Mrs. Smith knew the Buffett family as a result of a friendship that her father, John Haskell, and Buffett’s father formed back in their days at the University of Nebraska. Howard Buffett was Haskell’s stockbroker for years.

“He [Warren Buffett] would come over to our house sometimes and talk finances with my father.… My father agreed with Warren’s father that you should buy good stocks and keep them for a very long time,” she said.

“He was always so quick and witty.… He was a great guy, lots of fun, but it was obvious he was way ahead of us in brains,” she said.

Buffett, young Kathryn, and several other students all walked to elementary school together. Many of these friends went on to Benson High School; Buffett, however, didn’t graduate with the 1948 class because he had moved to Washington D.C. The students were known as Benson High School Bunnies. Even the school sign says, “Benson High School. Home of the Bunnies.” Of this Mrs. Smith said, “At the time we didn’t think it was funny, but it has been the brunt of many jokes since.” Kathryn went on to marry Homer Smith, a football coach who formerly oversaw the offenses of University of Alabama, UCLA, and University of Arizona. Early on he was the football coach at West Point. He authored the fast-paced novel, A Game to Play.

Coach Smith had degrees from Princeton—where he was a single-wing fullback—Stanford and Harvard. He recalled Buffett in his early 20s standing in a yard, talking about stocks, and buying businesses, and telling slightly risque jokes. “It was in the yard of Kathy Haskell, my wife now. Warren was there to see Carolyn, Kathy’s older sister,” said Smith. “Warren was obviously brilliant. Also, he was a great guy. [But] I thought he was young to be trying to teach a class at Omaha University. He was unforgettable [even] early on.”

Coach Smith and his wife remember Buffett as always being funny. Buffett could keep classmates in stitches with his joke-telling. The Smiths think he got that quality from his mother and described his father as absolutely serious and high-minded.

Smith, who played on the same Benson High School basketball team as former Vulcan Materials Company chairman Herb Sklenar, had retired from coaching. He and his wife live in Tuscaloosa, Alabama, where they worked on football coaching manuals: he wrote, she typed.

Although Buffett didn’t go to Benson High School with his friends from Rosehill, he still attends the 1947 and 1948 high school class reunions because he has so many friends in those classes.

“I was aware he wanted to make money. He was very industrious and was always trying to get money to buy stocks, but no one ever dreamed it would come to this,” Mrs. Smith said.

Among the students in the Benson classes were Walter Scott, who became head of Kiewit & Sons, and Dave Pederson, who attended Creighton University on a basketball and baseball scholarship. Pederson once guarded Bevo Francis, the world record-holder for the most points scored in a game: 113. He held Francis to 12 points. He has long run a pharmacy in Harlan, Iowa, and was named the Chamber of Commerce Citizen of the Year.

“FIREBALL”

Buffett adored his father, who gave him the name “Fireball” because of his energy and precociousness.

“Yes, he called him Fireball, and Warren called him Pop. They were the best of friends. When he died, Warren cried for days,” Mrs. Leila Buffett recalled. Buffett was 33 years old when his father died.

Buffett remained close to his mother, and at the height of the Salomon crisis, flew home from New York just in time to be with her when she was honored as Woman of the Year by the Nebraska Chapter of the Arthritis Foundation. Quipped Buffett, “She’s been woman of the year for the last 87 years.” He was 66 when she died.

CITIES SERVICE PREFERRED

In April 1942—when Buffett was 11—he began slowly buying stocks. The first purchase was three shares of Cities Service Preferred, which he bought for $38 a share. That was his net worth at the time.

Young Buffett talked his sister Doris into investing with him. He recalled that on walks to Rosehill with his sister, she would remind him that he was “not setting any records.” So he sold at $40 a share, making $5 after commissions. A few years later, the stock went to $200 a share.

Buffett had already been following the stock market, and computing averages, when he started to realize his views about the markets were more astute than those of others.

He once told Forbes (November 1, 1969) of his moment of enlightenment: “I’d been interested in the stock market from the time I was 11, when I marked the board here at Harris Upham where my father was a broker. I ran the gamut, stock tips, the Magee charting stuff, everything. Then I picked up Graham’s Security Analysis. Reading it was like seeing the light.” (Harris Upham was in the same building as his father’s firm, Buffett-Falk & Co.)

Buffett, ever the student with squirrel-like attention to numbers, took in the early investment lessons well; that is, he wasn’t guided by what people said and didn’t let fellow investors in on what he was doing.

For about four months, during the time his father ran against Roosevelt’s New Deal and was elected to Congress, 12-year-old Buffett lived with his grandfather Ernest Buffett.

In 1942, Buffett’s father was elected to the first of four terms as a congressman on the Republican ticket, and Buffett’s days in Omaha were interrupted.

In January 1943, his family moved to Virginia on the Rappahannock River just across from Fredericksburg. Although his two sisters adapted well to the move, Buffett felt uprooted and unhappy. For a brief time, young Buffett worked for a local baker. “I didn’t like the change at all, so I made a real pain of myself over this move.” Referring to his days in Fredericksburg, Buffett told L. J. Davis (New York Times Magazine, April 1990): “I was miserably homesick. I told my parents I couldn’t breathe. I told them not to worry about it, to get themselves a good night’s sleep, and I’d just stand up all night. My grandfather was quite keen on me, and he was back in Omaha. I’d write him and tell him how terrible things were. He finally said, ‘You’d better send the boy back here’” (Regardie’s, February 1986).

So in February, Buffett moved back to Omaha to live with his grandfather and his unmarried aunt, Alice Buffett, who taught high school in Omaha for 35 years. He also returned to Rosehill.

President of the Omaha Rotary Club in 1934 and a grocer by trade, Ernest Buffett also authored the book How to Run a Grocery Store and a Few Things I Have Learned about Fishing. Each night he dictated a few pages to his grandson. Buffett has joked that he was overexposed at an impressionable age to his grandfather’s long-winded literary style.

Buffett described that time this way: “I slept in the back bedroom of the house where there were mounds of copies of Reader’s Digest and Progressive Grocer. I think I read every one of them. When I was in my mid-twenties I became an investor in Butterick Corp., a company that somewhat incongruously was in the dual business of publishing the Progressive Grocer and selling patterns to women for sewing. Leonard Tingle was the CEO of Butterick and I told him my youth had been influenced by reading his magazine, rather than Popular Mechanics.”

In June 1943, Buffett rejoined his family in Fredericksburg but returned to Omaha for much of the summer, staying at a Presbyterian manse while its minister was away. In July 1943, the Buffett family, including Warren, moved to Washington, D.C., to 4211 49th Street N.W., near Massachusetts Avenue, in Spring Valley. A few years later Congressman Richard Nixon moved into the area.

Congressman Buffett was such a straight arrow and fiscal conservative that he once returned a $2,500 annual pay raise (from $10,000 to $12,500) to the United States Treasury.

Buffett, a crew cut lad in those days, went back and forth from Omaha to Washington so much that one retired executive in Omaha recalls that back then Buffett “was like a phantom.”

When he was 13, Buffett ran away briefly from his Washington D.C. home to Hershey, Pennsylvania. “He ran away with a friend, Roger Bell. I think they were picked up by the police,” his sister Doris Buffett recalled.

Buffett’s escapade had to be a little business related, of course. Buffett told Atlanta Constitution business writer Melissa Turner, that he, Bell, and another friend had the idea of earning a little money caddying at a local golf course. He also had the idea of touring the Hershey’s chocolate plant and getting a free candy bar. But he didn’t tour the plant and apparently didn’t consider buying the company. It wasn’t long before the police sent him home.

When Turner asked him if he might sample Hershey stock some day. He replied, “I’ve driven a car all my life, but I haven’t bought any car companies.”

Still, Buffett often mentions the attributes of Hershey when he gets going about the concept of consumer “franchises.” He explains that consumer franchises or “name brands” such as Coca-Cola, Gillette, and Wrigley have extra value. A valuable consumer franchise exists, he says, when people prefer a certain brand name so much that they would pay extra—even walk out of the store they’re in, and go across the street—just to buy the “better” brand. Even if another chocolate bar is five cents cheaper, one is still likely to choose the Hershey name.

In Washington, Buffett attended Alice Deal Junior High School, where his grades were poor. They improved only when his father threatened to take away his cherished paper routes. (While still 14, Buffett began paying taxes on an income of $1,000 he earned from newspaper routes.)

Still rebellious and looking for his place in the world, Buffett once again pounced on his main passion—business. He undertook a series of financial ventures, including retrieving lost golf balls at a country club in Washington, but his main pursuit was being an industrious newspaper boy. Buffett at one point delivered 500 newspapers on five paper routes, mainly to apartment complexes, according to Robert Dorr of the Omaha World-Herald.

Combining two Washington Post routes in the Spring Valley area with two rival Times-Herald routes, the young carrier later added the Westchester apartments.

Buffett was once asked about his early determination to be rich. “I wanted enough money so I could do what I wanted,” Buffett said. “When I was a kid I enjoyed delivering papers and while doing that, I liked being able to think about things” (The Mirror, May 13, 2003).

“Thinking he could better use the time to collect from his customers, he developed an effective scheme for selling magazine subscriptions. He would tear the stickers with the expiration date from discarded magazines, file them, and at the right time ask the customer for a renewal,” Dorr wrote in a May 29, 1966, story.

(Eugene Meyer would later merge the Post and Times-Herald into a large, successful newspaper. Buffett would one day make an investment in the Post, an enormously successful move that vaulted him to the top ranks of investors.)

Buffett was always fascinated by the stock market, recalls Doris Buffett. “I never had any doubt. I never knew it would amount to this, but even back then everyone recognized he knew about the stock market.” Even at 11 or 12, Buffett knew all the stocks but says he didn’t know what was behind them.

Buffett was constantly running calculations in his head. In church he calculated the life span of the composers of hymns, checking to see if their religious calling rewarded them with extra longevity. His conclusion: no.

Although young Warren was a math prodigy, his fascination with finance came as a surprise to Buffett’s religious and frugal father, who had little interest in amassing money for its own sake. He found his son, whom he hoped would one day join the clergy, spellbound by the power of the almighty dollar. But Buffett could not ultimately make the leap to religious faith. Rationality, facts, numbers, and money were what mattered to him.

Perhaps that was the reason Buffett settled on being an agnostic. Buffett said, “I am an agnostic. That’s the person who says ‘I’m not an atheist, thank God’” (Financial Times, May 17, 1999).

Buffett has said he decided on agnosticism because he doubts the human mind can know whether there is a God, but says about his religious father, “As a practical matter I think my dad and I came out at about the same place in terms of what we believed behavior should be and how society should operate.” He has also said, “In my whole life I never saw my dad or my wife ever do anything in their lives you couldn’t put on the front pages of a newspaper, written by an unfriendly reporter” (Omaha World-Herald, February 22, 2000, from a talk to Midland College business students).

Someone once said, “I used to be an agnostic, but now I’m not so sure.” It’s a little like Ronald Reagan’s comment about his father: “My father gave up going to church for Lent!” (Peggy Noonan, When Character Was King, p. 20).

Buffett’s agnosticism extends to economic forecasting, and he certainly would endorse former Stanford business professor Ezra Solomon’s view: “The only function of economic forecasting is to make astrology look respectable.”

“MONEY DOESN’T TALK, IT SWEARS.”

Buffett didn’t say it, Bob Dylan did: “Money doesn’t talk, it swears.”

Some robust men are called to the sea and others explore Antarctica. Buffett journeyed into the world of finance. And conquered it.

Buffett’s path to success seems analogous to Charles Lindbergh’s first flight after a particularly undistinguished youth. Indeed, Lindbergh had recently flunked out of college. A. Scott Berg, author of Lindbergh (p. 64) wrote,“When the plane took flight and banked for the first time, Lindbergh felt as though he had ‘lost all conscious connection with the past,’ that he lived ‘only in the moment in the strange, immortal space, crowded with beauty, pierced with danger.’”

Others, like Steve Wozniak, the inventor of the personal computer, are a bit more prosaic: “Finally I gave up and just popped in the other two PROMs, the ones with the ‘polling’ version of the monitor program. I typed in a few keys on the keyboard and I was shocked! The letters were displayed on the screen! It is so hard to describe this feeling—when you get something working on the first try. It’s like getting a hole-in-one from forty feet away” (Steve Wozniak, iWoz,

p. 166).

As for Buffett, he and his friend Don Danly at Woodrow Wilson High School in Washington, D.C. began a business when they bought a $25 pinball machine and fixed it up. They installed it in a barbershop on busy Wisconsin Avenue. After the first day of operation, the young entrepreneurs returned to find $4 in a pan full of nickels. Buffett said, “I figured I had discovered the wheel.”

That $4 made Buffett feel as though he were flying.

As more barbers asked for the machines, the youngsters said they would check with their hard-nosed boss, “Mr. Wilson” (actually themselves). By the time the Wilson Coin-Operated Machine Co. expanded to seven machines, it was hauling in $50 a week. “I hadn’t dreamed life could be so good,” Buffett said (John Train, The Midas Touch, p. 5).

In 1945, while Buffett was still in high school, he was able to save enough money to pay $1,200 for an unimproved 40-acre farm in northwestern Nebraska. His father had purchased the farm years earlier. Buffett paid his father in cash and rented the land to a tenant farmer.

When the Wilson Coin-Operated Machine Co. was sold in August 1947 to a war veteran for $1,200, Buffett took his share and headed for Wharton. This extraordinary force—a Nebraska special—was on his way. Buffett has become so extraordinary that he has been called “a five-sigma event,” a statistical aberration so rare it practically never occurs (Carol Loomis, Fortune, April 11, 1988).

I once wrote Buffett that my mother, Frances Kilpatrick, taught at Woodrow Wilson High School. Buffett replied: “I went to Woodrow Wilson in 1945–1947. I don’t remember a Mrs. Kilpatrick, so she must have been teaching one of the harder courses at the time. My high school career was not particularly illustrious—I was more interested in the pinball machines than in the classroom. Best regards, Sincerely, Warren E. Buffett.” (Actually, my mother taught there after he left.)

In school Buffett was neither cool nor a nerd, just a maverick. “I would not have been the most popular guy in the class, but I wouldn’t have been the most unpopular either. I was just sort of nothing” (Regardie’s, February 1986).

Although Buffett didn’t establish himself in high school, he was already making an impact in the business world.

Buffett wrote Miss Grace Carter, a teacher from his alma mater of Woodrow Wilson High School (letter of June 26, 1998) in part: “I remember my days at Wilson very well though, in all honesty, I was not on my best behavior at the time. If you’re going to have a rebellious period, I guess it’s a good idea to get it out of your system early. Incidentally, I note from your address that you live only a few blocks away from the Westchester Apartments (3900 Cathedral Avenue) where I got my financial start delivering papers.”

During his high school days, he pursued Carolyn Falk, but so too did Walter Scott, later head of the Peter Kiewit Sons’ conglomerate. Scott eventually married her.

“Unfortunately, the best man won,” Buffett says (Forbes, October 24, 1994).

Upon high school graduation in 1947 at 16, he was in a “chartist” phase in his study of the stock market.

Later in life, Buffett would say, “I realized that technical analysis didn’t work when I turned the chart upside down and didn’t get a different answer.”

By the time he graduated, Buffett had amassed the extraordinary sum of about $6,000, largely from his paper routes. The youngster was making more than his teachers.

Although he could have, he did not pay for college. His parents footed the bill, letting Buffett keep his money for investing. By the end of 1950, he had $9,800.

At the urging of his father—and it took some doing to convince Buffett to go to college instead of getting on with his business pursuits—he headed for the Wharton School of Business at the University of Pennsylvania. There he became president of the Young Republicans Club.

The Buffetts come from a long line of staunch Republicans, but they all have an independent streak. Warren Buffett, largely persuaded that Democrats had a better understanding of civil rights, shocked his family when he and his wife Susan became Democrats. Susan Buffett told Forbes (October 21, 1991), “It caused great commotion” [in the family].

A cousin of Buffett’s recalls family dinners often centering around rapid-fire political talk. “His sisters have about the same IQ he does,” said Katherine Grimm of Akron, Ohio. “If they were at dinner, someone would toss out a political idea and the next would say, ‘Defend your position.’”

Buffett told Forbes (October 18, 1993), “I became a Democrat basically because I felt the Democrats were closer by a considerable margin to what I felt in the early 1960s about civil rights. I don’t vote the party line. But I probably vote for more Democrats than Republicans.”

But as a college student, Buffett was resolutely Republican. In November 1948, as an 18-year-old sophomore, Buffett became the cover boy for Penn Pics, the pictorial and humor magazine of the University of Pennsylvania. He appeared in his raccoon coat and bowler hat with his fraternity brother at a Penn football game at Franklin Field. In the fall of 1948, he made arrangements to rent an elephant to ride in a Republican victory parade, but after Truman upset Dewey, the plans were canceled.

At the University of Pennsylvania, Buffett pledged Alpha Sigma Phi fraternity his freshman year and learned to play bridge (Forbes, June 2, 1997).

He was at Penn from 1947 to 1949, majoring in math and statistics before transferring in his junior year to the University of Nebraska—Lincoln College of Business Administration. There he earned a B.S. degree in 1950. He breezed through both schools, earning his degree in just three years. Even as he worked at the college paper, played bridge, and made A’s in his courses, Buffett managed to make time for business. He once submitted a dozen entries trying to win a $100 Burma-Shave jingle contest. His best entry: “If missin’ on kissin’—Hey listen, try thissen—Burma-Shave” (Roger Lowenstein, Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist, pp. 33–34).

At Penn, Buffett became friends with Harry Beja. “The two of them matched A+’s in Industry 1, but Beja couldn’t help but notice how much harder he worked in the course than Buffett had.” Buffett also became friends with Beja’s roommate, a student from Brooklyn who quickly decided Buffett was a “genius” (Roger Lowenstein, Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist, p. 29).

“I didn’t feel I was learning that much,” Buffett has said of his experience at the University of Pennsylvania. He didn’t complete his studies there because he didn’t cotton to the theoretical niceties of business. Buffett’s obsession was always on what brought results in the real world.

During breaks from Penn, he worked twice at J.C. Penney’s in Omaha: one summer and during a Christmas vacation. He made 75 cents an hour selling men’s shirts and has joked, “I became an authority on the Minimum Wage Act.” The upside, however, was that Buffett experienced firsthand the world of retail.

At the University of Nebraska, he was regional circulation manager for the Lincoln Journal, supervising 50 paper boys in six rural counties. He also worked again for another J.C. Penney. For even more extra money, he rounded up 220 dozen golf balls and sold them to Jerry Orans for $1,200 (Roger Lowenstein, Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist, p. 34).

Buffett graduated from the University of Nebraska in the summer of 1950 at the age of 19 after taking 14 courses in one year. He then applied to Harvard Business School. Meanwhile, he kept up his constant reading about business by frequently visiting the Omaha Public Library and absorbing everything he could find about accounting and insurance.

When the time came for Buffett’s interview with a Harvard alumnus, he took a train to Chicago for the big event. Years later he told Carol Loomis that all the Harvard representative saw was “a scrawny 19-year-old who looked 16 and had the social poise of a 12-year-old.” When the interview was over, so were Buffett’s prospects at Harvard, and so too was the infallibility of the Harvard admissions office.

“The interview in Chicago took about 10 minutes, and they threw me back in the water,” Buffett said. Harvard told him he was too young and to try again in a year or two.

Buffett wrote his friend Jerry Orans about his rejection: “Now for the blow. Those stuffed shirts at Harvard didn’t see there [sic] way clear to admit me to their graduate school. They decided 19 was too young to get admitted and advised me to wait a year or two. Therefore, I am now faced with the grim realities of life since I start paying room and board here in four weeks. My dad wants me to go on to some graduate school, but I’m not too sold on the idea.”

BEN GRAHAM/ORACLE OF VALUE INVESTING

Two weeks later Buffett wrote to Orans again: “To tell you the truth, I was kind of snowed when I heard from Harvard. Presently, I’m waiting for an application blank from Columbia. They have a pretty good finance department there; at least they have a couple of hot shots in Graham and Dodd that teach common stock valuation” (Roger Lowenstein, Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist, p. 35).

Warren Buffett was stung by Harvard’s rejection, but the sting was not to be long lasting.

“How many a man has dated a new era in his life from the reading of a book.”(Thoreau)

In August 1950, Buffett was back in the Omaha library looking at different graduate schools. He had read The Intelligent Investor and was surprised to learn that the authors Ben Graham and David Dodd were listed as Columbia professors. “I figured they were long since dead,” Buffett has said. Buffett wrote to Dodd and received back an acceptance letter. Buffett was soon to become the prize student of the greatest business professor at Columbia.

In 1894, Benjamin Grossbaum was born in London, to a Jewish family in the bric-a-brac trade. The German family name was changed from Grossbaum to Graham during World War I.

When Benjamin was only 9, his 35-year-old father died of pneumonia. Mrs. Grossbaum and her three young sons were unable to keep up their import business, and it failed in little more than a year.

Graham graduated from Boys High School in Brooklyn in 1910, and went on to attend Columbia. He was a brilliant student, studying the classics and reading Greek, Latin, German, and Spanish. (Graham later translated the novel The Truce from its original Spanish.) Graham graduated from Columbia second in his class in 1914 at age 20.

Then Graham headed for Wall Street.

In 1929, Graham was asked to lecture at Columbia Business School; he agreed to if someone would take notes of what he said. According to Walter Schloss, “Dave Dodd was a young instructor … and offered to take notes of Ben’s lectures. Dodd said he took copious notes at each lecture and turned them over to Graham, who then wrote his opus Security Analysis; and although Graham had written the entire book, he insisted that Dave Dodd’s name appear as co-author. The book Security Analysis, first published in 1934, is known as ‘Graham and Dodd.’”

Before Security Analysis was published, investors often relied on intuition, tips, or the reputation of the business owner to make their decisions. “This work provided reason and structure to previously disorderly theories on investments and was directed at the investment professional” (Jeffrey Bingham’s Security Analysis thesis about Ben Graham, Roosevelt University).

Buffett regards the second edition in 1940 as “vastly superior” to the 1934 edition. Other editions followed, and the book is currently in its fifth edition. Graham developed his disciplined, realistic approach—his value approach—after being wiped out in the 1929 stock market crash.

“First editions of Security Analysis, coauthored by David Dodd, have sold for more than $10,000, and late last year a signed copy fetched $20,000, close to a record for a book of 20th century nonfiction” (SmartMoney, July 1, 2001). Rare first editions were offered in 2006 for about $30,000.

In 1949, Graham wrote a shorter book, The Intelligent Investor, for the layman looking for an investing framework.

As a senior at the University of Nebraska in early 1950, Buffett read Benjamin Graham’s The Intelligent Investor, which preached “value investing.” That meant finding companies undervalued in the stock market, companies whose intrinsic value is substantially greater than the value the stock market assigns to the enterprise. A value investor tries to buy assets for substantially less than what the underlying business is worth—its true “intrinsic value”—in the real business world. The goal is to buy stocks selling at a good discount to the “transactional value” of the business.

Graham also thought investors should buy a stock only if it traded at less than two-thirds of net working capital. To Graham, a sound investment required high net asset values and low earnings multiples. He stressed prices in relation to interest rates.

The Intelligent Investor, which has sold more than one million copies in hardback, offers one of Buffett’s key business beliefs: “Investment is most intelligent when it is most businesslike.” That means investments should not be swayed by emotions—hopes and fears—nor fads. Before reading Graham, “I had been investing with my glands instead of my head,” Buffett said.

Later, as a teacher, Graham encouraged investors to pay attention to intrinsic business value—what a reasonable businessman would pay. He once said, “The investor’s worst enemy is likely to be himself.”

Also, an investor should keep in mind a “margin of safety” (meaning being sure the business you’re buying is worth significantly more than you pay for it in the stock market). Only price and value count. Buffett would later say the words “margin of safety” are the three most important words in investing. Maybe Graham came by this important investing concept from Mark Twain who used the “margin of safety” phrase when talking about navigating a steamboat on the Mississippi in Life on the Mississippi.

Many items are to be considered before investing: Integrity of management, competitive position, and durability of the franchise, as well as price. On the issue of price, these are among the holy words of Ben Graham that so captured Buffett:

The margin-of-safety idea becomes [most] evident when we apply it to the field of undervalued or bargain securities. We have here, by definition, a favorable difference between price on the one hand and indicated or appraised value on the other. That difference is the safety margin. It is available for absorbing the effect of miscalculations or worse than average luck. The buyer of bargain issues places particular emphasis on the ability of the investment to withstand adverse developments. For in most such cases he has no real enthusiasm about the company’s prospects. True, if the prospects are definitely bad the investor will prefer to avoid the security no matter how low the price. But the field of undervalued issues is drawn from the many concerns—perhaps a majority of the total—for which the future appears neither distinctly promising nor distinctly unpromising. If these are bought on a bargain basis, even a moderate decline in the earning power need not prevent the investment from showing satisfactory results. The margin of safety will then have served its proper purpose (Benjamin Graham, The Intelligent Investor, p. 279).



Buffett has become the world’s greatest practitioner of value investing. For Buffett, value investing is as easy as telling the sex of a fly. How do you tell the sex of a fly? A woman walked into the kitchen to find her husband walking around with a fly swatter. “What are you doing?” she asked. “Hunting flies,” he replied. “Oh, killing any?” she asked. “Yep, three males, two females,” he said. Intrigued, she asked, “How can you tell?” He replied, “Three were on a beer can, two were on the phone.”

Reading Graham’s book The Intelligent Investor, was a James Joyce moment—an epiphany for Buffett. “It was like young Abraham Lincoln reading: Dilworth’s Speller,” Buffett told Omaha World-Herald reporter Robert Dorr (March 24, 1985).

Here are the words of Saint Paul: “And it came to pass, that, as I made my journey, and was come nigh to Damascus about noon, suddenly there shone from heaven a great light round about me.” (Acts 22:6)

“I read the first edition of this book early in 1950, when I was nineteen,” Buffett said. “I thought then that it was by far the best book about investing ever written. I still think it is.” Buffett would later say, “On a lot of people’s compasses, Ben was true north.”

Buffett told L. J. Davis, “I don’t want to sound like a religious fanatic or anything, but it really did get me” (New York Times Magazine, April 2, 1990).

In May 2000, Dodd’s daughter, Barbara Dodd Anderson of San Francisco, gave Buffett her father’s own copy of the first edition of Security Analysis, which included his annotations. The presentation was made at Columbia University Business School. Buffett, who lectures there every two years, recalled that Dodd helped him get in. Dodd died in 1988 at age 93. When Buffett did his study concluding that clergy members don’t live longer than the rest of the population, he should have returned later to the subject to see if value investors live longer.

Buffett downloaded The Intelligent Investor word for word forever into his brain. Once, when he testified in the IBM antitrust case, an IBM lawyer said Buffett had contradicted a paragraph in the book. Buffett countered that the lawyer was citing the third edition, which had additional contributors, and that the paragraph was not in the first edition, which reflected only the work of Graham and Dodd (The New York Times, June 11, 2000).

Buffett has always recommended The Intelligent Investor as required reading for any successful investor. He has cited, in particular, Chapter 8 about investor attitudes toward an erratic, unpredictable stock market and Chapter 20 on “Margin of Safety” about buying at bargain prices to be among the most important pieces of investment advice ever written and that the true investor takes advantage of stock prices when they become silly in either direction, and he buys at a good price compared to real business value.

Chapter 8 says when approaching the stock market, you should imagine you’re in business with “Mr. Market,” but you have to watch him because he lets his enthusiasms and fears run away with him. The chapter states the significance of fluctuations in stock price, “Basically, price fluctuations have only

one significant meaning for the true investor. They provide him with an opportunity to buy wisely when prices fall sharply and to sell wisely when they advance a great deal. At other times, he will do better if he forgets about the stock market and pays attention to his dividend returns and to the operating results of his companies.”

Chapter 20 discusses “a favorable difference in price on the one hand and an indicated or appraised value on the other” stating “That difference is the margin of safety.” Therefore, the margin of safety depends on the price paid. Excellent prices come with poor markets. Money manager Chris Davis is fond of saying, “You make your money in a down market, it just doesn’t seem like it at the time.”

The lesson of value investing was later reinforced by Ben Graham, who taught that whether someone else agrees or disagrees with you does not make you right or wrong. That hallmark idea never left Buffett, who in 1965 worded it this way in a correspondence with members of the Buffett Partnership: “We derive no comfort because important people, vocal people, or great numbers of people agree with us. Nor do we derive comfort if they don’t. A public opinion poll is no substitute for thought.”

Buffett added that when you find a situation you understand, where the facts are ascertainable and clear, then you act, whether the action is conventional or unconventional and regardless of whether others agree or disagree.

When you are dead-sure of something and are armed with all the facts, then everyone else’s advice is only confusing and time-consuming. When almost everyone was dismissing the newspaper business as unappealing in the 1970s, Buffett spotted its monopoly-like franchises and bought one media stock after another.

From his early days, Buffett has rarely shown his hand. The practice would take on far greater significance later when Wall Street would try to guess what he was doing. Only rarely did his moves in the market leak out. To this day, Buffett tries to keep his investments secret until publication of the Berkshire annual report each March. Yet Buffett has said it’s not easy to keep secrets, especially when talking to attractive women.

Buffett’s academic record was one of the best ever at Columbia Business School, where he earned a masters in economics in June 1951. At the time Graham was teaching Buffett, Graham is said to have believed young Buffett would become the greatest financial mind of his time.

Buffett made an A+ under Graham, according to Jim Rogers, who also taught finance at Columbia, and John Burton, former dean of the Columbia Business School. Indeed, it is said that Buffett made the only A+ under Ben Graham, but unfortunately that feat is not documented.

Rogers, born in Demopolis, Alabama, was educated at Yale and Oxford before hitting Wall Street in the 1970s, where he hooked up with famed investor George Soros. Their Quantum Fund, which often shorted stocks by assuming prices would fall, did so well that Rogers retired at age 37 with a reported $14 million.

Rogers still has a letter dated March 5, 1987, from Buffett to Columbia University Graduate School of Business Dean John Burton. It reads:

I appreciate the invitation to the Annual Dinner but will have to decline. My extended trip to New York always occurs in May—and even then I like to skip formal dinners as I find I can do a lot more catching up with friends in four- and six-people lunches and dinners. In fact, I’m not sure I can quite remember the last formal dinner I’ve attended. I enjoyed the Columbia Business School Annual Report. From everything I hear, Jim Rogers continues to be regarded as the best finance teacher in the country.



Dean Burton said, “He [Buffett] was gifted in math, but his ability to perceive economic value is his genius.”

Graham himself attended Columbia on a scholarship and graduated second in his 1914 class, at age 20, though he took a strange route getting there. After high school, he took a national exam and there was shock when the brilliant student scored poorly. In contrast, a relative of Graham’s received the second highest score ever. Discouraged, Graham took a job, and the relative went to Columbia—and did poorly. It took some time but eventually the discovery was made that the test scores had been mistakenly switched! Ben Graham was finally off to Columbia.

Graham was the sort of genius who masters a wide variety of intellectual disciplines. He was an original thinker and a prolific writer.

Berkshire vice chairman Charles Munger, who knew Graham, shared about his academic success:

Warren had a professor/mentor—Ben Graham—for whom he had great affection. Graham was so academic that when he graduated from Columbia three different academic departments invited him into their Ph.D. programs and asked him to start teaching immediately as part of the Ph.D. program: [those three departments being] literature, Greek and Latin classics, and mathematics. (Outstanding Investor Digest, December 19, 1997)



Buffett wasn’t the only Graham admirer. Bill Ruane, a Harvard Business School graduate, became interested in the teachings of Columbia’s Ben Graham (1894–1976) and David Dodd (1895–1988), and took one of Graham’s courses, making him a classmate of Buffett’s in 1951. Ruane headed the Ruane, Cunniff & Co. investment management firm and ran the Sequoia Fund, which has large investments in stocks, including Berkshire. For decades Ruane was a director of The Washington Post Co. and a director of GEICO until Berkshire bought the remainder of GEICO.

Ruane used to joke that the only difference between himself and Buffett is billions of dollars and 100 points of IQ. He said a kind of intellectual electricity coursed between Graham and Buffett, and the rest of the class was a rapt audience. “Sparks were flying,” recalled Ruane. “You could tell then he [Buffett] was someone who was very unusual.” Back in the 1960s, Ruane was Buffett’s stockbroker.

Fred Stanback, a classmate of Buffett’s at Columbia, recalls that Buffett was constantly reading Standard & Poor’s reports.

At Columbia, Buffett ran into a friend from Nebraska, Bill Christensen, and the two discovered they were dating the same girl. Buffett told Christensen he’d back out of the situation.

Christensen, a retired history professor from Midland College in Fremont, Nebraska, recalls with laughter, “That girl told me he’d be a millionaire someday.” Christensen said the woman married someone else and lives in Colorado. He has kidded her over the years about not marrying Buffett.

After graduating from Columbia, Buffett offered to work for Graham’s investment company, Graham-Newman & Co. for free. “But Ben,” Buffett jokes, “made his customary calculation of price to value and said no.”

Rejected, Buffett, armed with a Columbia master’s degree at age 20, returned to Omaha to work in his father’s brokerage firm, Buffett-Falk & Co., as an investment salesman from 1951 to 1954. Young Buffett was such a whiz that when someone asked if the business would be renamed Buffett & Son, Warren retorted, “No, we’re naming it Buffett & Father” (Logard Halverstadt, 100 Most Popular Business Leaders, p. 44).

Buffett also began teaching an investment course at the University of Omaha’s adult education program.

(Feeling his public speaking was inadequate, he paid $100 to take a Dale Carnegie course in 1952 when he was 21. Buffett has said he took the course, “not to prevent his knees from knocking when public speaking, but to do public speaking while his knees were knocking.”)

In the beginning of his teaching stint, he once arrived to find only four students; he dismissed the class, saying he was sorry there wasn’t enough interest to hold the course. Eventually his class got off the ground. Omaha World-Herald’s Robert Dorr has written about a student from that course who recalled how class members, mostly in their 40s, snickered slightly when they first saw Buffett. Buffett told Dorr, “I was skinnier then and looked like I could get into a basketball game as a high school student.”

The moment Buffett began speaking, however, the snickering stopped. “After two minutes, he had the class in his hands,” said the former student.

One of his students was Dr. Carol Angle, a young pediatrician (Forbes, October 12, 1998). “Warren had us calculate how money would grow using a slide rule. He brainwashed us to truly believe in our heart of hearts in the miracle of compound interest,” said Dr. Angle. She and her husband, William, also a doctor, invited 11 other doctors to a dinner to meet Buffett.

Buffett remembers Bill Angle getting up at the end of the dinner and announcing, “I’m putting $10,000 in. The rest of you should too” (Forbes, October 12, 1998).

Today, Dr. Carol Angle, who clearly doesn’t work for the money, is director of clinical toxicology at the University of Nebraska Medical Center.

Buffett continued to invest, but not every venture worked out.

“I guess my worst decision was that I went into a service station when I was 20 or 21, and I lost 20% of my net worth. So that service station cost me about $800 million now, I guess. It’s very satisfying when Berkshire goes down because the cost of that service station mistake declines,” he said at the Berkshire annual meeting in 1992. We should update that $800 million: $8 billion by now!

In his early days, he devoured financial books. While he worked for his father’s brokerage firm, he often went to Nebraska’s capital, Lincoln, to read statistical histories of insurance companies. He told Forbes (October 18, 1993) about those days: “I read from page to page. I didn’t read brokers’ reports or anything. I just looked at raw data. And I would get all excited about these things. I’d find Kansas City Life at three times earnings, Western Insurance Companies at one times earnings. I never had enough money and I didn’t like to borrow money. So I sold something too soon to buy something else. I was over stimulated in the early days and I’m under stimulated now. I bought into an anthracite company. I bought into a windmill company. I bought into a street railway company, or more than one.” Buffett bought cheap then found the stocks were cheap for good reasons.

Buffett found that Western Insurance (See The Western chapter) was earning $20 a share and trading at about $13 a share. He studied company filings, spoke to managers and saw it was a good company. Then he went to different cities in Nebraska to the homes of people who owned the stock and bought it from them.

Referring generally to companies that are cheap, Buffett later called his efforts at statistically cheap buys his “used cigar butt” approach. “When you’re buying cigar butts, you’ve got to get rid of them. There aren’t lots of puffs in it,” Buffett said in a talk to Columbia business students October 27, 1993, as reported in the Omaha World-Herald (January 2, 1994). In the same talk, Buffett discussed some of his finds:

When I got out of Columbia, the first place I went to work was a five-person brokerage firm with operations in Omaha (Buffett-Falk & Co., which his father founded). It subscribed to Moody’s industrial manual, banks and finance manual, and public utilities manual. I went through all those page by page.



I found a little company called Genesee Valley Gas near Rochester [New York]. It had 22,000 shares out. It was a public utility that was earning about $5 per share, and the nice thing about it was you could buy it at $5 per share.



I found Western Insurance in Fort Scott, Kansas. The price range in Moody’s financial manual … was $12–$20. Earnings $16 a share. I ran an ad in the Fort Scott paper to buy that stock. [Buffett put half his net worth at the time into Western Insurance.]



I found the Union Street Railway, in New Bedford [Massachusetts], a bus company. At that time it was selling at about $45 and, as I remember, had $120 a share in cash and no liabilities.



Nobody’s going to tell you about the Union Street Railway Co. … or Genesee Valley Gas. Sometimes the management’s buying it themselves. You can’t do this for big money, but it’s somewhat the same principle. You find something that shouts at you.



Buffett later described his satisfaction with his Genesee find and others using the page-by-page approach: “I went through the Moody’s manuals page by page—the industrial manual, the transportation manual, the banks and finance manual—just looking for things. And I found stocks at one times earnings. One was Genesee Valley Gas, a little tiny company in upstate New York. There were no brokerage reports on it, no nothing, but all you had to do was turn the page. It worked out so well I actually went through the book a second time” (Fortune, July 20, 1998).

In another description of this story to Columbia business students (March 24, 2006), Buffett talked of going through 12,000 pages of Moody’s manuals in 1951. “It was absolutely a question of turning the pages.” On page 1433, he found Western Insurance. Ten pages later, he found National American Fire Insurance (NAFI). “This book got hot towards the end,” Buffett said.

At that time, NAFI had a book value of $135 a share and earned $29 a share while its stock price was only $27 a share.

Remarkably, re-telling this story in 2007 to a student group, Buffett recalled the exact page numbers and company numbers for Western Insurance and NAFI as they were in Moody’s.

Those early working days were also courting days for Buffett. On April 19, 1952, at Dundee Presbyterian Church in Omaha, he married Susan Thompson. This petite brunette with a winning smile and manner was the popular daughter of Dr. William Thompson of Omaha. “We used to call him ‘Wild Bill’,” says Buffett’s son Howard. Thompson was a psychology professor as well as dean of the School of Arts and Sciences at the University of Omaha, which later became part of the University of Nebraska. Susan Thompson attended Northwestern University where she roomed with Buffett’s sister Bertie. It was Bertie who introduced Susan to Warren. Their parents were already acquainted.

Both grandparents on Susan Buffett’s mother’s side were deaf. Her grandfather J. Schuyler Long (1869-1933) wrote one of the two sign language dictionaries, The Sign Language: A Manual of Signs (1918). The royalties from the dictionary go to Gallaudet University in Washington, D.C. Her uncle was head of the California School for the Deaf, which Warren and Susie Buffett visited on their honeymoon.

At a convention of school administrators in 1931, Long, a teacher, newspaper editor, and author, appealed to his hearing peers: “Do you know the world as the deaf man finds it? The place to test success of an educational system is not in the schoolroom nor in the conversations over the social teacups but out where men toil and earn their daily bread.”

Backstroking to the Buffett wedding, what else did Buffett do on his honeymoon? “Warren Buffett … had taken the original Graham and Dodd course in 1950 after having been exposed to The Intelligent Investor. He read the first edition of Security Analysis on his honeymoon” (Bruce C. N. Greenwald et al, Value Investing: From Graham to Buffett and Beyond, p. viii).

The marriage and honeymoon for Corporal Warren Buffett came within a hair of being delayed, according to columnist Michael Kelly in the Omaha World-Herald (April 27, 2002):

THE MISSOURI RIVER FLOOD OF 1952

Fifty years ago this month, the Missouri River flood of ’52 nearly washed out Warren Buffett’s honeymoon.



Buffett, then selling stocks in Omaha, was to marry Susan Thompson at 3 p.m. on April 19 at Dundee Presbyterian Church. As the water rose that month, he thought his National Guard unit might be activated.



This was the flood of the century. Sure enough, at noon on the 19th, he received a call from his captain: “Corporal Buffett, we’ve been activated.”



He was ordered to report that day at 5 p.m. Buffett said he would have thought the call was from one of his buddies playing a prank, except that he recognized the captain’s slight stammer.



The future Wizard of Wall Street worried woefully. What would he tell Susie?



“I was a wreck anyway,” he said. “She was much more mature than I was. Emotionally, she was 19 going on 40. I was 21 going on 12.”



Before he left for the church, Buffett received a call from the commanding officer of the 34th National Guard Division, Gen. Warren Wood. He had heard about the wedding and excused the corporal from duty.



A four-paragraph story in the next day’s Omaha World-Herald told the tale. Said the general: “Love is the only thing that will stop us.”



Driving his Aunt Alice’s car, Buffett first stopped for dinner at the Wigwam Cafe in Wahoo, Nebraska before heading west. “To show my sophistication, I had chicken fried steak.”



READING SECURITY ANALYSIS ON THE HONEYMOON

On the honeymoon, Buffett has said he read Security Analysis to his wife. “It might not seem romantic, but I felt she ought to read it” (Philadelphia Inquirer, September 4, 2007).

During their early married years, the Buffetts lived in a run-down apartment. Buffett’s wife soon wanted to buy a house, but he had only about $10,000 at the time and explained to her that the nest egg was his “toolkit” and that no carpenter would ever give away his tools because that was his livelihood. So the Buffetts were renting a house about the time he was putting $7,500 into GEICO stock (lecture to George Washington University students on October 21, 2004).

Their next move was into a duplex, where they lived until 1954, when they moved to New York for Buffett to go to work for Graham-Newman. During his stay in New York, Buffett and his wife, who was pregnant with their second child, rented an apartment in White Plains. In the spring of 1956, Buffett left Graham-Newman, and he and his wife moved back to Omaha, renting a house on Underwood Avenue not far from the Buffett grocery store. Some of the early Buffett Partnership letters were written from 5202 Underwood Avenue. In 1958, they moved into the home where Buffett still lives.

“When I got married, we had $10,000 and two choices. I told Susie that we could (1) buy a house now or (2) she could let me work on this, and that it would hopefully increase. So we waited four years. I bought the house when it represented 10% of my net worth,” Buffett said at the Berkshire annual meeting in 1998.

Music has long been a part of Buffett’s life and may have helped him in winning his wife’s hand. During their college days, Buffett captured Susie’s attention by playing the ukulele with her father, a mandolin player. “It was obvious I was not number one with her. But he [Susan’s father] became very pro-me. It was two against one,” Buffett has said. “That’s true,” agrees Howard Buffett. “My father really did court her through her father.”

Warren and Susan Buffett, who grew up about a mile from one another, had three children. After the children were grown and shortly after their 25th wedding anniversary in late 1977, Buffett and his wife followed their own separate paths and began living apart. It was in the mid 1970s, that Susie Buffett, always interested in travel and music, pursued her passion for music in earnest by singing blues and jazz. Susie Buffett moved to San Francisco. In 1991, she was named to Berkshire’s board, replacing Ken Chace of Maine, who retired.

ASTRID MENKS

Astrid Menks, a vivacious woman 17 years Buffett’s junior and once a hostess in the same cafe where Buffett’s wife sang, set up housekeeping with Buffett in 1978, the year after Susie Buffett left for San Francisco.

“Astrid was not around until after my mother left for San Francisco,” said Buffett’s daughter, Susan.

Buffett and his wife saw each other about once a month and every Christmas with the family at Laguna Beach. She traveled with him on many nonbusiness trips.

“My dad was so involved with his work, which is his fun. My mother had a very different life. … We have such great parents. They are very affectionate. They still have strong relations. Once the kids were raised, my mother didn’t want to sit home,” Buffett’s daughter said.

Buffett, Susie (who died in 2004), and Astrid showed up at a party held for shareholders at Borsheims, the Berkshire-owned jewelry store, the day before the annual meeting in 1990. As usual, they were all cordial to one another and have attended the same annual meeting events every year. The three sent presents to relatives from “Warren, Susie, and Astrid” (Salon, August 31, 1999).

Buffett has given Astrid bejeweled mementos, including a gold piece in the form of a Berkshire stock certificate. Some gifts were bought at Borsheims. Astrid—who is fond of garage sales, recycling, gardening, and sweeping snow—has been a Berkshire shareholder for many years.

Buffett and Astrid married in 2006. He has said the earlier arrangement was unusual. “But if you knew everybody well, you’d understand it quite well” (Regardie’s, February 1986).

Menks came to the U.S. from West Germany in 1951 along with her parents, Alexander and Marianna Menks, and her four siblings. No one in the Menks family spoke English, although her father spoke German, Polish, Latvian, Russian, and some French. All the children learned English at school in less than a year. Astrid’s mother died in 1954. Her father worked as a painter at St. Joseph Hospital in Omaha. Astrid received her citizenship in 1966 at the age of 20.

GRAHAM-NEWMAN

In his trek to work for Ben Graham, Buffett was initially turned away and detoured. Buffett described these initial disappointments in a letter he wrote July 24, 1985, to Maria Anagnos, author of “Financial Theory and the Formation of an Investment Empire,” a thesis for an MBA degree at New York University Graduate School of Business Administration in 1986:

Between 1951 and 1954, when I was pestering Ben Graham for a job (he turned me down when I got out of school, even though I offered to work for him for nothing), he mentioned me to Bill Rosenwald (son of Julius Rosenwald who developed Sears, Roebuck into a mass merchandiser) with the result that I received an exploratory letter about going to work for the family. I couldn’t follow through at the time because National Guard obligations kept me in Omaha. I will never know if Ben was trying to do Bill Rosenwald a favor, or whether he was just trying to get me off his own doorstep.



Today, Buffett gets many requests from people who want to work for him, some even offering to pay him their salaries. Buffett says, “O.K., fine. I’ll even double your salary” (Anagnos’ thesis).

Buffett finally landed a job with Graham in 1954 at Graham-Newman on Wall Street. Graham and Jerome Newman founded their investment partnership in 1926, and it survived until 1956. Graham paid Buffett a salary.

“I went to work for Ben in August 1954, without ever asking what my salary would be,” Buffett said. “It turned out to be $12,000, plus the next year I got a $2,000 bonus. I worked for both parts of the business.” During Buffett’s stay in New York, Graham helped him find an evening job teaching an adult education course in investments at the Scarsdale adult school.

Graham-Newman was a regular investment company, and Newman & Graham was a limited partnership—what today would be called a hedge fund. The two funds together had about $12 million, according to Walter Schloss.

“When Warren Buffett became a junior employee at Graham-Newman in the 1950s, he made a detailed study of arbitrage earnings from 1926 to 1956—the entire life span of the company. He discovered that unleveraged returns from arbitrage averaged 20% per year. Buffett soaked up the tricks of arbitrage used at Graham-Newman and has used and improved on them ever since” (Janet Lowe, Benjamin Graham on Value Investing, p. 75).

“YOU’VE STOLEN MY SON”

Walter Schloss, who worked with Buffett at Graham-Newman, recalled that one day Buffett’s father came to Graham-Newman and told Graham essentially, “You’ve stolen my son” (Walter Schloss interview, October 23, 2005).

Buffett stayed there two years until Graham closed the business and retired in 1956. Graham never gave Buffett money to invest. Buffett later said, “He couldn’t have cared less. That was my frustration with Graham. He had no intensity for money” (Forbes, October 12, 1998). Graham’s wife, Estelle, invested $20,000 with Buffett early on.

Both Graham and his partner, Jerome Newman, died wealthy. Ben Graham lived his last years in a La Jolla, California, condominium overlooking the Pacific Ocean and died in 1976.

The Graham-Newman firm was small. “It operated with $6 million in capital,” Buffett said at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1992.

Graham-Newman’s Micky Newman, son of Jerome Newman, attended Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2002. He said Buffett is exactly the same person today he was 50 years ago—talkative, honest, and brilliant. “The only difference is he has more experience, but he’s the same person he was then.”

Newman graduated from Cornell University and served as a naval officer in World War II before heading such major American corporations as Philadelphia and Reading Corporation. Fruit of the Loom and Acme Boot were once units of Newman’s company, and Newman was instrumental in helping Buffett buy Fruit of the Loom. Buffett also bought Acme.

Asked when he recognized Buffett’s ability, Newman said, “The first minute I looked at his work.” Newman died at 85 in 2006.

In addition to Buffett, the Graham-Newman firm hired Walter Schloss and Tom Knapp, who each became famous value investors.

Irving Kahn, head of Kahn Brothers & Company, Inc. in New York, worked for Graham for 27 years at Columbia and Graham-Newman. Kahn compiled the tables for Security Analysis while working as Graham’s teaching assistant for $25 a week (The Wall Street Journal, July 9, 2003).

Kahn described his first encounter with Graham: “I just met Ben Graham in 1928 working afternoons and weekends at a member firm of H. Hentz & Co.’s back office, helping bookkeepers book trades by hand in large ledgers. I asked an older man if there were any accounts that made profits consistently. He showed me one and it bore the name of Ben Graham. I saw that his office was in the same building and took the chance that he might talk to a young stranger. To my surprise he was very friendly and helpful and glad to explain his investing methods. He even invited me to try his new class in Applied Security Analysis at Columbia Business School.”

Kahn, well over 100, was going strong in 2011. He and his family all have lived such long lives that they are part of a Harvard study on longevity. Reports say that studies haven’t come up with much other than the Kahns have high levels of “good” cholesterol, which can ward off heart disease. His oldest sister, Helen, is 104, and his younger brother, Peter, is in his late 90s. Kahn’s other sister, Lee, died at 101.

Kahn recalls Buffett at Graham-Newman as Graham’s prized protégé. “He was much the same as he is now, but he was a brash, cocky young guy…” said Kahn. “He was always busy on his own. He has tremendous energy. He could wear you out talking to you. He was very ambitious about making money.” Kahn added that Buffett had an extraordinary understanding of how business worked.

Buffett’s father knew Ben Graham; and Kahn said both men, seared by the Depression, sought ways to restore old values and to find ways that would ensure price stability.

“Warren’s father was at the forefront of the Depression in Omaha, and for farmers he had a deep feeling that the system had broken down...” said Kahn. “It was a widespread farm belt feeling. He was also in the securities business. Coming out of the Depression he met Ben Graham in Washington, who was a sort of Renaissance man. They talked a lot about tying price stability to commodities and what could be done for lesser-developed countries.”

In addition to having an eye for business and value investing, Graham also had an eye for willowy blondes. Buffett commented on that side of Graham in a 1988 Fortune’s Investor’s Guide interview: “It was all open and everything, but Ben liked women. And women liked him. He wasn’t physically attractive—he looked like Edward G. Robinson, but he had style.”

During his time with Graham-Newman, young family man Buffett commuted by train from his Westchester County apartment in White Plains. “It didn’t seem like much of a life,” he told Linda Grant. “People kept coming up to me all the time, whispering into my ear about some wonderful business. I was getting excited all the time. I was a wonderful customer for the brokerages. Trouble was, everyone else was too.”

Along the way, Buffett discovered that he and Graham had somewhat differing views of practical investing. He decided to strike out on his own, never again to have a boss.

“Ben was not that interested in going deeply into corporate analysis as I might have been,” Buffett once said. At Berkshire’s 1992 Annual Meeting, Buffett said Graham, seeking simple ways to provide safety for investors, focused on measures of cheapness in selecting stocks. Graham was after such benchmarks as buying stocks for two-thirds of the net working capital of a company.

Buffett began to look beyond only measures of cheapness. “I tried hard to get business insights,” he said, adding that he began looking at stocks as businesses; and that while he looked for value, as do all investors, he also looked at growth as another part of value.

Berkshire shareholder Michael Assael explains Buffett’s concept: “It’s the classic case of Buffett getting two for the price of one. Buffett teaches us that ‘growth is always a component in the calculation of value, constituting a variable whose importance can range from negligible to enormous.’ Just look at the worldwide growth of The Coca-Cola Company. Berkshire bought into Coke in the 1980s when Coke’s P/E ratio and earnings were only a fraction of what they are today.”

Buffett ultimately became interested in not only strict value investing, emphasizing a company’s balance sheet, but also in the fundamentals and growth prospects of a company, taking into account its competitive position.

At age 25, Buffett returned to Omaha, dropped anchor and intends to live the rest of his life in this Midwestern city 1,100 miles from Wall Street.

In 1996, serving as a poster boy for a campaign to promote Nebraska’s business climate, Buffett said, “I chose to stay in Nebraska because it has a great deal going for it. For one thing, Nebraska’s pro-business climate makes real economic sense for any type of business. And, of course, there are all those characteristics we are known for here in Nebraska: clean air, low crime rate, good schools, and a Midwestern work ethic” (Omaha World-Herald, August 1, 1996).

After his days at Columbia, Buffett got little encouragement about going into the investment business in 1951. “The two people I respected the most were my dad and Ben Graham, and they both said it was a bad time to go into it,” Buffett recalled at the Berkshire annual meeting in 1992.

To begin a business in his bedroom took courage. Not many young people would be met with great expectations with an pronouncement like this one.

His father may not have encouraged it, but when he started his partnership in his bedroom, it did not create a great stir in the family. “We took it for granted he knew what he was doing,” his sister said.

Others agree. Investor Phil Carret, who went to Harvard, called Buffett the smartest man in the U.S. (Bottom Line/Tomorrow, June 1998). Sequoia Fund’s Bill Ruane has dubbed Buffett the smartest guy in the country. Former GE CEO Jack Welch has called Buffett the smartest guy in any room. Executive Jet CEO Rich Santulli says, “There is not one person in the world who is smarter than Warren Buffett” (Robert Miles, The Warren Buffett CEO, p. 135).

Many people know how smart Buffett is but then, incongruously, conclude he’s just lucky.

“I first met him when he came home after working for Ben Graham,” recalls William O’Connor, the former Mutual of Omaha executive. “I invited him to our investment club. Like most of us, he was about our age of 24, but unlike us, he was so profound when it came to business and finance. He was so well received we invited him back the next year and each time he played a little penny-ante poker and he left some small sums. He would say it was against his better judgment, but frequently said, ‘I’ll call.’ ”

O’Connor took Buffett’s 10-week investment course at the University of Omaha, now the University of Nebraska at Omaha. During breaks Buffett and the students would drink Pepsis, while students soaked up Buffett’s investment insights.

In 1956, at age 25, Buffett was married with two children. His personal holdings jumped from $9,800 in 1950 to $140,000 in 1956. “I thought it was enough to retire on…” Buffett told reporter L. J. Davis. “I had no master plan.” Before that, in his first year out of college, Buffett hit the ground running. The net worth of his investments had soared 144% from the original $10,000.

“He rarely gave specific advice, but he gave you a lot to think about.” O’Connor said. “He left his students well-grounded in the principles of compounding,”

O’Connor sold Buffett an IBM typewriter for the Buffett Partnership in December 1958:. “I installed it at his home. Over the years I sold him an office replacement typewriter and a dictating machine. Perhaps what he got the most use from was the dictating machine I sold to his wife, Susie, who used it for her correspondence with 60 or 70 minority children she helped with college and moral support.”

In late 1958, O’Connor sold about $16,000 of his IBM stock and some other small holdings; and on January 1, 1959, invested $18,600 in the Buffett Partnership. Over the years, he added to his holdings, only occasionally selling some for family needs.

His wife Jean questioned his judgment about investing so much with Buffett, but O’Connor told her that if she knew what he knew about Buffett, she’d understand.

O’Connor’s faith paid off, and he became one of Buffett’s many Omaha

millionaires. Good thing—William and Jean O’Connor have ten children. “Warren really is a very uncomplicated person.” O’Connor said. “He’s a super nice guy who just keeps things simple.

“He is truly a remarkable person. His technical knowledge and his humor are unique. It’s truly entertaining to be associated with him. … He has an insatiable thirst for knowledge. He reads from all the sources, and he has a photographic memory that helps him recall and reconstruct things in an orderly, logical fashion. … He plays a little tennis and golf, but I think he’d rather read—and play bridge—than anything.”

Buffett has changed little. He still reads. He still plays bridge. But above all, despite a wide range of intellectual pursuits, his most consuming passion is still business.

Another one of Buffett’s students was Gunnar Horn, an award-winning but low-paid journalism teacher who lived modestly and left a $3-million legacy to charities and friends. He made the money in the stock market but never invested in Berkshire because it didn’t pay a dividend (Omaha World-Herald, August 5, 2001).

BUFFETT PARTNERSHIP

In the 1950s, Buffett was approached by family members who wanted investment advice. As a result, in 1956, he founded the Buffett Partnership telling investors, “I’ll run it like I run my own money, and I’ll take part of the losses and part of the profits. And I won’t tell you what I’m doing.”

Buffett managed the money and made all of the decisions. He has always kept his investors in the dark until an earnings report is filed.

He pooled $105,100 from friends and relatives to form his partnership. Other than going around town trying to solicit money, mainly from doctors, Buffett rang up few expenses. He always would hold dear his low-cost operating habits.

He ran the partnership from the sun porch located just off his upstairs bedroom, so that none of his profits went for rent. If ever someone lived over the store—in the store actually—Buffett did.

The man who would become known as the Wizard of Omaha, the Oracle of Omaha, and the Sage of Omaha was just getting started.

Homer Dodge, a physics professor and president of Norwich University in Vermont, heard of the wunderkind from his friend Ben Graham. He arrived in Omaha one summer day in 1956 after a canoe trip. Dodge sought out Buffett and became the first outside partner.

The canoe trip was apparently incidental. Dodge had driven 1,500 miles alone in hopes of persuading 25-year-old Buffett to manage his family’s savings (Fortune/1990 Investor’s Guide). Buffett answered the door of his home in his socks and invited Dodge in for an informal chat. Dodge gave Buffett $120,000 to invest (Forbes, October 12, 1998).

Buffett recalled that meeting for Fortune: “Homer told me, ‘I’d like you to handle my money.’ I said, ‘The only thing I’m doing is a partnership with my family.’ He said, ‘Well, I’d like one with you.’ So I set up one with Homer, his wife, children, and grandchildren.”

Dodge invested in the Buffett Partnership; and when Dodge died in 1983, that sum had multiplied into tens of millions of dollars for his family.

Dodge’s son Norton is a University of Maryland expert on the Soviet economy. Forbes (October 12, 1998) reported Norton Dodge decided to use his wealth for worthwhile purposes. On his frequent trips to the Soviet Union, Dodge learned about the many talented artists who couldn’t exhibit their works because the glories of the Communist state are not celebrated, Dodge then sold some Berkshire and used the money to buy their work and publicize them. He has contributed $40,000 to their economy. Dodge later donated about $20 million worth of the art to Rutgers University. He said it should be called “The Buffett Collection.”

Norton Dodge said, “My father saw immediately that Warren was brilliant at financial analysis, but it was more than that.” The elder Dodge saw a uniquely talented craftsman who loved the process of investing and who had mastered all the tools. The same Fortune article quoted Berkshire vice chairman Charles Munger: “His [Buffett’s] brain is a superbly rational mechanism. And since he’s articulate, you can see the damn brain working.”

In 1965, a fellow named Laurence Tisch, who would later become chairman of Loew’s and CBS, sent Buffett a $300,000 check with a note saying, “Include me in.”

Tisch, no slouch himself at investing, would later describe Buffett as

“the greatest investor of his generation.” Michael Assael considers that an understatement: “As Berkshire’s web of wealth expands exponentially, Warren Buffett will come to be seen as one of the greatest architects of economic value a free society has ever known.” Tisch later told Forbes (October 12, 1998) he sold his Berkshire to avoid being criticized for being a Buffett investor when both men might be interested in the same stocks.

In those early days, some investors signed on with Buffett, but others were not convinced. John Train was one of the latter: “I made the opposite decision when, looking for a good place to park some capital, I first met Buffett. At that very early stage he had no office at all and ran things from a tiny sitting-room off his bedroom—no secretary, no calculator. When I found that the holdings could not be revealed, I decided not to sign up” (John Train,The Money Masters, p. 10).

One day Buffett called on his neighbor Butter-Nut Coffee executive Donald Keough. Buffett had only to walk across the street. That the two lived so close is as odd as Truman Capote (In Cold Blood) and Harper Lee (To Kill a Mockingbird with 15 million copies in print) once living next door to one another in the small town of Monroeville, Alabama. (Just as odd as the Buffett-Keough and the Lee-Capote connections is that Mark Twain—once an editor of The Buffalo News—lived for a time in Hartford, Connecticut, across the lawn from Harriet Beecher Stowe, author of Uncle Tom’s Cabin.)

Young Keough, partly because Buffett sat around in a T-shirt reading all day, declined Buffett’s offer. “I had five small kids and left for work each day,” Keough recalled for a profile of Buffett by Bernice Kanner in New York magazine profile of Buffett (April 22, 1985). “Buffett had three and stayed home. He had this marvelous hobby, model trains, and my kids used to troop over there and play with them. One day Warren popped over and asked if I’d thought about how I was going to educate these kids. … I told him I planned to work hard and see what happened. Warren said if I gave him $5,000 he’d probably do better (for me). My wife and I talked it over, but we figured we didn’t know what this guy even did for a living—how could we give him $5,000? We’ve been kicking ourselves ever since. I mean, if we had given him the dough, we could have owned a college by now.” As of early 2004, Keough owned 42 Berkshire A shares directly and 8 indirectly.

Keough eventually became president of The Coca-Cola Company as well as a board member of The Washington Post Company and the McDonald’s Corp.

In 1961, by the time he was 31, Keough was a millionaire. However, by the time Microsoft’s Bill Gates was 31, he was a billionaire. Comedian Jay Leno once said of Gates, “This man is so successful, his chauffeur is Ross Perot.”

“I had a lot better ideas back then than I do now,” Buffett told Money World’s Adam Smith, whose real name is George J. W. Goodman. Smith took his

nom de plume from the 18th-century Scottish economist who outlined the mechanics of capitalism.

In 1965, through his Buffett Partnership, Buffett acquired a controlling interest in a New Bedford, Massachusetts, textile mill called Berkshire Hathaway. The cost was $14 million. Buffett became chairman on May 10, 1965. When the stock was trading at $18 a share. At that time, Berkshire was suffering from a prolonged slide, and Buffett bought its unimpressive operations for a proverbial song.

Despite hard work and new management, the textile operations never paid off. Berkshire would become one of the few businesses that never made it under Buffett; in 1985, after years of struggling to keep it afloat, he sold it for scrap.

In 1969, Buffett, determining that he could no longer find real values—buying a business or part of a business at wide discount to its intrinsic business value—decided to dissolve the highly-successful partnership. After 13 years of average annual 30% growth, the partnership was worth $100 million. Buffett’s stake was about $20 million. Buffett, 38 at the time, wrote his limited partners:

I am out of step with present conditions. When the game is no longer played your way, it is only human to say the new approach is all wrong, bound to lead to trouble, and so on. … On one point, however, I am clear. I will not abandon a previous approach whose logic I understand (although I find it difficult to apply) even though it may mean foregoing large, and apparently easy, profits to embrace an approach which I don’t fully understand, have not practiced successfully, and which possibly could lead to substantial permanent loss of capital.



He then distributed to his investors their stakes in the partnership and their pro rata shares in Berkshire.

John Train wrote a chapter about Buffett in his book The Money Masters. In that chapter, Train addressed Buffett’s success with his partnership: “He never had a down year, even in the severe bear markets of 1957, 1962, 1966, and 1969. That achievement stands alone in modern portfolio management.”

Three years after the Buffett Partnership disbanded, the market suffered one of its worst periods in decades, the 1973–74 collapse. Guess who was buying in 1973? As we’ll see later, in the spring and summer of that year, Buffett picked up media and advertising stocks at rock-bottom prices, including $10.6 million in Washington Post shares.



(Photo courtesy of Doug Buffett)

The Buffett Family Tree Circa 1933

Warren Buffett, front row, is sitting third from left with his hands on his legs. To his left is his sister Bertie, held by their mother, Leila. To Leila’s left is Buffett’s sister Doris. Behind Leila is her husband, Howard Buffett, who became a U.S. Congressman. See the following page for further identifications.

Of Permanent Value “Fireball” with a Money Changer



(Photo courtesy of Doug Buffett)

(Photo courtesy of Doug Buffett)

“Fireball” with a Money Changer The Story of Warren Buffett



Buffett’s Childhood Home Bought on eBay

Buffett spent the first six years of his life in this house at 4224 Barker Avenue in midtown Omaha. The two-bedroom house was one of 70,000 Sears “kit” homes sold nationwide by the mail order company between 1908 and 1940. This house was built in 1923. Buffett’s parents moved in soon after they were married in 1925. At one point in 2011, the house was for sale on eBay for $120,000. In July 2011, Minnesota businessman John Morgan, who has contributed to Buffett-blest charities such as Girl’s Inc. in the past, bought the home for $150,000. That was the highest of 13 bids. Morgan was quoted as saying the house will be used for the benefit of Girls Inc.

(Photo courtesy of the Omaha World-Herald/Chris Machian)



The Money Changer

This is the actual money changer that Buffett used as a child. It now resides at Berkshire headquarters and, heck, may still be in use.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Cowboy Salesman

This photo, on the back of the Visitors’ Guide for the Berkshire annual meeting in 2009, shows Buffett as a cowboy at about age 5, the age he sold Cokes.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value “Fireball” with a Money Changer

Ed Conine, president of J Bragg women’s apparel department store chain in Omaha and Lincoln, recalled, that Leila Buffett told him that when she was in her late 70s, Buffett gave her both an exercise bike and a Cadillac. “I have 34,000 miles on the bike and 5,600 miles on the Cadillac,” Mrs. Buffett quipped.



(Photo by Allan Maxwell)

Beginnings: Public School in Omaha

At Rosehill Elementary School, Buffett daydreamed about stocks. When he was 12 years old, he left—not very willingly—for Washington, D.C., after his father was elected to Congress in 1942. The school, named after wild roses growing in nearby hills, was torn down in the summer of 2000. After Allan Maxwell of Omaha sent Buffett a brick from the old Rosehill School, he wrote back, “I would rather have a brick from Rosehill than a gold-plated one.”

(Photo by John Gass)



The New Rosehill Elementary School

This new school, built early this century, replaced Buffett’s old grade school.

“Fireball” with a Money Changer The Story of Warren Buffett



A Lock of Hair

Buffett tells fans Terri and Allan Maxwell, who had jokingly asked for a lock of hair, that “a lock of hair will follow.”

(Photo by

LaVerne Ramsey)



Haskell

Early on, Buffett demonstrated an interest in this young lady, Carolyn Haskell (Hallquist), shown here as in the 1948 Benson High School Yearbook.

(Photo courtesy of Herb Sklenar)



Athletes of Benson High

Kathryn and Coach Homer Smith enjoy festivities surrounding Berkshire’s 1999 Annual Meeting/love-in. Coach Smith died in 2011.

(Photo by Lee Armstrong)



Hallquist

Although Buffett had an eye for Carolyn Haskell, she married Robert Hallquist, shown here as in the 1948 Benson High School Yearbook.

(Photo courtesy of Herb Sklenar)

Of Permanent Value “Fireball” with a Money Changer



Smarter and Funnier Than the

Three Stooges

Roberta (Bertie), Doris, and Warren Buffett are pictured in front of a neighbor’s home in Washington, D.C.’s Spring Valley area. The photo was taken when Warren was a skinny 13-year-old; Doris was 16 and Bertie, 10.





(Photo courtesy of Doris Buffett)



Kathryn and Coach Homer Smith at the Fiesta Bowl in Tempe, Arizona, in 1984.

(Photo courtesy

of Kathryn Smith)



Buffett Contemporaries who Graduated from Benson High School in 1949.

Kathryn Haskell and Homer Smith married and live in Tuscaloosa, Alabama. Carl Brasee became a successful banker. Lorraine Nielsen (Barton) had three children, and among her many activities works at the gift shop at the Omaha Marriott.

(Page retyped)

KATHRYN HASKELL AND HOMER SMITH

Homecoming

King and Queen

Carl Brasee and Lorraine Niel-

sen were crowned Homecom-

ing King and Queen at the

second annual Homecoming

dance held after the Benson-

North football game. Carl

was elected by his teammates

while Lorraine, who was one

of eight girls nominated by

the senior class, was elected

by all who attended the

dance.

(Photo courtesy of Lorraine Nielsen Barton)

CARL BRASEE AND LORRAINE NIELSEN

King and Queen

of Sports

Climaxing their athletic ac-

tivities at Benson, Homer

Smith and Kathryn Haskell

were crowned King and

Queen of Sports at the an-

nual alumni game. Kathryn

and Homer are presidents of

the Girls’ and Boys’ O-Clubs.

They have taken an active

part in numerous sport activi-

ties.

“Fireball” with a Money Changer The Story of Warren Buffett



The Four Tops

Four generations of Buffetts are pictured from right to left, Warren Buffett and his mother, Leila Stahl Buffett; his son, Howard Graham Buffett; and his grandson, Howard (Howie) Warren Buffett. The photo was taken around 1989. In early 2002, when Howie was 18, he and a girlfriend were critically injured in a vehicle accident near Decatur, Illinois. Howie lost control of a Toyota Land Cruiser on an ice-covered road and hit a tree. After lengthy rehabilitation, they both recovered.

(Photo courtesy of Howard Buffett)

Of Permanent Value “Fireball” with a Money Changer



Howard Buffett Elected

Omaha’s Evening World–Herald reports in the midst of World War II (November 4, 1942) that Buffett’s father was elected to Congress.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

“Fireball” with a Money Changer The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value “Fireball” with a Money Changer



Buffett Family Portrait

This photo of the Buffett family was taken in a public park in Washington, D.C. in 1948. It was to be used as a campaign photo later in the fall election, the one in which Congressman Buffett was defeated. In the photo, Doris is 20, Warren 18, and Bertie is 16. The Buffett parents were in their 40s.

(Photo courtesy of Doris Buffett)



Young Republican Club Card

Note the card is signed by the then president Warren Buffett.



A Portrait of the Artist

as a Young Man

Buffett’s senior photo at Woodrow Wilson High School. His net worth at that time was about $6,000.

(Setha Poppel Yearbook Archives)

“Fireball” with a Money Changer The Story of Warren Buffett



Penn Pics Put On

Buffett made the cover of this November 1948 Penn Pics.



Buffett’s God

Ben Graham, the Father of Value Investing and Buffett’s teacher at Columbia University. “He was my god,” Buffett says. Graham taught the first business school course on fundamental analysis at Columbia in 1929.

(AP/

Wide World

Photos)

Of Permanent Value “Fireball” with a Money Changer



Good Investment

Ad from Bauman Rare Books Catalogue, June, 2005, priced Graham’s Security Analysis for $16,500. A first edition of The Intelligent Investor, has been offered at $20,000.

(Photo by Mary Porter)



(Photo by

Mary Porter)

The Holy Writ

Security Analysis by Graham and Dodd. This third edition, fifth printing of 1951 is valued at about $700. Both Security Analysis and The Intelligent Investor emphasize the difference between investing and speculation.

Buffett’s Bible

The 1949 first edition of The Intelligent Investor is from the Roland Schank collection. Buffett, who can read a book in one sitting, virtually memorized this book. He has said the book shaped his whole investing framework. After the success of Security Analysis (1934), Graham wrote a popular version about half the length of his earlier investing book. Both books clearly distinguish between investing and speculation. A Buffett-signed first edition of The Intelligent Investor was sold on October 6, 2010, at auction for $25,250 to Mitch Julis of Canyon Partners of Los Angeles. The proceeds went to the San Francisco-based Excellence in Investing for Children’s Causes Foundation.



(Photo vby Professor Paul Alkon)



This photo of 21-year-old Buffett hangs at the Eppley Airfield complex in Omaha.

(Photo by Harold Burdette)

“Fireball” with a Money Changer The Story of Warren Buffett



$2,000 Book

on the Internet

Value investor Seth Klarman’s Margin of Safety, which is out of print, has become quite a

collector’s item. Klarman heads the $7-billion Baupost Group in Boston.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value “Fireball” with a Money Changer



No Housing Bubble Here

Buffett bought this home, built in 1921, for $31,500—10% of his net worth at the time. The Acme Brick folks like to point out the brick. Buffett has never moved, but he has remodeled and added rooms, including a 1,271-square-foot handball court behind the garage. Buffett’s home had an assessed value of $707,600 in 2009, according to Douglas County records. The house has large television screens, satellite TV, bookshelves throughout, and stacks of Cokes near the garage entranceway. Furnished in early Nebraska Furniture Mart, the home has a TV room with magenta carpeting and a Mickey Mouse phone in the kitchen. Bill Gates says that upstairs there’s a train set from Buffett’s youth and a lot of books.

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

“Fireball” with a Money Changer The Story of Warren Buffett



Bill Christensen

(Photo by

Laverne Ramsey)

Of Permanent Value “Fireball” with a Money Changer



Professor Thompson

Buffett’s father-in-law, Dr. W. H. Thompson, was pictured in the University of Omaha 1952 yearbook.

(Photo courtesy of Herb Sklenar)

“Fireball” with a Money Changer The Story of Warren Buffett

One More Unpretentious Home

Mrs. Susan Thompson Buffett’s childhood home in Omaha still stands.



(Photo courtesy of John Gass)



Fistfulls of Money

Buffett (center) is pictured at Camp McCoy in La Crosse, Wisconsin, where he served in the National Guard pay unit in the 1950s. Even back then, counting money brought a smile to his face.

v(Photo courtesy of Warren Buffett)

Dundee Presbyterian Church

Warren and Susie Buffett

married here in 1952.



(Photo by John Gass)

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Wigwam Cafe in Wahoo

You just cannot make up stuff like this name and location!

Of Permanent Value “Fireball” with a Money Changer



Warren and Susie Buffett’s First Home

This rental home at 5202 Underwood Avenue was where Buffett first ran the Buffett Partnership.

(Photo by John Gass)

“Fireball” with a Money Changer The Story of Warren Buffett



(Courtesy of Walter Schloss; photo taken in June 1968 at Del Coronado in San Diego)

Ben Graham and His Disciples: Members of the “Intellectual Village” of Graham and Dodd

Pictured here from left: Warren Buffett; Bob Brustein, Ben Graham’s friend, now deceased (Brustein’s widow, Hannah, married Alan Pakula, director of such movies as To Kill a Mockingbird, All the President’s Men, and Sophie’s Choice. Pakula was killed in a car accident in 1998.); Ben Graham; David “Sandy” Gottesman; Tom Knapp; Charles Munger; Jack Alexander; Henry Brandt; Walter Schloss; Marshall Weinberg; Ed Anderson; Buddy Fox; and Bill Ruane. In 1968, the market was tanking and Buffett called Graham to ask if he would be willing to meet with him and his colleagues for a “little cross-fertilization” of ideas.



Micky Newman

He recognized Buffett’s ability the first minute he looked at his work.

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

Of Permanent Value “Fireball” with a Money Changer



Irving Kahn

Value investors live longer—“The nature of investing has no retirement age,” Kahn said. Kahn turned 100 on December 19, 2005 and was honored by the New York Society of Security Analysts which he helped to found. Another investor setting records for longevity was Roy Neuberger, founder of the Neuberger Berman brokerage firm in New York. Neuberger, also a famed art patron, died at age 107

in late 2010. Neuberger passed away in a rare year when there was no estate tax.



“Fireball” with a Money Changer The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value “Fireball” with a Money Changer



“Can You Hear Me Now?”

No, it’s not Bill Gates—It’s The Oracle of Omaha in 1966. His net worth was about $10 million at the time.

(Photo courtesy

of Omaha World-Herald)

“Fireball” with a Money Changer The Story of Warren Buffett



Buffett Stymied by Twitter

Even as one of the foremost media barons through the years, Buffett is well known as a technophobe who really only uses a computer for bridge games. Here’s Buffett’s only known Twitter message sent on February 20, 2009. His big following has not heard from him since.

Of Permanent Value “Fireball” with a Money Changer



14





BUFFETT’S TRIBUTE TO BEN GRAHAM


Warren Buffett wrote the following tribute after the death of his mentor and friend, Ben Graham:



BENJAMIN GRAHAM

1894-1976

Several years ago Ben Graham, then almost 80, expressed to a friend the thought that he hoped to do every day “something foolish, something creative, and something generous.”



The inclusion of that first whimsical goal reflected his knack for packaging ideas in a form that avoided any overtones of sermonizing or self-importance. Although his ideas were powerful, their delivery was unfailingly gentle.



Readers of this magazine need no elaboration of his achievements as measured by the standard of creativity. It is rare that the founder of a discipline does not find his work eclipsed in rather short order by successors. But, over 40 years after publication of the book that brought structure and logic to a disorderly and confused activity, it is difficult to think of possible candidates for even the runner-up position in the field of security analysis. In an area where much looks foolish within weeks or months after publication, Ben’s principles have remained sound—their value often enhanced and better understood in the wake of financial storms that demolished flimsier intellectual structures. His counsel of soundness brought unfailing rewards to his followers—even to those with natural abilities inferior to more gifted practitioners who stumbled while following counsels of brilliance or fashion.



A remarkable aspect of Ben’s dominance of his professional field was that he achieved it without that narrowness of mental activity that concentrates all effort on a single end. It was, rather, the incidental by-product of an intellect whose breadth almost exceeded definition. Certainly I have never met anyone with a mind of similar scope. Virtually total recall, unending fascination with new knowledge, and an ability to recast it in a form applicable to seemingly unrelated problems made exposure to his thinking in any field a delight.



But his third imperative—generosity—was where he succeeded beyond all others. I knew Ben as my teacher, my employer, and my friend. In each relationship—just as with all his students, employees and friends—there was an absolutely open-ended, no-scores-kept generosity of ideas, time, and spirit. If clarity of thinking was required, there was no better place to go. And if encouragement or counsel was needed, Ben was there.



Walter Lippmann spoke of men who plant trees that other men will sit under. Ben Graham was such a man.



Warren Buffett



(With permission of Warren Buffett)

(Retyped)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Buffett’s Tribute to Ben Graham



15





BENJAMIN GRAHAM AND SECURITY ANALYSIS


By Walter J. Schloss

Ben Graham was an original thinker as well as a clear thinker. He had high

ethical standards and was modest and unassuming. He was one of a kind. I worked for him for nearly 10 years as a security analyst.

In re-reading the preface to the first edition of Security Analysis, I am impressed all over again with Ben’s views. I quote: “We are concerned chiefly with concepts, methods, standards, principles, and above all with logical reasoning. We have stressed theory not for itself alone but for its value in practice. We have tried to avoid prescribing standards which are too stringent to follow or technical methods which are more trouble than they are worth.”

Security Analysis says it all. It is up to analysts and investors to put Ben’s ideas into practice.

Back in 1935 while working at Loeb Rhodes (then called Carl M. Loeb & Co.), one of the partners, Armand Erpf, gave a good piece of advice when I asked him how I could get into the “statistical department.” In those days and perhaps today to some extent, the best way to advance was by bringing in business. If you had wealthy family or friends, you brought in commissions. Security analysis was in its infancy and who you knew was much more important than what you knew. If you didn’t have connections, it was difficult to get ahead. In any case, Mr. Erpf told me that there was a new book called Security Analysis that had just been written by a man called Ben Graham.

“Read the book and when you know everything in it, you won’t have to read anything else.”

I took Ben’s course in Advanced Security Analysis at the New York Stock Exchange Institute (New York Institute of Finance).

Ben was a good speaker, enthusiastic, and logical. Ben did something that I haven’t seen done often. He would take an undervalued situation at that time, such as the bankrupt bonds of Baldwin Locomotive, and show how much the new securities would be worth based on their projected earning power and assets and relate this to the price of the bonds. Many bright Wall Streeters such as Gus Levy of Goldman Sachs, who later became the top arbitrageur in the country, used to take his course. I often wondered how much money people made on Ben’s ideas by transforming them into investments.

Ben was very generous with his thoughts and his time, particularly with young people. By offering me a job as his security analyst as I was about to leave the Army at the end of 1945, he changed my life. I know he helped others in our field too.

At Ben’s memorial service, Dave Dodd, Ben’s co-author, told how he became involved in the book.

It seems that Ben was asked to teach a course at Columbia University on investments and he agreed to do it with the stipulation that he would only do so if someone would take notes. Dave Dodd, a young instructor, volunteered and took copious notes at each of Ben’s lectures. Ben, using the notes, then went ahead and wrote Security Analysis. As Dave said, Ben did the work but he insisted that Dave get credit by being co-author.

Professor Dodd went on to become a very successful investor and a director of Graham-Newman Corporation, an investment trust that Ben had founded in 1936 with his partner, Jerome Newman.

The ability to think clearly in the investment field without the emotions that are attached to it, is not an easy undertaking. Fear and greed tend to affect one’s judgment. Because Ben was not really very aggressive about making money, he was less affected by these emotions than were many others.

Ben had been hurt by the Depression, so he wanted to invest in things that would protect him on the downside. The best way to do this was to lay out rules which, if followed, would reduce his chance of loss. A good example of this was the day I happened to be in his office at Graham-Newman when he received a telephone call that they had bought 50 percent of Government Employees Insurance Co. (now GEICO). He turned to me and said, “Walter, if this purchase doesn’t work out, we can always liquidate it and get our money back.”

The fact that GEICO worked out better than his wildest dreams wasn’t what he was looking for. As the saying goes, a stock well bought is half sold. I think Ben was an expert in that area.

Graham-Newman followed the precepts set down by Ben and the fund prospered. Compared to today’s investment company, it was tiny. Its total net assets on January 31, 1946 were $3,300,000.

Ben’s emphasis was on protecting his expectation of profit with minimum risk. If one wants to get hold of Moody’s Investment Manuals for the 1947-1956 period, it is interesting to see Graham-Newman’s holdings. Many of them were small, practically unknown companies but they were cheap on the numbers. It is instructive to read their annual report for the year ended January 1946. It states that their general investment policies were twofold.

1. To purchase securities at prices less than their intrinsic value as determined by careful analysis with particular emphasis on the purchase of securities at less than their liquidating value.

2. To engage in arbitrage and hedging operations.

I helped Ben with the third edition of Security Analysis, published in 1951. In the appendix is an article on special situations that first appeared in The Analysts Journal in 1946. In the article, he had worked out an algebraic formula for risk-reward results that could be applied today, 37 years later.

In 1949, The Intelligent Investor was published. This was a book for the layman, but it focused on security analysis and gave prestige to the field. Its fourth revised edition is still in print.

One day, I came across a very cheap stock based on its price at the time, Lukens Steel. We bought some but expected to buy more.

At this point, Ben went out to lunch with a man who kept telling Ben about one blue chip after another. At the end of the meal he asked Ben if he liked anything, and Ben said we were buying some Lukens Steel. I doubt if it took a day before the man went out and bought a great deal of Lukens and pushed the stock out of our buying range. I had the impression after Ben told me the story that he didn’t want to be rude and hadn’t realized how important his comments were.

He tried to keep things simple. He wrote that he didn’t believe security analysts should use more than arithmetic and possibly a little algebra for any investment decision.

Because Ben was a cultured, many-faceted man, he didn’t spend as much time on investments as did others in the field. He liked to try new ideas. In the late 1930s he became involved in promoting his ever-normal granary theory and wrote a book on it called Storage and Stability in which some commodities and metals would be used as a backing for our currency. His ideas made sense and with cotton at six cents a pound and other raw materials at low prices, it was an interesting proposal. He never had the clout to sell it to the Congress, although Bernard Baruch, a friend of his, supported the idea; and it could have been a useful way to help the farmers and reduce the threat of inflation.

Of all the things that Ben accomplished in his lifetime, Security Analysis was, to me, his greatest achievement.

Ben Graham was the leader in giving status to security analysts. It was a privilege to know him.

____________________

Schloss and his son Edwin closed their business in 2003 after 48 years. In 1952, a $100,000 investment in the S&P 500 would have grown to $9.3 million by 2002; but $100,000 invested with Schloss would have grown to $78 million by 2002. Walter Schloss gave his archives to Columbia Business School, and Edwin went back to a long-time family interest in the theater. In 2005, Edwin Schloss put on a play in New York about the works of Mississippi writer Eudora Welty. The one-woman stage show was called Sister and Miss Lexie. The show, a 25th anniversary production at The Flea Theater, drew on the characters from Welty’s novel Losing Battles and her classic short story “Why I Live at the P.C.”

Edwin Schloss ended his 33-year sideline of investing in commercial theater after a $5 million production flopped. Grey Gardens played its last performance July 29, 2007. “With it,” Schloss said (Bloomberg, August 1, 2007), “I felt wounded by the experience. If a serious musical like Grey Gardens can’t make it, I feel producing quality is an exercise in masochism.” In all, Schloss has backed some 15 Broadway or off-Broadway shows, including 1999’s Kiss Me, Kate, which was profitable. But other shows failed.

Schloss said some 30 years ago that Buffett advised him against investing in Broadway. “He told me, ‘If the music is wonderful, with the best script and the most gifted cast, just shut your eyes and say no.’ I should have listened to him,” Schloss said.

The elder Schloss, who has lived through 17 recessions, still loves investing and studying Value Line sheets. He continues to operate on a shoestring in a room across the hall from his apartment where a wall contains holiday greeting photos from Buffett addressed to “Big Walt.” Schloss owns a 1934 edition of Ben Graham’s Security Analysis which he still thumbs through. The book is held together by three strips of Scotch tape (Forbes, February 11, 2008).

Reproduced by permission from the private writings (1976) of Walter J. Schloss.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Ben Graham and Security Analysis



Same DNA is clearly at work here.

Walter and Edwin Schloss

(Photo courtesy of Walter Schloss)



Eudora Welty

Pulitzer Prize winning author Eudora Welty, of Mississippi, coincidentally, studied advertising at Columbia University’s business school.

(AP/Photo)



16





GARAGE SALE FROM HEAVEN


Tim Medley, a Berkshire shareholder since 1987, who runs the Medley & Brown financial advisor firm in Jackson, Mississippi. Medley may have made the most undervalued investment of his career when he bought an early copy of Security Analysis —very good condition, no deficits but no scarce dust jacket—for $3 at a garage sale.

Medley says he has no plans to resell the book.

GARAGE SALES IN NEW ORLEANS

by Tim Medley

After buying a condo in New Orleans a few years back, my wife, Jean, and I try to be there once a month or so for long weekends. As you would expect, we’ve loved finding the neighborhood restaurants, buying seafood at the farmers’ market and being a part of this unique city. One of Jean’s favorite activities is visiting garage sales—she prefers to call them estate sales—on Saturday morning, and oftentimes, I am an unwilling participant. I was glad I was along a few weeks ago because I struck gold.



Pulling up on the curb at a home in Metairie, I noticed the customary box of old books for sale, and I headed that way. For many years, I’ve imagined that one day at one of these garage sales, I might find an antique edition of Graham and Dodd’s famous book, Security Analysis, considered by many to be the holy grail of investment analysis. Warren Buffett, who studied under Ben Graham at Columbia University in the late 1940’s, feels the second edition is the best of the six editions. As I reached the box, I read the sign saying “all books $3.” I immediately saw Security Analysis. At first I thought it was a recent, less valuable edition, but when I picked it up, it read “Second Edition.” My mind said, “Something must be wrong. This can’t be what I think it is.” After a minute or so of thumbing through it, I realized I had the real thing. I collected myself and headed for the owner. I wondered, “Should I offer him $2?” No, not this time. The owner looked at the book and over toward the box, and he seemed to hesitate. But then he said, “three bucks.” I paid and, still concerned that he might rethink his transaction, decided to skip the rest of the garage sale and got in my car.



What’s it worth? My book is the first printing of the Second Edition, and it appears there were seven printings. Ebay has a third printing for sale at $900. Grannis Fine Books of New Jersey has this listed at $1,000.



Needless to say, I have a new enthusiasm for garage sales!



(Source: Medley & Brown Investment News, Spring 2011)

FOUR BOOKS THAT BUFFETT TREASURES

In a 2008 foreword for the sixth edition of Security Analysis, Buffett wrote: “There are four books in my overflowing library that I particularly treasure, each of them written more than 50 years ago.”

Two of those books, he said, are first editions of The Wealth of Nations (1776) by Adam Smith and The Intelligent Investor (1949) by Benjamin Graham. Bill Gates gave Buffett a first edition of The Wealth of Nations, a rare book indeed. More about that in a later chapter.

In the foreword of the new Security Analysis, Buffett says that the third book that he treasures is an original copy of Security Analysis written by Benjamin Graham and David Dodd. Graham and Dodd both taught Buffett at Columbia University where he studied from 1950 to 1951. Buffett shared the following about the third and fourth books that he particularly treasures, both being editions of Security Analysis:

The copy of Security Analysis that I keep in my library and that I used at Columbia is the 1940 edition. I’ve read it, I’m sure, at least four times and obviously it is special.



But let’s get to the fourth book I mentioned, which is even more precious. In 2000, Barbara Dodd Anderson, Dave’s only child, gave me her father’s copy of the 1934 edition of Security Analysis with hundreds of marginal notes. These were inked in by Dave as he prepared for the publication of the 1940 revised edition. No gift has meant more to me.





Tim Medley with His Treasure

The Story of Warren Buffett



Sixth Edition of Security Analysis (2008)

(Photo by Mary Porter

Of Permanent Value Garage Sale from Heaven



17





THE WESTERN


Rick Mayhew, a Fenton, Missouri, financial planner, has watched the history of The Western Insurance Companies closely since his father, Thomas M. Mayhew, was once CEO of the company. During the 1950s, Buffett bought and then sold stock in The Western. It was several years later that Mayhew’s father was promoted to CEO.

“After Dad had retired,” Mayhew said, “the company was for sale. Warren and Charlie met with management of The Western in Kansas City but did not strike a deal.”

Mayhew, along with a student group, visited with Buffett in Omaha on December 1, 2006. Buffett told the group about finding The Western in Moody’s and showed the Q&A group his used copy of Moody’s, which he had purchased on Amazon.com to replace his original copy.

“He [Buffett] asked me if the street address for The Western had been 101 East First Street in Fort Scott, Kansas,” Mayhew recounted. “And, yes, that had been the home office. Pretty amazing memory.

“During lunch, I told Warren I wished he had bought The Western when it was for sale,” Mayhew said. “He smiled and said, ‘I wish I had, too.’”

The following material was compiled by Mayhew from a book called The Western Story (1976) by C. C. Otto, the CEO of The Western before Mayhew’s father.

____________________

In the early 1950s, at age 21, Buffett put 50% of his net worth in stock of The Western Insurance Securities Company of Fort Scott, Kansas. This was the holding company for The Western Casualty and Surety Company, The Western Fire Insurance Company, and later, The Western Indemnity Company. They were collectively referred to as The Western Insurance Companies, or just The Western. The company’s home office was located in Fort Scott, Kansas, which had a population of 10,000 at the time. The financial offices of the company were located in Kansas City, Missouri.

The Western was incorporated in Fort Scott in 1910 by its founder, Oscar Rice. This was four years before automobiles were required to be registered in Kansas.

There was a delay in securing a charter because the word “automobile” did not appear in the Kansas statutes. When the Kansas legislature convened in January 1911, it authorized the charter, which was issued on February 25, 1911, and filed as a public document on March 1, 1911. At the time, there were only 400,000 automobiles in the United States. Rice, The Western’s founder, did not own an automobile; and he did not buy one until 1920, 10 years after starting a car insurance company.

To get the company started, 200 applications for membership in the Western Automobile Indemnity Association (a mutual corporation) were taken at an admission fee of $5 each, which provided working capital of $1,000. The Association started business on March 28, 1911.

After the $5 membership fee, the annual premium was $80, payable in four installments of $20 each. The company, represented by thousands of independent insurance agents, grew and eventually became active in 37 states.

To organize, control, and manage future expansion of the company, The Western Insurance Securities Company was chartered on October 26, 1925.

In 1937, an investor in New York City had quietly accumulated a large block of Securities Company stock. He confronted CEO Ray B. Duboc, who succeeded Rice upon his death in 1922, with a direct challenge to control the Securities Company and the subsidiary operating companies. Duboc went to New York and bought all of the threatening investor’s stock. The purchase was paid for personally by Mr. Duboc and by Secretary-Treasurer Eugene Clifford Gordon at great personal sacrifice on their parts.

During 1951, The Western popped up on Buffett’s radar screen. In December 2006, Buffett met with a group of Fort Scott Community College students and described his interest in The Western and how he had researched the stock. He said he found information about The Western in the back of Moody’s Bank and Finance Manual (a mere 1,000 pages at the time), “where they keep all the good stuff.”

In the process of researching The Western, Buffett checked at the Nebraska Insurance Department in Lincoln and then began to contact agents in Omaha who either represented or competed against The Western. Both groups gave favorable reviews. He then went to Kansas City and met with CEO Ray B. Duboc. Buffett was just starting his career at the time and later shared his impression of Duboc: “Ray Duboc could not have treated me better when I met him as a 21 year old. He was a first-class human being as well as an outstanding businessman.” It sounds a lot like Buffett’s initial contact with Lorimer Davidson at GEICO.

Duboc had shared with Buffett the series of stories about the potential proxy fight and the struggle to maintain control of The Western. After this visit, Buffett sold his GEICO stock and put 50% of his net worth in Western Insurance Securities stock. Later he sold his Western stock and began purchasing GEICO again. This led to his eventual acquisition of GEICO.

The Western’s home office was in a small town, but branch offices existed in larger cities, such as Los Angeles, Chicago, Phoenix, Denver, Seattle, Jackson, San Antonio, Salt Lake City, Portland, Omaha, Sioux Falls, and Detroit. The financial offices, bond department, and a branch office were located in Kansas City, approximately 80 miles north of Fort Scott. A very personal “family” culture permeated The Western, as one might expect from a company with small town Midwestern roots.

In the mid 1930s, a surety bond was needed on the state treasurer of Georgia. Duboc went to Atlanta himself to meet with Governor Eugene Talmadge. Arriving at the Governor’s mansion, he was advised he would need to wait until the Governor had finished milking his cow. The meeting resulted in a bond with double cash collateral and a nice profit for the company.

At one time, The Western wrote a public official schedule bond that included Elvis Presley as one of the bond principals. Elvis had been given the honorary title of Special Deputy Sheriff in Shelby County, Tennessee, which included Memphis. During some employee training sessions in the bond department, the drawer containing the bond was pulled out, and the official document was displayed for the trainees. It is suspected this was done to add a bit of glamour to the surety bond business.

____________________

When The Western was offered for sale in the mid 1980s, Buffett and Munger went to Kansas City to meet with the chairman, Charles Duboc (son of Ray B. Duboc) and the president Cedric McCurley. The meeting did not result in a deal, and the company was later sold to Lincoln National Corporation for $270 million and merged with its American States property and casualty operation. A few years later, in 1997, Safeco purchased American States and closed the office in Fort Scott.

At one time, The Western employed 785 people in Fort Scott. A trust in honor of the company and its employees was established in 2007 at the Fort Scott Community College. Nationwide, The Western at one point employed more than 2,200. Mayhem acknowledged what a tribute it was to the company that so many people, so long after the fact, wanted to honor The Western.

In a letter to Rick Mayhew, Buffett credited The Western with a role in his success: “Western, in a major way, contributed to the financial success I had. I owe a lot to Ray Duboc, The Western, and Fort Scott, Kansas.”



The Western Logo

(Courtesy of Rick Mayhew)

The Story of Warren Buffett



The Western Home Office

These are two of the three buildings The Western occupied in downtown Fort Scott. In the 1980s, The Western bought 88 acres of land just outside town to expand. One building was erected in 1982; the company was sold a few years later.

(Courtesy of Rick Mayhew)

Of Permanent Value The Western



The Westerner, September 1954 Issue

This is a copy of the front page of the internal Western newsletter. CEO Ray Duboc was featured.

(Courtesy of Rick Mayhew)



The Westerner, December 1979 Issue

Several years of annual work themes were featured.

(Courtesy of Rick Mayhew)

The Western The Story of Warren Buffett





Of Permanent Value The Western





18





WATER BOY AND CADDIE


Upon finding out that former Washington Redskins quarterback Eugene Profit had set up a value fund and bought Berkshire stock, Buffett wrote him the following letter on January 25, 2001:

Dear Mr. Profit,





I see where you own some Berkshire Hathaway stock and used to play for the Redskins. I own some Berkshire Hathaway and for two games was a water boy for the Redskins.





Back in the mid-40s, my sister, Doris, dated Dudley DeGroot, Jr., the son of the coach (he didn’t last long). I made myself such a pain that my sister and Dudley conspired to bribe me by getting me employed as a junior water boy. This was at the time of Sammy Baugh, so I was in heaven. Then Doris and Dudley broke up and the Redskins released me. Unfortunately, no other NFL team picked up my contract.





Come to our annual meeting, and we can compare notes on “our” respective teams.





Profit played football for the New England Patriots from 1986 to 1989. Following that, he went on to play one season with the Washington Redskins but left after an injury.

For a while he owned a doughnut shop outside Washington, D.C. Although it was profitable, the Yale graduate with an economics degree didn’t find it to be enough of a challenge.

After leaving his food business, he joined the Legg Mason firm as a financial consultant in 1994; then in 1996, he set up the Profit Value Fund, which he currently runs in Silver Spring, Maryland.

A CADDIE FOR TIGER WOODS

Fast-forward Buffett’s life 50 plus years from his days with the Redskins and suddenly he’s a caddie for Tiger Woods.

It began when Buffett showed up, along with many of the rich and famous, at a charity auction at the Silicon Valley home of investor Ron Conroy on May 19, 2000. Buffett took the opportunity to plug NetJets, which was offering round-trip flights to Orlando for a chance to golf with NetJets’ customer Tiger Woods. Bidders raised $650,000 for charity coffers, and NetJets President Rich Santulli announced he’d throw in Buffett as the caddie. “That didn’t bring an extra dime,” Buffett said.

Skipping out of work at the office on March 12, 2001, Buffett served as caddie at the Isleworth Country Club near Woods’s home in Florida. According to the Omaha World-Herald (March 18, 2001), Buffett didn’t actually lug Tiger’s clubs around the course. “It wasn’t the hardest job,” Buffett said. “I mostly rode in a cart.”

At the 18th tee, the world’s greatest golfer proposed a bet with the world’s greatest investor: They would each play the par-4 hole with $5 going to the player with the lowest score. Woods offered Buffett an advantage: Tiger would play the hole on his knees. “Crouching tiger, hidden dragon.” He teed up, knelt down to the awkward knee position and drove the ball 260 yards. Buffett hit a decent first drive, then found the water on his second drive. Things just got worse for Buffett. Tiger shot a 6 on the hole and went home $5 richer.

Buffett also reported that during the round, Woods performed the trick he made famous in TV commercials—repeatedly bouncing a ball in the air off the face of the club and then knocking the ball into the heavens beyond. Buffett said at one point Woods bounced the ball a little higher off his club, took a big swing and drove it 250 yards. “He’s unbelievable,” Buffett said.

One of the participants in the charity event was Tom Mendoza, president of the Network Appliance Storage Equipment Company as well as being president of the University of Notre Dame. He once gave the Fighting Irish $35 million—the school’s largest gift ever—toward the Mendoza College of Business. Mendoza described the golfing event this way:

We were immediately struck by the fact that the course was closed to everyone but us. Both Tiger and Warren were extremely friendly and after lunch, Warren changed from his suit into a caddie outfit with “Woods” on the back.



We went to the range and attempted to intimidate Tiger. It wasn’t effective. At one point, for fun, he hit it 300 plus yards into friends of his who were hitting on the opposite side of the range. A man came running across the street from his front yard with a leaf blower and caused a commotion; it was Tiger’s best friend Mark O’Meara. We took a number of group and individual photos and off we went.



It is hard to describe what it is like to watch Tiger play. On the second hole (par 5) he was 255 yards away. He hit a two iron eight feet from the pin. He never hit any putts over eight feet, but he was within an inch on almost every one regardless of distance. He shot a 69. His course record is 59. On that day, he hit irons in on the first two par 5s and did not birdie the holes. He had started the round on the second hole (shotgun). He birdied 10 and 11, eagled on 12, then hit seven straight birdies: 10 holes in a row under par.



On 18, he challenged Warren Buffett (who was not playing) by saying he could win the hole from his knees (430 yard par 4 up hill). Warren hit his drive 200 yards down the middle. Tiger, from his knees, hit it 240 straight. Tiger then hit a fairway wood to the edge of the green and won the hole. He then tossed the ball in the air and hit it with his driver with one hand over 250 yards.



No, he is not human.



But he could not have been nicer to us. We flew back with Warren Buffett and dropped him in Omaha. He had many great stories and insights. My favorite was his response to the question, “What is the most important advice you have for a CEO?” He said it was the same thing that makes a long-term marriage successful. We guessed honesty, loyalty, etc. He kept shaking his head no. “It’s setting low expectations.” He said his wife is always saying, “Warren, I’m so surprised.”



I can honestly say that he is the most impressive man that I have ever met, and I believe everyone else on the trip felt the same.



I cannot do justice to the day in an e-mail, but this event defined “cool.”



The Story of Warren Buffett



Crouching Tiger,

Hidden Dragon Woods

(AP/Wide World Photos)

Of Permanent Value Water Boy and Caddie



19





BUFFETT’S STOCK PORTFOLIO IN 1950S




The Story of Warren Buffett



Of Permanent Value Buffett’s Stock Portfolio in 1950s

INVESTMENT PERFORMANCE

12/31/50

Buffett & Co. $ 591.20

Selected Industries (1200 @3 1/8) 3,750.00

U. S. & International Securities (700 @4 1/8) 2,887.50

Parkersburg Rig & Reel (200 @13) 2,600.00

Total $ 9,828.70

Less: Loss on interest in Marshall Wells

(12 1/2 @198) 25.00

NET ASSETS $ 9,803.70

12/31/51

Buffett-Falk & Co. $ 292.63

Dividends receivable 140.00

Government Employees Insurance (350 @37 1/2) 13,125.00

Timely Clothes (200 @13) 2,600.00

Baldwin Co. (100 @22) 2,200.00

Greif Brothers Cooperage “A” (200 @18 1/4) 3,650.00

Des Moines Railway 5’s - 1955 (2000 @33) 330.00

Thor Corp. (200 @12 3/4) 2,550.00

Total $24,867.63

Loss: Bank Loans $5,000.00

Loss on interest in Cleveland

Worsted Mills (25 @95) 150.00 5,150.00

NET ASSETS 19,737.63

Net Increment in Investment Account $ 9,933.93

Less: Capital Additions 2,500.00

Net Gain from Investments $7,433.93

Percentage Gain on 12/31/50 Net Assets 75.8%

Dow-Jones Industrials 12/31/51 269.23

Dow-Jones Dividends -1951 16.34

Total 285.57

Less: Dow-Jones Industrials 12/30/50 235.41

Gain in Dow-Jones Industrials 50.16

Percentage Gain on 12/31/50 Dow-Jones Industrials 21.3 %

(Page retyped)



Buffett’s Stock Portfolio in 1950s The Story of Warren Buffett

PAPER ROUTES

July 5 Sunday $42.00

1511 Post $32.00

Afternoon Herald $10.00

August $52.00

1511 Post $42.00

Afternoon Herald $10.00

September $70.00

1511 Post $42.00

7 Herald $18.00

Afternoon Herald $10.00

October 5 Sunday $73.00

1511 Post $32.00

6 Herald $14.00

7 Herald $17.00

Afternoon Herald $10.00

November $86.00

1511 Post $42.00

6 Herald $15.00

7 Herald $19.00

Afternoon Herald $10.00

December-Same as November $ 86.00

$409.00

EXPENSES:

Watch repair $10

Bicycle - Misc $35 45.00

Net 364.00

(Page retyped)

Notice Buffett deducted $10 for watch repair and $35 for a bicycle.

Of Permanent Value Buffett’s Stock Portfolio in 1950s



20





CHESS WITH JONATHAN BRANDT


Henry Brandt, the top student in the Harvard Business School in his day and long a senior vice president with Shearson Lehman Hutton, made the mistake of selling more than 1,500 of the family’s Berkshire shares for millions of dollars less than they are worth today. “I’m very embarrassed about that,” Brandt once told Fortune.

His embarrassment was more acute when he discovered the buyer of his shares to be a Berkshire subsidiary, Rockford Bancorp, which later was spun off.

An extraordinary gatherer of information, Brandt spent his days writing out his investment thoughts on yellow pads. “He still does that [writes out everything on yellow pads],” his wife Roxanne said in the 1990s. Everyone recognized his fact-gathering abilities, and Buffett agreed.

Brandt and Buffett were friends from the early days, and their families remain friends today; although Brandt died on September 30, 2000.

For a time the two men shared an apartment during the week and then returned to their wives on the weekends. “So Buffett has slept in my bed,” laughs Roxanne Brandt.

The families often got together at the Brandt home in Manhattan. After dinner the men would settle in chairs or sit on the floor and listen to Buffett talk. Even back then, recalls Roxanne, it was “Jesus and the Apostles.”

She wrote in her daughter’s baby book at the time, “Three greatest minds of the era: Einstein, Schweitzer, and Buffett.”

Did you know football commentator and former player Joe Theismann once said, “Nobody in football should be called a genius. A genius is a guy like Norman Einstein.”? Norman Einstein was the valedictorian of Theismann’s high school graduating class. This was verified by Sports Illustrated.

So, when Theismann says, “He’s no Norman Einstein,” he means the same thing we do when we say, “He’s no Albert Einstein.”

Albert Einstein (1879–1955), the man who tried through science to study the cosmos and to read the mind of God, was so smart he managed to pull off something Buffett has only talked about doing: speaking to us from beyond the grave. Here’s Einstein’s comment about the Bush-Gore election contest: “Not everything that can be counted counts, and not everything that counts can be counted.”

Once Buffett played chess with the Brandts’s five-year-old son, Jonathan. “Buffett has always said he lost to Jonathan,” Mrs. Brandt said. “The truth is he beat Jonathan, but barely. He was sweating it.” She added, “I always had the feeling that Buffett looked at Jonathan, thinking, ‘When he grows up, where will he fit in my picture?’”

Jonathan, who went to Harvard and Stanford, wound up working for Buffett’s longtime friend, Bill Ruane, at the Ruane, Cunniff firm where he is an expert on banks and, of course, Berkshire.



Jonathan Brandt

Maybe he wants a rematch with Buffett.

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Chess with Jonathan Brandt



21





“I MAKE NO FURTHER PROVISIONS”


All men are ready to invest their money

But most expect dividends.

I say to you: Make perfect your will.

I say: take no thought of the harvest,

But only of proper sowing.

— T. S. Eliot

Congressman Howard H. Buffett signed his last will and testament on August 5, 1963, the year before he died. After his death, an inventory of his estate amounted to $563,292.77, of which $334,739.00 was invested in the Buffett Partnership. The elder Buffett bequeathed $20,000 to The Nebraska Methodist Hospital, $10,000 to The Immanuel Deaconess Institute, and $5,000 to Harding College of Searcy, Arkansas.

He left the rest of his estate to his “Beloved Wife” Leila, and named her as executrix and his son as trustee.

Howard Buffett’s instructions were clear:

Upon the death of my wife and myself, the Trustee shall divide the trust into as many equal shares as there are then living daughters of mine and deceased daughters of mine who have left issue then surviving.



Warren Buffett was to receive nothing except a few personal effects. Congressman Buffett explained his leaving nothing to his son by saying: “I make no further provision for my son, Warren, not out of any lack of love for him, but because he has a substantial estate in his own right and for the further reason that he has advised me that he does not desire the same and has requested that I not make any further provision for him.”

At his death, the elder Buffett, in line with the probity of his life, had checking accounts at local banks with a total of about $7,000, about $30,000 in Treasury bonds, one 1961 Buick automobile worth $1,800, and a solid stock portfolio. His portfolio included holdings reflective of his concerns with inflation: 300 shares of the diamond company De Beers Consolidated Mines, 300 shares of Dome Petroleum, 200 shares of Handy and Harmon, 500 shares of Kewanee Oil Company, and 100 shares of Weyerhaeuser. He also had agriculture and insurance investments: 185 shares of South Omaha Feed and Supply Company and 208 shares of Government Employees Insurance Company (GEICO).

GEICO was one of Warren Buffett’s favorite stocks, indeed a company for which one day Buffett would own all the shares. The 208 GEICO shares and a few other holdings were sold by Mrs. Buffett after her husband’s death to be invested elsewhere, according to court documents. What Congressman Buffett started as a buildup of solid wealth, Warren Buffett finished; however, none of Warren Buffett’s wealth was inherited from his father.



Bedrock Convictions

Congressman Howard Buffett (the only father in the 1960s with hair longer than his son’s) was known for integrity and bedrock convictions and thought his son should consider the ministry. Howard Buffett was known for saying things like, “It’s a nasty job going after the skunk under the hen house, but someone has to do it.” Seems like a genetic code for the pithy saying was passed on to the next generation.

(Omaha World–Herald)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value “I Make No Further Provisions”



22





BUFFETT PARTNERSHIP


Flash back to the Buffett Partnership days, the Fabulous Fifties.

To talk to Buffett face-to-face during the first years, “You went in the back door of his home, walked through the kitchen, the living room and went up the stairs to the bedroom,” the Omaha World-Herald (May 5, 1986) quoted one partner as saying. “If you were impressed with show and image, Warren was not your man.”

During the life of the partnership—from 1956 to “by the time we got to Woodstock” in 1969—average annual returns were 30% before fees; that is, $10,000 became $300,000. It was a busy year. Woodstock was held August 15–18, 1969, the same weekend that Hurricane Camille, the worst hurricane in years, slammed Mississippi, the birthplace of the blues and the origins of rock-and-roll—the roots of Woodstock itself. The war in Vietnam was at its peak.

At the time of the partnership’s inception, Buffett had been married for four years and had two small children. He was fresh off a brilliant academic career and a two-year stint on Wall Street. But Buffett, falling back on his pioneer spirit and self-reliance of the agrarian Midwest, shunned Wall Street and would forever after operate from his beloved Omaha.

Omaha, a city where almost everything is dedicated to economic activity, is the home of such no-nonsense enterprises as Mutual of Omaha, Union Pacific, ConAgra, Woodmen of the World Insurance, a Campbell’s Soup plant, Creighton University, a large health care industry, and the nearby Strategic Air Command (SAC) headquarters.

At the point in his career where Buffett was testifying before Congress about the Salomon scandal, he was introduced to the House Energy and Finance Subcommittee by U.S. Representative Peter Hoagland (D-Nebraska), who said it was his pleasure to introduce one of his state’s most illustrious and inspiring citizens. Hoagland attributed Buffett’s success “to growing up in Omaha, a beginning that instilled in him the old-fashioned values of integrity, discipline, and character.”

Born into a family both fully substantial and involved in the community, blessed with extraordinary mental abilities, and operating in a perfect economic soil for capitalism, Buffett arose one morning and entirely on his own founded the Buffett Partnership.

Organized May 1, 1956, when Buffett was 25, the tiny partnership had seven limited partners—four family members and three close friends—who contributed a total of $105,000 but had neither voting power nor say in the running of the partnership.

On the evening of May 5, 1956, the partners met; and Buffett handed out a short paper called “The Ground Rules” that included these words: “Whether we do a good job or a poor job is to be measured against the general experience in securities.”

The following month on June 30, 1956, Chuck Berry hit No. 2 on the charts with “Roll Over Beethoven.” In 1955, Berry’s first hit, “Maybelline,” launched him into the spotlight. He followed that with “Brown-Eyed Handsome Man” the next year. While Berry was making it big on the charts, Buffett was in his bedroom reading and working on his own music and rounding up a small band of partners.

For the history books, the following limited partners soared to No. 1 on the charts beginning in 1956:

Charles E. Peterson Jr. $5,000 (friend and

ex-roommate)

Elizabeth B. Peterson $25,000 (Charles’s mother)

Doris B. Wood $5,000 (sister)

Daniel J. Monen Jr. $5,000 (attorney/friend)

William H. Thompson $25,000 (father-in-law)

Alice R. Buffett $35,000 (aunt)

Truman S. Wood $5,000 (brother-in-law)

(Truman Wood, an Omaha native, married Buffett’s sister Doris in the early 1950s. They were divorced in 1965, and she later remarried. Wood died in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, in 1998.)

Over the years, the partnership grew from seven investors and $105,000 to 300 investors and $105 million. Attorney Daniel Monen drew up all Buffett Partnership papers. He died of a stroke at 77 near the end of 2004.

“The first investors just believed in me,” Buffett says. “The ones who had faith stayed on—you couldn’t get my Aunt Katie to sell if you came at her with a crowbar” (Forbes, October 11, 1999).

The first meeting of the partners was held at the Omaha Club in downtown Omaha. General partner Warren Buffett, listed as residing at 5202 Underwood Avenue where he rented a home, chipped in a whopping $100. And so the partnership began with $105,100. “Buffett’s initial investment for the partnership (not including the $100) was the purchase of a 49-cent ledger from Woolworth’s” (Maria Anagnos’ thesis). His only luxury was a manual typewriter. He would add more of his own money later to the successful enterprise. As manager, Buffett received 25% of the profits above the 6% investors were to receive in savings accounts annually, with deficiencies carried forward. The override amounted to a good income for young Buffett.

Buffett reinvested back into the partnership his substantial fee which amounted to about $1 million by the early 1960s (article by Holme R. Osborne as it appeared in GuruFocus, April 16, 2007).

“I got the idea for my partnership form because I had worked for Ben. I was inspired by the example. I changed certain things, but it was not original with me. That has never been recognized,” Buffett says (Janet Lowe, Benjamin Graham on Value Investing, p. 170).

Over the life of the partnership, the setup made Buffett a rich man. Two additional single-family limited partnerships were formed in 1956. By January 1, 1957, combined assets were $303,726. (That was the same year Elvis Presley was “All Shook Up.”) One other early investor was Robert Heilbrunn, who had studied under Ben Graham before becoming a value investor in his own right.

To seek new money, Buffett called on investors. He would sometimes approach them with his tax return asking, “Don’t you wish you could pay this much in taxes?”

One of Buffett’s weatlhy neighbors, Dorothy Davis, invited him over to her apartment one evening in 1957, according to Forbes (October 12, 1998). “ ‘I’ve heard you manage money,’ she said. Buffett recalls, ‘She questioned me very closely for two hours about my philosophy of investing. But her husband, Dr. Davis, didn’t say a word. He appeared not even to be listening. Suddenly, Dr. Davis announced, ‘We’re giving you $100,000.’ ‘How come?’ I asked. ‘Because you remind me of Charlie Munger.’ ” Buffett wondered who this Charles Munger was. Two years later, Dr. Davis introduced them.

Another Omaha businessman Bufett approached in the early days turned to his wife before making the $10,000 investment. His wife told him they didn’t have $10,000. “We could borrow it,” he persisted. “Like hell,” she replied. Today that businessman’s son bemoans his parents decision not to make the investment and thus missing out on being millionaires, adding, “We’ve all been working our asses off ever since.”

Among the early partners was Charles Heider, who today is general partner of Heider-Weitz Partners in Omaha. Heider says, “I told my family, ‘Look, Warren is going to think about how to invest our money seven days a week.’ ”

Another was investor Fred Stanback, who met and was impressed with Buffett at Columbia. Stanback is known for his long-term holdings in Berkshire, Food Lion, and other stocks.

As time passed, some original partners added money while new partners came on board. Later other partnerships and amendments to the original partnership cropped up. At the end of 1961, Buffett merged 10 of his partnerships and changed the name from Buffett Associates to Buffett Partnership.

In 1957, the partnership had recorded a gain of $31,615.97—a 10.4% increase. That may not sound impressive, but compared with the Dow Jones Industrial Average that slumped 8.4% that year, it was splendid.

The Dow and partnership results for the years 1957 through 1969 were listed for comparison in percentage terms in The Intelligent Investor (Fourth Revised Edition, 1973):

Dow Buffett Partnership

1957 -8.4 10.4

1958 38.5 40.9

1959 20.0 25.9

1960 -6.2 22.8

1961 22.4 45.9

1962 -7.6 13.9

1963 20.6 38.7

1964 18.7 27.8

1965 14.2 47.2

1966 -15.6 20.4

1967 19.0 35.9

1968 7.7 58.8

1969 -11.6 6.8

The partnership never failed to beat the Dow. It never had a down year. On average, from 1957 through 1962, while the Dow grew 8.3% a year, the partnership grew 26% a year.

Net assets of the partnership, compiled by Buffett while still under his own roof were $7,178,500! Buffett, worth about $100,000 when he started the partnership in 1956, was worth about $400,000 by 1959.

In November 1962, the partnership, which along the way had invested in windmill makers and anthracite producers, began buying shares of a textile mill, Berkshire Hathaway. The stock price had dropped below book value, indeed, even below the cash in the bank.

Buffett bought his first shares of Berkshire at $7.60 and kept on buying between $7 and $8 a share. By 1965, he gained financial control of Berkshire and became a director.

From the beginning, Buffett knew his mission was to compound his cash at a hefty, steady clip. In 1963, Buffett wrote his partners the following epistle about “The Joys of Compounding”:

I have it from unreliable sources that the cost of the voyage Isabella originally underwrote for Columbus was approximately $30,000. … Without attempting to evaluate the psychic income derived from finding a new hemisphere, it must be pointed out that even had squatter’s rights prevailed, the whole deal was not exactly another IBM. Figured very roughly, the $30,000 invested at 4% compounded annually would have amounted to something like $2,000,000,000,000 (that’s two trillion for those of you who are not government statisticians) by 1962.



Historical apologists for the Indians of Manhattan may find refuge in similar calculations. Such fanciful geometric progressions illustrate the value of either living a long time, or compounding your money at a decent rate.



In the same letter, Buffett told partners he had moved from an office off his bedroom “to one a bit (quite a bit) more conventional,” adding his response to the change: “Surprising as it may seem, the return to a time clock life has not been unpleasant. As a matter of fact, I enjoy not keeping track of everything on the backs of envelopes.”

It was 1962 when Buffett moved the partnership to 810 Kiewit Plaza. By then he had splurged by hiring his first employee, Bill Scott, who managed Berkshire’s bond portfolio until his retirement in 1993. Scott still works parttime at Berkshire and oversees his own charity interests.

From the beginning, partnership expenses were worrisome. From 1963 to 1969, rent soared from $3,947 to $5,823. Dues and subscriptions skyrocketed from $900 to $994. “At least the situation hasn’t gotten completely out of control,” Buffett wrote in his partnership letter of January 22, 1969.

Along the way, a Dun and Bradstreet Report dated November 13, 1963, gave approval of the fledgling enterprise: “Volume steady. Condition sound.” The partnership also received the following one-sentence description of its creditworthiness: “Due to the nature of this business, subject is not a general seeker of mercantile credit however maintains a prompt local pay record.”

As for the partnership’s finances, the report found that at the start of 1963, the partnership was worth $9.4 million, “consisting of cash resources, income-producing securities, and other investments. A sound condition continues. Cash averages a low to moderate six-figure amount in two local depository [sic] with a high six figure amount owing secured and relations satisfactory … Employs one. Location: Rents office space on eighth floor of multi-story brick office building located [in an] outlying business district. Premises orderly.”

At that time, limited partners numbered more than 90.

In his letter on January 18, 1964, Buffett reports the partnership began the year with assets of $17,454,900. “Susie and I have an investment of $2,392,900 in the Partnership. For the first time, I had to withdraw funds in addition to monthly payments, but it was a choice of this or disappointing the Internal Revenue Service.”

In 1964, Buffett Partnership listed 440 Omaha partners with an average investment of $98,430. Assuming those investors remained with Buffett throughout ownership of Berkshire shares, the $98,430 would have grown to $112 million by 1998 (Omaha World-Herald, July 12, 1998).

In 1965, Buffett was telling partners, “If our record is better than that of these (market averages), we consider it a good year whether we are plus or minus. If we do poorer, we deserve the tomatoes.”

ARBITRAGE

The results all along were boosted by Buffett’s skillful use of arbitrage. Often he would go long the stock of the acquiree and short the acquirer’s stock as a merger date approached.

In his January 18, 1965 letter, Buffett described three main investment categories in which the partnership was engaged:

1. Generals—Undervalued stocks generally to be held for a long time.



2. Workouts—Securities with a timetable, arbitrage situations arising from sell-outs, mergers, reorganizations, and the like.



3. Controls—Owning such a sizeable block that the partnership gains control of the business.



He also discussed taxes:

We have had a chorus of groans this year regarding partners’ tax liabilities. Of course, we also might have had a few if the tax sheet had gone out blank.



More investment sins are probably committed by otherwise quite intelligent people because of “tax considerations” than from any other cause. One of my friends—a noted West Coast philosopher—maintains that a majority of life’s errors are caused by forgetting what one is really trying to do. This is certainly the case when an emotionally supercharged element like taxes enters the picture (I have another friend—a noted East Coast philosopher who says it isn’t the lack of representation he minds—it’s the taxation).



In the midst of all this, Buffett says, “We like good management—we like a decent industry—we like a certain amount of ‘ferment’ in a previously dormant management or stockholder group. But, we demand value.”

By 1965, the partnership’s net assets—through contributions and compounding—had grown to $26 million from a mere $105,100 in only nine years. Buffett celebrated in the spring by renting an additional 227 square feet of space at headquarters, about the size of an ordinary room.

“Our War on Poverty was successful in 1965,” began Buffett’s January 20, 1966, letter to partners. “Specifically, we were $12,304,060 less poor at the end of the year,” During the year (1965), as the Dow went up 14.2%, the Buffett Partnership orbited the world, with a 47.2% return! That was about the time Buffett started saying, “Democracy is great, but not in investment decisions.”

Although Buffett had told partners his goal was to beat the Dow by 10 percentage points, in reality he was beating it by nearly 20 points. From 1957 through 1965, the Dow rose 11.4% per year on average. The partnership returns were 29.8% a year! His goal was achieved. And left in its own dust.

“I now feel that we are much closer to the point where increased size may prove disadvantageous,” he said. He would say it almost every year afterwards. He’s been saying it for more than 40 years. Yet average returns have continued coming in at more than 20% a year. Almost four decades later in the 2003 Berkshire Annual Report, which reported a 21% increase in book value which was 7.7 short of S&P that year, Buffett wrote, “Performance in the future will fall far short of what it has been in the past.”

In 1962, when Buffett Partnership began buying Berkshire Hathaway at under $8 a share, Berkshire had about $16 a share in working capital alone. Buffett addressed the Partnership’s position in Berkshire in his January 20, 1966 letter:

Our purchases of Berkshire started at a price of $7.60 per share in 1962. This price partially reflected large losses incurred by the prior management in closing some of the mills made obsolete by changing conditions within the textile business (which the old management had been quite slow to recognize). In the postwar period the company had slid downhill a considerable distance, having hit a peak in 1948 when about $29 1/2 million was earned before tax and about 11,000 workers were employed. This reflected output from 11 mills.



At the time we acquired control in the spring of 1965, Berkshire was down to two mills and about 2,300 employees. It was a very pleasant surprise to find that the remaining units had excellent management personnel, and we have not had to bring a single man from outside into the operation. In relation to our beginning acquisition cost of $7.60 per share (the average cost, however, was $14.86 per share, reflecting very heavy purchases in early 1965), the company on December 31, 1965, had net working capital alone (before placing any value on the plants and equipment) of about $19 a share.



Berkshire is a delight to own. There is no question that the state of the textile industry is the dominant factor in determining the earning power of the business, but we are most fortunate to have Ken Chace running the business in a first-class manner, and we also have several of the best sales people in the business heading up this end of their respective divisions.



While a Berkshire is hardly going to be as profitable as a Xerox, Fairchild Camera or National Video in a hypertensed market, it is a very comfortable sort of thing to own. As my West Coast philosopher [Buffett also has called on an East Coast philosopher] says, “It is well to have a diet consisting of oatmeal as well as cream puffs.



In a letter dated July 12, 1966, Buffett reported that the partnership, with two 10% partners, had purchased all the stock of Hochschild, Kohn & Co., a privately owned, Baltimore-based department store chain, for about $5 million. Buffett’s partnership bought 80% of Diversified Retailing Co., and Diversified purchased Hochschild. The chain, which never did well, was sold on December 1, 1969, to Supermarkets General for about the purchase price.

Even with that stale purchase, the partnership continued its overall astounding success in 1966 as stated in his January 25, 1967 letter: “The Partnership had its tenth anniversary during 1966. The celebration was appropriate—an all-time record (both past and future) was established for our performance margin relative to the Dow. Our advantage was 36 points which resulted from a plus 20.4% for the Partnership and a minus 15.6% for the Dow.”

Buffett’s January 24, 1968, letter began by describing the good year experienced by the Partnership in 1967:

By most standards, we had a good year in 1967. Our overall performance was plus 35.9% compared to plus 19.0% for the Dow, thus surpassing our previous objective of performance ten points superior to the Dow. Our overall gain was $19,384,250 which, even under accelerating inflation, will buy a lot of Pepsi [which in those days he was spiking with cherry syrup]. And, due to the sale of some long-standing large positions in marketable securities, we had realized taxable income of $27,376,667, which has nothing to do with 1967 performance but should give all of you a feeling of vigorous participation in The Great Society on April 15th.



It was also during this time that Buffett reported that through the partnership’s two controlled companies, Diversified Retailing and Berkshire, two other companies were acquired: Associated Cotton Shops, later named Associated Retail Stores, and National Indemnity, along with National Fire & Marine, an affiliated company. Associated was bought by Diversified Retailing and National Indemnity was purchased by Berkshire.

Buffett reported in that same 1968 letter: “The office group, spouses and children have over $15 million invested in BPL [Buffett Partnership Limited] on January 1, 1968, so we have not had a need for NoDoz during business hours.”

In his letter on July 11, 1968, Buffett clearly worried about a speculative blowoff for the market:

I make no effort to predict the course of general business or the stock market. Period. However, currently, there are practices snowballing in the security markets and business world which, while devoid of short-term predictive value, bother me as to possible long-term consequences.



Spectacular amounts of money are being made by those participating (whether as originators, top employees, professional advisors, investment bankers, stock speculators, etc.) in the chain-letter type stock-promotion vogue.



From 1957 through 1968, the Dow’s compound annual growth rate was 9.1%; Buffett Partnership’s rate was 31.6%.

Buffett wrote in his January 22, 1969 letter about a change he had noted in the investment management business:

The investment management business, which I used to severely chastise in this section for excessive lethargy, has now swung in many quarters to acute hypertension. One investment manager, representing an organization (with an old established name you would recognize) handling mutual funds aggregating well over $1 billion, said upon launching a new advisory service in 1968:



The complexities of national and international economics make money management a full-time job. A good money manager cannot maintain a study of securities on a week-by-week or even a day-by-day basis. Securities must be studied in a minute-by-minute program.





Wow!



This sort of stuff makes me feel guilty when I go out for a Pepsi.



In his January 22, 1969 letter, he described why market price was inconsequential to him:

I still sometimes get comments from partners like: “Say, Berkshire is up four points—that’s great!” or “What’s happening to us, Berkshire was down three last week?” Market price is irrelevant to us in the valuation of our controlling interests. We valued B-H at 25 at yearend 1967 when the market was about 20, and 31 at yearend 1968 when the market was about 37. We would have done the same thing if the markets had been 15 and 50, respectively. (“Price is what you pay, value is what you get.”) We will prosper or suffer in controlled investments in relation to the operating performances of our businesses—we will not attempt to profit by playing various games in the securities markets.



On May 29, 1969, he wrote about his decision to close up shop: “About eighteen months ago I wrote to you regarding changed environmental and personal factors causing me to modify our future performance objectives.” The investing environment was becoming more negative and frustrating. He continued, “I know I don’t want to be totally occupied with out-pacing an investment rabbit all my life.” Buffett concluded, “The only way to slow down is to stop.”

As the end of the line appeared for the Buffett Partnership, Woodstock was tuning up. Of course in today’s different business structure, Buffett remains occupied with outrunning that investment rabbit for the best investment carrots, and Woodstock takes on a new meaning.

“Buffett ended the partnership in 1969, because he was tired of the pressure of being the league leader in mutual funds. He thought that the stock market was overvalued, and the number of partners had grown to where he would have to register as an investment company subject to government regulations. Most importantly, he no longer needed other people’s money to play the game” (Spinner, 1988, p. 187).

From 1957 to the end of 1969, the partnership had rung up a 29.5% annual compound return while the Dow had a measly return of only 7.4% annually!

Buffett liquidated the partnership and distributed to the investors their profits and their pro rata interest in Berkshire. He gave them a range of options: maintaining proportional interests in Diversified Retailing or in Berkshire or cash. He also offered to help his investors make investments in bonds.

He even recommended another money manager, his old friend Bill Ruane, who established the Sequoia Fund on July 15, 1970, to serve limited partners when Buffett Partnership closed.

From the beginning, the successful Sequoia Fund has invested in some of the same stocks that Berkshire owned, Freddie Mac being one. About a quarter of Sequoia’s money is in Berkshire.

The Buffett Partnership was terminated at the end of 1969, and the market was well into a long tailspin culminating in the collapse of 1973–74. Perhaps Buffett was familiar with Shakespeare’s stage direction in The Winter’s Tale: “Exit, pursued by a bear.”

Buffett’s caution about conditions and his withdrawal were perfectly timed. When the partnership closed, Berkshire had 983,582 shares outstanding. Buffett Partnership owned 691,441 of them.

Berkshire’s market value had grown to about $105 million; and Buffett’s own stake was worth about $25 million, much of which he quietly invested in Berkshire Hathaway. His interest, both managerial and financial, increased in Berkshire, which had bought the Illinois National Bank and Trust of Rockford, Illinois, in 1969.

Berkshire moved its business headquarters on August 1, 1970, to the 14th floor of Kiewit Plaza. At that time Berkshire had three main businesses: the textile operation, the insurance operation conducted by National Indemnity and National Fire & Marine, and the Illinois National Bank and Trust. It also owned Sun Newspapers, Inc., Blacker Printing Company, and 70% of Gateway Underwriters; but these operations were not financially significant. Berkshire also bought the Omaha Sun, along with a string of weeklies in 1969, but sold them in 1981, two years before the Sun folded.

In a final letter to partners on February 18, 1970, Buffett thanked them for giving him a free hand:

My activity has not been burdened by second-guessing, discussing non sequiturs, or hand holding. You have let me play the game without telling me what club to use, how to grip it, or how much better the other players were doing. I’ve appreciated this, and the results you have achieved have significantly reflected your attitudes and behavior. If you don’t feel this is the case, you underestimate the importance of personal encouragement and empathy in maximizing human effort and achievement.



“Herein lies the motivational and management aspects of Buffett’s genius, his keen understanding of human nature,” says Michael Assael. “But Warren Buffett’s business and investment genius runs deeper. Today it revolves around three disciplines, and the interplay among them:

1. Finance. Buffett knows return on investment is paramount. He demands value. He inputs capital efficiently and has structured Berkshire to get the big bang for her buck.

2. Economics. Buffett is sensitive to the evolving economic landscape and invests in long-term trends to Berkshire’s advantage. He can read the mind of the consumer and understand civilization’s hierarchy of desires. He can gauge industrial consumption as well. He can predict which businesses will have the great competitive strength.

3. Management and Human Relations. Buffett is touched by the importance of sensitivity and empathy in motivating people and maximizing achievement. He’s careful to plant and nurture the seeds of human capital and goodwill.

“Combining these talents makes Buffett unique,” Assael continues. “He views his work in a multi-dimensional way, much as Einstein viewed space, time and gravitation, and Freud the id, the ego, and the superego. The gifts of Buffett’s genius speak for themselves.” As the partnership closed out, Buffett, still a young man with a maverick, offbeat-manner, was planning bigger things.

Here’s a last look back at two partnership letters:

Warren E. Buffett

5202 Underwood Ave.

Omaha, Nebraska

SECOND ANNUAL LETTER TO LIMITED PARTNERS

The General Stock Market Picture in 1957



In last year’s letter to partners, I said the following:



My view of the general market level is that it is priced above intrinsic value. This view relates to blue-chip securities. This view, if accurate, carries with it the possibility of a substantial decline in all stock prices, both undervalued and otherwise. In any event I think the probability is very slight that current market levels will be thought of as cheap five years from now. Even a full-scale bear market, however, should not hurt the market value of our work-outs substantially.



If the general market were to return to an undervalued status our capital might be employed exclusively in general issues and perhaps some borrowed money would be used in this operation at that time. Conversely, if the market should go considerably higher our policy will be to reduce our general issues as profits present themselves and increase the work-out portfolio.



All of the above is not intended to imply that market analysis is foremost in my mind. Primary attention is given at all times to the detection of substantially undervalued securities.



The past year witnessed a moderate decline in stock prices. I stress the word “moderate” since casual reading of the press or conversing with those who have had only recent experience with stocks would tend to create an impression of a much greater decline. Actually, it appears to me that the decline in stock prices has been considerably less than the decline in corporate earning power under present business conditions. This means that the public is still very bullish on blue chip stocks and the general economic picture. I make no attempt to forecast either business or the stock market; the above is simply intended to dispel any notions that stocks have suffered any drastic decline or that the general market is at a low level. I still consider the general market to be priced on the high side based on long-term investment value.



Our Activities in 1957



The market decline has created greater opportunity among undervalued situations so that, generally, our portfolio is heavier in undervalued situations relative to work-outs than it was last year. Perhaps an explanation of the term “work-out” is in order. A work-out is an investment which is dependent on a specific corporate action for its profit rather than a general advance in the price of the stock as in the case of undervalued situations. Work-outs come about through sales, mergers, liquidations, tenders, etc. In each case, the risk is that something will upset the applecart and cause the abandonment of the planned action, not that the economic picture will deteriorate and stocks decline generally. At the end of 1956, we had a ratio of about 70-30 between general issues and work-outs. Now it is about 85-15.



During the past year we have taken positions in two situations which have reached a size where we may expect to take some part in corporate decisions. One of these positions accounts for between 10% and 20% of the portfolio of the various partnerships and the other accounts for about 5%. Both of these will probably take in the neighborhood of three to five years of work but they presently appear to have potential for a high average annual rate of return with a minimum of risk. While not in the classification of work-outs, they have very little dependence on the general action of the stock market. Should the general market have a substantial rise, of course, I would expect this section of our portfolio to lag behind the action of the market.



Results for 1957



In 1957 the three partnerships which we formed in 1956 did substantially better than the general market. At the beginning of the year, the Dow-Jones Industrials stood at 499 and at the end of the year it was at 435 for a loss of 64 points. If one had owned the Averages, he would have received 22 points in dividends reducing the overall loss to 42 points or 8.47% for the year. This loss is roughly equivalent to what would have been achieved by investing in most investment funds and, to my knowledge, no investment fund invested in stocks showed a gain for the year.



All three of the 1956 partnerships showed a gain during the year amounting to about 6.2%, 7.8% and 25% on year end 1956 net worth. Naturally, a question is created as to the vastly superior performance of the last partnership, particularly in the minds of the partners of the first two. This performance emphasizes the importance of luck in the short run, particularly in regard to when funds are received. The third partnership was started the latest in 1956 when the market was at a lower level and when several securities were particularly attractive. Because of the availability of funds, large positions were taken in these issues whereas the two partnerships formed earlier were already substantially invested so that they could only take relatively small positions in these issues.



Basically, all partnerships are invested in the same securities and in approximately the same percentages. However, particularly during the initial stages, money becomes available at varying times and varying levels of the market so there is more variation in results than is likely to be the case in later years. Over the years, I will be quite satisfied with a performance that is 10% per year better than the Averages, so in respect to these three partnerships, 1957 was a successful, and probably better than average, year.



Two partnerships were started during the middle of 1957 and their results for the balance of the year were roughly the same as the performance of the Averages which were down about 12% for the period since inception of the 1957 partnerships. Their portfolios are now starting to approximate those of the 1956 partnerships and performance of the entire group should be much more comparable in the future.



Interpretation of Results



To some extent our better than average performance in 1957 was due to the fact that it was a generally poor year for most stocks. Our performance, relatively, is likely to be better in a bear market than in a bull market so that deductions made from the above results should be tempered by the fact that it was the type of year when we should have done relatively well. In a year when the general market had a substantial advance I would be well satisfied to match the advance of the Averages.



I can definitely say that our portfolio represents better value at the end of 1957 than it did at the end of 1956. This is due to both generally lower prices and the fact that we have had more time to acquire the more substantially undervalued securities which can only be acquired with patience. Earlier I mentioned our largest position which comprised 10% to 20% of the assets of the various partnerships. In time I plan to have this represent 20% of the assets of all partnerships but this cannot be hurried. Obviously, during any acquisition period, our primary interest is to have the stock do nothing or decline rather

than advance. Therefore, at any given time, a fair proportion of our portfolio may be in the “sterile” stage. This policy, while requiring patience, should maximize long term profits.



I have tried to cover points which I felt might be of interest and disclose as much of our philosophy as may be imparted without talking of individual issues. If there are any questions concerning any phase of the operation, I would welcome hearing from you.



February 6, 1958

Buffett’s January 1961 letter follows:

The General Stock Market in 1960:



A year ago, I commented on the somewhat faulty picture presented in 1959 by the Dow-Jones Industrial Average which had advanced from 583 to 679, or 16.4%. Although practically all investment companies showed gains for that year, less than 10% of them were able to match or better the record of the Industrial Average. The Dow-Jones Utility Average had a small decline and the Railroad Average recorded a substantial one.



In 1960, the picture was reversed. The Industrial Average declined from 679 to 616, or 9.3%. Adding back the dividends which would have been received through ownership of the Average still left it with an overall loss of 6.3%. On the other hand, the Utility Average showed a good gain and, while all the results are not now available, my guess is that about 90% of all investment companies out-performed the Industrial Average. The majority of investment companies appear to have ended the year with overall results in the range of plus or minus 5%. On the New York Stock Exchange, 653 common stocks registered losses for the year while 404 showed gains.



Results in 1960:



My continual objective in managing partnership funds is to achieve a long-term performance record superior to that of the Industrial Average. I believe this Average, over a period of years, will more or less parallel the results of leading investment companies. Unless we do achieve this superior performance there is no reason for existence of the partnerships.



However, I have pointed out that any superior record which we might accomplish should not be expected to be evidenced by a relatively constant advantage in performance compared to the Average. Rather it is likely that if such an advantage is achieved, it will be through better-than-average performance in stable or declining markets and average, or perhaps even poorer-than-average performance in rising markets.



I would consider a year in which we declined 15% and the Average 30% to be much superior to a year when both we and the Average advanced 20%. Over a period of time there are going to be good and bad years; there is nothing to be gained by getting enthused or depressed about the sequence in which they occur. The important thing is to be beating par; a four on a par three hole is not as good as a five on a par five hole and it is unrealistic to assume we are not going to have our share of both par three’s and par five’s.



The above dose of philosophy is being dispensed since we have a number of new partners this year and I want to make sure they understand my objectives, my measure of attainment of these objectives, and some of my known limitations.



With this background it is not unexpected that 1960 was a better-than-average year for us. As contrasted with an overall loss of 6.3% for the Industrial Average, we had a 22.8% gain for the seven partnerships operating throughout the year. Our results for the four complete years of partnership operation after expenses but before interest to limited partners or allocation to the general partner are:



Partnerships

Operating Partnership Dow-Jones

Year Entire Year Gain Gain

1957 3 10.4% -8.4%

1958 5 40.9% 38.5%

1959 6 25.9% 19.9%

1960 7 22.8% -6.3%

It should be emphasized again that these are the net results to the partnership; the net results to the limited partners would depend on the partnership agreement that they had selected.



The overall gain or loss is computed on a market to market basis. After allowing for any money added or withdrawn, such a method gives results based upon what would have been realized upon liquidation of the partnership at the beginning of the year and what would have been realized upon liquidation gains or losses and is different, of course, from our tax results which value securities at cost and realize gains or losses only when securities are actually sold.



On a compounded basis, the cumulative results have been:



Year Partnership Gain Dow-Jones Gain

1957 10.4% - 8.4%

1958 55.6% 26.9%

1959 95.9% 52.2%

1960 140.6% 42.6%

Although four years is entirely too short a period from which to make deductions, what evidence there is points toward confirming the proposition that our results should be relatively better in moderately declining or static markets. To the extent that this is true, it indicates that our portfolio may be more conservatively, although decidedly less conventionally, invested than if we owned “blue-chip” securities. During a strongly rising market for the latter, we might have real difficulty in matching their performance.



Multiplicity of Partnerships:



A preceding table shows that the family is growing. There has been no partnership which has had a consistently superior or inferior record compared to our group average, but there has been some variance each year despite my efforts to keep all partnerships invested in the same securities and in about the same proportions. This variation, of course, could be eliminated by combining the present partnerships into one large partnership. Such a move would also eliminate much detail and a moderate amount of expense.



Frankly, I am hopeful of doing something along this line in the next few years. The problem is that various partners have expressed preferences for varying partnership arrangements. Nothing will be done without unanimous consent of partners.



Advance Payments:



Several partners have inquired about adding money during the year to their partnership. Although an exception has been made, it is too difficult to amend partnership agreements during mid-year where we have more than one family represented among the limited partners. Therefore, in mixed partnerships an additional interest can only be acquired at the end of the year.



We do accept advance payments during the year toward a partnership interest and pay interest at 6% on this payment from the time received until the end of the year. At that time, subject to amendment of the agreement by the partners, the payment plus interest is added to the partnership capital and thereafter participates in profits and losses.



Sanborn Map:



Last year mention was made of an investment which accounted for a very high and unusual proportion (35%) of our net assets along with the comment that I had some hope this investment would be concluded in 1960. This hope materialized. The history of an investment of this magnitude may be of interest to you.



Sanborn Map Co. is engaged in the publication and continuous revision of extremely detailed maps of all cities of the United States. For example, the volumes mapping Omaha would weigh perhaps fifty pounds and provide minute details on each structure. The map would be revised by the paste-over method showing new construction, changed occupancy, new fire protection facilities, changed structural materials, etc. These revisions would be done approximately annually and a new map would be published every twenty or thirty years when further paste-overs became impractical. The cost of keeping the map revised to an Omaha customer would run around $100 per year.



This detailed information showing diameter of water mains underlying streets, location of fire hydrants, composition of roof, etc., was primarily of use to fire insurance companies. Their underwriting departments, located in a central office, could evaluate business by agents nationally. The theory was that “a picture was worth a thousand words” and such evaluation would decide whether the risk was properly rated, the degree of conflagration exposure in an area, advisable reinsurance procedure, etc. The bulk of Sanborn’s business was done with about thirty insurance companies although maps were also sold to customers outside the insurance industry such as public utilities, mortgage companies, and taxing authorities.



For seventy-five years the business operated in a more or less monopolistic manner with profits realized in every year accompanied by almost complete immunity to recession and lack of need for any sales effort. In the earlier years of the business, the insurance industry became fearful that Sanborn’s profits would become too great and placed a number of prominent insurance men on Sanborn’s board of directors to act in a watch-dog capacity.



In the early 1950s, a competitive method of underwriting known as

“carding” made inroads on Sanborn’s business and after-tax profits of the map business fell from an average annual level of over $500,000 in the late 1930s to under $100,000 in 1958 and 1959. Considering the upward bias in the economy during this period, this amounted

to an almost complete elimination of what had been sizable, stable earning power.



However, during the early 1930s, Sanborn had begun to accumulate an investment portfolio. There were no capital requirements to the business so that any retained earnings could be devoted to this project. Over a period of time about $2.5 million was invested, roughly half in bonds and half in stocks. Thus, in the last decade particularly, the investment portfolio blossomed while the operating map business wilted.



Let me give you some idea of the extreme divergence of these two factors. In 1938 when the Dow-Jones Industrial Average was in the 100-120 range, Sanborn sold at $110 per share. In 1958 with the Average in the 550 area, Sanborn sold at $45 per share. Yet during that same period the value of the Sanborn investment portfolio increased from about $20 per share to $65 per share. This means, in effect, that the buyer of Sanborn stock in 1938 was placing a positive valuation of $90 per share on the map business ($110 less the $20 value of the investments unrelated to the map business) in a year of depressed business and stock market conditions. In the tremendously more vigorous climate of 1958 the same map business was evaluated at a minus $20 with the buyer of the stock unwilling to pay more than 70¢ on the dollar for the investment portfolio with the map business thrown in for nothing.



How could this come about? Sanborn in 1958 as well as 1938 possessed a wealth of information of substantial value to the insurance industry. To reproduce the detailed information they had gathered over the years would have cost tens of millions of dollars. Despite “carding,” over $500 million of fire premiums were underwritten by “mapping” companies. However, the means of selling and packaging Sanborn’s product, information, had remained unchanged throughout the years and finally this inertia was reflected in the earnings.



The very fact that the investment portfolio had done so well served to minimize in the eyes of most directors the need for rejuvenation of the map business. Sanborn had a sales volume of about $2-1/2 million per year and owned about $7 million worth of marketable securities.

The income from the investment portfolio was substantial, the business had no possible financial worries, the insurance companies were satisfied with the price paid for maps, and the stockholders still received dividends. However, these dividends were cut five times in eight years although I could never find any record of suggestions pertaining to cutting salaries or director’s and committee fees.



Prior to my entry on the Board, of the fourteen directors, nine were prominent men from the insurance industry who combined held 46 shares of stock out of 105,000 shares outstanding. Despite their top positions with very large companies which would suggest the financial wherewithal to make at least a modest commitment, the largest holding in this group was ten shares. In several cases, the insurance companies these men ran owned small blocks of stock but these were token investments in relation to the portfolios in which they were held. For the past decade the insurance companies had been only sellers in any transactions involving Sanborn stock.



The tenth director was the company attorney, who held ten shares. The eleventh was a banker with ten shares who recognized the problems of the company, actively pointed them out, and later added to his holdings. The next two directors were the top officers of Sanborn who owned about 300 shares combined. The officers were capable, aware of the problems of the business, but kept in a subservient role by the Board of Directors. The final member of our cast was a son of a deceased president of Sanborn. The widow owned about 15,000 shares of stock.



In late 1958, the son, unhappy with the trend of the business, demanded the top position in the company, was turned down and submitted his resignation, which was accepted. Shortly thereafter we made a bid to his mother for her block of stock, which was accepted. At the time there were two other large holdings, one of about 10,000 shares (dispersed among customers of a brokerage firm) and one of about 8,000. These people were quite unhappy with the situation and desired a separation of the investment portfolio from the map business, as did we.



Subsequently our holdings (including associates) were increased through open market purchases to about 24,000 shares and the total represented by the three groups increased to 46,000 shares. We hoped to separate the two businesses, realize the fair value of the investment portfolio and work to re-establish the earning power of the map business. There appeared to be a real opportunity to multiply map profits through utilization of Sanborn’s wealth of raw material in conjunction with electronic means of converting this data to the most usable form for the customer.



There was considerable opposition on the Board to change of any type, particularly when initiated by an “outsider,” although management was in complete accord with our plan and a similar plan had been recommended by Booz, Allen & Hamilton, Management Experts. To avoid a proxy fight (which very probably would not have been forthcoming and which we would have been certain of winning) and to avoid time delay with a large portion of Sanborn’s money tied up in blue-chip stocks which I didn’t care for at current prices, a plan was evolved taking out all stockholders at fair value who wanted out. The SEC ruled favorably on the fairness of the plan. About 72% of the Sanborn stock, involving 50% of the 1,600 stockholders, was exchanged for portfolio securities at fair value. The map business was left with over $11/4 million in government and municipal bonds as a reserve fund, and a potential corporate capital gains tax of over $1 million was eliminated. The remaining stockholders were left with a slightly improved asset value, substantially higher earnings per share, and an increased dividend rate.



Necessarily, the above little melodrama is a very abbreviated description of this investment operation. However, it does point up the necessity for secrecy regarding our portfolio operations as well as the futility of measuring our results over a short span of time such as a year. Such “control situations” may occur very infrequently. Our bread-and-butter business is buying undervalued securities and selling when the undervaluation is corrected along with investment in “special situations” where the profit is dependent on corporate rather than market action. To the extent that partnership funds continue to grow, it is possible that more opportunities will be available in “control situations.”



The auditors should be mailing your financial statement and tax information within about a week. If you have any questions at all regarding either their report or this letter, be sure to let me know.



Warren E. Buffett

1-30-61

After Buffett closed the $100-million partnership in 1969—the year of Woodstock and man’s lunar landing—he channeled all of his $25 million into a strange and unlikely firm, a textile company called Berkshire Hathaway.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Rock-and-Roll

Rock and roll’s Chuck Berry performs his duckwalk while playing his guitar on April 4, 1980.

(AP/Wide World Photos)

Of Permanent Value Buffett Partnership

Buffett Partnership The Story of Warren Buffett



Bill and Ruth Scott

Bill and his wife, Ruth, are among the most generous donors to the University of Nebraska. The Scotts received the Regents Medal in 2009 for their generosity to the university. When he’s not out making huge donations, Scott plays the trumpet in a polka band.

(Photo courtesy of the University of Nebraska)



The Boys in the Band

Scott and his band members sometimes play in California, where Scott spends winters.

(Photo courtesy of Debbie Bosanek)

Of Permanent Value Buffett Partnership

Buffett Partnership The Story of Warren Buffett



Charlie Munger

Is this a Canadian Rockies Black Bear, or is it possibly Charlie Munger talking about stock options?

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

Of Permanent Value Buffett Partnership

Buffett Partnership The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Buffett Partnership

Buffett Partnership The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Buffett Partnership

Buffett Partnership The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Buffett Partnership



23





HARRY BOTTLE




Doc Bottle

Harry Bottle is known as Buffett’s “doctor of sick businesses.” Dempster Mill Manufacturing is one of the businesses Doc Bottle has treated. In his mid-80s, he is alive and well in Ventura, California. (Photo is from the Roland Schank Collection and shot by Dr. Paul Alkon on September 27, 2003.)

In 1956, the Buffett Partnership began acquiring Dempster Mill Manufacturing Co., a producer of windmills and farm equipment in Beatrice, Nebraska, about 100 miles south of Omaha. The investment was recorded as a “general” (undervalued stock to be held a long time), because the stock was selling at $18 a share but had a book value of about $72.

One Berkshire shareholder thinks the playbook for Dempster read like this: Buy the company at a quarter of book value, liquidate a substantial portion of the book value to generate funds for investment, borrow money on the unleveraged company for further investment, then spin off the core business.

Buffett continued buying Dempster stock in small quantities for five years. By mid-1961, his partnership owned more than 70% of the company. About $1 million was in Dempster, which when sold in 1963, and netted the partnership about $2.3 million.

When Dempster didn’t succeed, Buffett called Harry Bottle to the rescue. Buffett and Bottle began a cost-cutting era, laying off about 100 employees in the town of 12,000 people. Eventually the business sold to First Beatrice Corporation. Beatrice city fathers, interested in revenues and jobs, helped obtain financing.

In the Buffett Partnership letter of January 18, 1963, Buffett wrote:

The high point of 1962 from a performance standpoint was our present control situation—73% of Dempster Mill. Dempster has been primarily in farm implements (mostly items retailing for $1,000 or under), water systems, water well supplies, and jobbed plumbing lines.



The operations for the past decade have been characterized by static sales, low inventory turnover and virtually no profits in relation to invested capital.



We obtained control in August, 1961 at an average price of about $28 per share, having bought some stock as low as $16 in earlier years, but the vast majority in an offer of $30.25 in August. When control of a company is obtained, obviously what then becomes all-important is the value of assets, not the market quotation for a piece of paper (stock certificate)...



Initially, we worked with the old management toward a more effective utilization of capital, better operating margins, reduction of overhead, etc. These efforts were completely fruitless. After spinning our wheels for about six months, it became obvious that while lip service was being given to our objective, either through inability or unwillingness, nothing was being accomplished. A change was necessary.



A good friend of mine, whose inclination is not toward enthusiastic descriptions, highly recommended Harry Bottle for our type of problem. On April 17, 1962, I met Harry in Los Angeles, presented a deal which provided for rewards to him based on our objectives being met, and on April 23rd he was sitting in the president’s chair in Beatrice.



Harry is unquestionably the man of the year. Every goal we have set for Harry has been met, and all the surprises have been on the pleasant side. He has accomplished one thing after another that has been labeled as impossible, and has always taken the tough things first. Our breakeven point has been virtually cut in half, slow-moving or dead merchandise has been sold or written off, marketing procedures have been revamped, and unprofitable facilities have been sold...



There is one final point of real significance for Buffett Partnership, Ltd. We now have a relationship with an operating man which could be of great benefit in future control situations. Harry had never thought of running an implement company six days before he took over. He is mobile, hard-working and carries out policies once they are set. He likes to get paid well for doing well, and I like dealing with someone who is not trying to figure out how to get the fixtures in the executive washroom gold plated. Harry and I like each other, and his relationship with Buffett Partnership, Ltd. should be profitable for all of us.



While Bottle was trimming down Dempster and beefing up profits, Buffett was doing his thing: Diverting money to buy securities. As Buffett wrote in the partnership letter:

To some extent, we have converted the assets from the manufacturing business which has been a poor business, to a business which we think is a good business—securities.



Today, Bottle lives at Ventura Marina Mobile Home Community in Ventura, California, having moved there from Woodland Hills, California, in 1996.

Buffett book collector Roland Schank (see Roland Schank chapter) found Bottle after an Internet search for him. (When I did an Internet search for him, I got Happy Harry’s Bottle Shop, a liquor store in Grand Forks, North Dakota.)

Schank and his friend Dr. Paul Alkon visited Bottle on September 27, 2003. They spent the day taking photos, collecting documents about Dempster, and talking about Bottle’s passion for boating, hunting, and building hand-made clocks in wooden cabinets.

In an October 2003 interview, Bottle recalled his introduction to Buffett. Bottle says it was Charles Munger who wanted the two to meet. Bottle was an officer at Dempster at the time, and Munger was on the board of TEC in Pasadena. Bottle traveled to Los Angeles to meet with Buffett who immediately asked him to run Dempster.

Bottle said about Buffett: “He’s a very intelligent fellow and has a sense of humor. Not all intelligent people have a sense of humor. And he’s accommodating.”

Bottle took the job and within days began implementing a strict turnaround of the faltering business. Bottle and Buffett have remained friends over the years although “there’s less to talk about” since Bottle is retired. A Berkshire shareholder for years, Bottle said he sold his stock several years ago, which, he added, may have been a mistake.

“I was a doctor of sick companies,” Bottle has told friends over the years. Born in Tacoma, Washington, Bottle was drafted into the Air Force in World War II and served as a medic. After the war, he earned an accounting degree from the University of Portland. He later moved to Southern California where he worked for a variety of companies and still serves as a volunteer at Good Samaritan Hospital where Munger has served on the board for years.

Bottle’s first wife of 52 years died in 1994. He has since remarried. His wife, Etta, is 93.

The following is Bottle’s account of the Dempster days:

RE: Dempster Mill Mfg. Co.

Beatrice, Neb

1962-1964

Actually my introduction to Warren came through Charlie Munger who I had worked with at a transformer company in Pasadena, California during the 50’s, 1951-1959.



Between 1959 and early 1962, I worked as a consultant for a very successful turn around specialist here in Los Angeles, and in so doing gained considerable expertise in assisting companies in distress (sick companies).



Charlie introduced me to Warren in early April 1962 and after some discussion regarding his need for an operating manager for a farm machining company he owned in Nebraska, we very quickly came to a mutual employment agreement and I departed for Beatrice two days later.



My wife and daughter followed me three months later, my daughter who, I might add, was in her high school senior year—the culture change was not easily acceptable to her.



Now you must realize Dempster Mill was a fine old company with an excellent potential or I’m sure Warren wouldn’t have been interested.



This had a stimulating effect on all of us especially me for I knew if we exerted the effort we could turn it around and make it produce up to Warren’s measure of performance—and that’s pretty high.



I hasten to say there were others involved in this venture - Warren and Charlie of course, Bill Scott and Verne McKenzie who at the time was our outside auditor.



They all came up with ideas and made my task easier.



One idea came from Warren and Charlie. Upon investigating our sales pricing structure we were valuing replacement and repair parts equal to the total of the sum of the completed item.



So lacking any cost data to determine correct pricing, they suggested we simply categorize all parts into three categories.



1. An item 100% proprietary, not available except from us. Increase up to 500%.



2. An item semi proprietary - Increase 200 to 300%.



3. Non proprietary - Increase 0 to 100%.



We turned this inventory with an estimated inventory value of $300 thousand into a resale value exceeding $2 million. Incidentally, we had few, if any, objections to our pricing strategy and continued to sell these parts at higher sales prices with little, if any, sales resistance.



This, of course, led us into other pricing updates and to support continued upward sales price adjustments. A cost data system was installed and maintained.



Our initial efforts at reorganization were impeded somewhat, for not only did we have two different unions to contend with, we had a cadre of employees used to working at an unacceptable pace, little accountability for quality and little if any leadership initiative.



So as we began the process of reorganization, including of course among other things, a substantial reduction in employees, which didn’t exactly endear us to the Unions or some of the local business people.



All in all, I consider our efforts in turning Dempster into a well run reputable business was very beneficial to the local area.



Warren, after all, stepped in and rescued an ailing business, made it well, sold it to local principals for continuance of operation and support for the area (a win-win situation).



TRIVIA

Our sales department received a call from the Peace Corps in Washington, D.C., wanting to know if we would donate windmills to then French Somaliland to provide water pumping stations for the population.



Our reply was, “Where are the windmills we sent you two years ago?” They didn’t know. However, we traced their whereabouts to a government warehouse in Somaliland still in the crates.



My instruction to the sales department was, “We are not a nonprofit company and if the Peace Corps wishes to supply any of our products to wherever, we would offer the same prices and terms as we offer all of our customers.”



Shortly thereafter, I received a call from the then assistant to the Governor who was following up the request made by the Peace Corps. To which I informed we would gladly offer our best terms to the Peace Corps but we could not offer our shareholders’ property for nothing. However, I told him that I would confer with my superior and if there was a change in my decision I’d get back to him. Needless to say after conferring with Warren, I felt no need to call them back.



The tools that management uses sometimes are primitive and/or simple —example:



I was having trouble with reducing inventories to a level that would accommodate a reasonable rate of return.



So in desperation I simply hired a painter and with his help we painted a 6” white line 10 feet above the floor around the inside wall of our largest warehouse and I called in plant supervisors and informed them if I ever walked into the building and could not see the line above the pile of boxes I would lay off everyone, except the shipping department until the line was exposed.



I gradually moved that line down until I arrived at a satisfactory inventory turn.



Buffett says today, “Hiring Harry may have been the most important management decision I ever made. Dempster was in big trouble under two previous managers, and the banks were treating us as a potential bankrupt. If Dempster had gone down, my life and fortunes would have been a lot different from that time forward.”

Here’s Buffett’s account of the selling of Dempster in 1963:



Dempster

Shown above left is the Dempster Mill Manufacturing Co. building in Beatrice. The photo was taken in 2007 by David Gass as the John Gass family of Denver drove to the Berkshire annual meeting that year. The photo on the right was taken by Bruce Wilhelm in 2008. Beatrice is about 35 miles south of Lincoln, Nebraska. The company still operates at the same location as it did in the Harry Bottle days, and it still makes windmills and pumps.



The Story of Warren Buffett



Dempster Changes Hands: Signing the Declaration of Independence

Above, Harry Bottle, Dempster president, signs a contract for the sale of the Dempster plant and equipment to a new ownership. At right is Warren Buffett, chairman of the Dempster board who, through Buffett Partnership, Ltd., controlled a majority of Dempster stock. (From the Beatrice Daily Sun, September 13, 1963.) Buffett was just two weeks beyond his 33rd birthday.

(Courtesy of Roland Schank Collection)

Of Permanent Value Harry Bottle



Doc’s Next Stop: Fixing Rover on Mars

Bottle, left, met Ronald Schank, right, after his Internet search. Schank grew up in Beatrice, Nebraska, home of Dempster Mill Manufacturing, and later went to the U.S. Air Force Academy. Schank is now a civil service procurement analyst at the Air Force Space and Missile Systems Center in El Segundo, California. (Roland Schank Collection, photo by Dr. Ellen Alkon)



Happy Harry’s

Happy Harry’s Bottle Shop, a liquor store in Grand Forks, North Dakota

t(Photo by Jim Maves)

Harry Bottle The Story of Warren Buffett



Chiming in Profit for Buffett Partners

In his career, Bottle worked at turning around about 25 companies in Southern California. In his spare time, he likes boating, hunting, and building clocks. (Roland Schank Collection, photo by Dr. Paul Alkon)

Of Permanent Value Harry Bottle



Mr. Fix-It

Harry Bottle is shown here at the Ventura Marina Mobile Home Community. (Roland Schank Collection, photo by Dr. Paul Alkon)

Harry Bottle The Story of Warren Buffett





Of Permanent Value Harry Bottle





24





BUFFETT’S EARLY INVESTORS


The following is a story by Jim Rasmussen that appeared in the Omaha World-Herald on August 16, 1998:



To live in Omaha in the late 1950s and know Warren Buffett was to hold a ticket to incredible wealth.

To punch this ticket, you needed at least $5,000 to invest. And you had to have confidence in the twenty-something investor, who worked out of his modest house and drove a Volkswagen bug.

Those who did invest never regretted it. They became very rich simply by keeping their money with Buffett and watching it grow. Now the world’s second-richest person, Buffett has compiled one of the greatest investment records in history.

Consider the numbers. An investor who put $10,000 with Buffett in 1957 saw it multiply to $160,000 by 1970, the year Buffett dissolved his investment partnership.

If that investor then converted the $160,000 into stock in Berkshire Hathaway Inc.—the company that Buffett has used since then as his investment vehicle—it would be worth $259 million today.

At least 16 Omahans who invested in limited partnerships with Buffett in the 1950s and ’60s still live in Omaha. Dozens more are scattered across the country. The fortunes of some have grown so big that they confess to having trouble deciding what to do with their money.

Even though most of Buffett’s early partners did not reinvest all their money in Berkshire, many put significant sums in the company. Even after selling some of the stock and giving some away to family or charity, many of these Buffett partners retain fortunes in the tens of millions, perhaps more than $100 million in some cases.

Yet, at least in Omaha, most of Buffett’s partners live in relatively ordinary houses, drive ordinary cars, and show few outward signs of being among the city’s super-rich.

For example, Leland and Dorothy Olson live in a simple but comfortable one-story home southeast of Westside High School. It’s been their address for the past 45 years.

They’ve also given millions to the University of Nebraska Medical Center and other charities.

Leland Olson said their lifestyle is probably the same as if he’d never invested with Buffett.

“I’d probably live in the same house,” said Olson, a retired obstetrician, “I just wouldn’t be giving away a lot of money.”

The Olsons and several others of Buffett’s partners have quietly established their own charitable foundations. They’re giving to universities, hospitals, churches, and other charities.

Some of these World War II-generation investors are certain to leave large gifts to charity when they die.

The size of some of the estates will be mind-boggling. That became apparent after Nebraska natives Donald and Mildred Othmer, early Buffett partners, left a fortune of more than $650 million at their deaths.

They left nearly all to charity. Among the beneficiaries was the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, scheduled to receive about $100 million from Mildred Othmer’s estate. That would be the largest bequest in the university’s history.

Buffett has said that even larger bequests from some Berkshire investors are sure to come.

The Buffett millionaires are among a growing number of super-rich in Omaha, say financial professionals who advise the wealthy. By one estimate, more than 120 Omaha families and individuals have a net worth of at least $100 million.

Their ranks have been swelled by stockholders in successful Omaha companies such as Berkshire Hathaway and Peter Kiewit Sons’ Inc.

Although hundreds of Omahans have become millionaires investing in Berkshire, few can claim to be among those who invested in Buffett’s early partnerships. These early investors had the best opportunity to profit from the investment wizard’s skill since they had their money growing with him for the longest. During the first 10 years of Buffett’s investment partnership (from 1957, the first full year of partnership, through 1966) it earned a total return of 1,156 percent, nearly 10 times the return on the Dow Jones Industrial Average.

Later investors also were pleased, as Berkshire Hathaway’s returns have consistently thrashed the stock-market averages.

Many of the early Buffett investors were his family, friends and acquaintances. Others included students of investment night courses that he taught at Omaha University (now the University of Nebraska at Omaha). Still others heard of Buffett’s reputation by word of mouth.

When Buffett ended the partnerships in 1970, the list included 99 partners, the limit allowed by law at the time. There were more, though, because Buffett grouped some of his investors into single entities to stay under the 99-partner limit. Douglas County records include a list of the partners and their holdings for each year of the partnerships.

While several declined to be interviewed, 10 of those on the list agreed to share their recollections of Buffett and how investing with him has changed their lives.

They share a freedom from financial worry and an opportunity to allocate large sums of money—whether to family, charity, or their own use.

Omahan Dick Holland, a Buffett investor, puts it this way: “We’re lucky as hell. That’s all there is to it.”

Buffett, 67, continues as chairman of Berkshire Hathaway Inc. He owns $33.3 billion in Berkshire stock. He has built the company’s wealth by buying good companies cheap, and then holding on.

Some of his early partners remain friends with Buffett, although increasing demands on his time have reduced their contact with him. Most of their memories of him come from those early days, when the man in the VW bug set out to make them, and himself, rich.

Dan Monen—One of the original seven investors in Buffett’s first partnership in 1956, made his first killing on a Buffett idea in the late 1950s.

Buffett had analyzed an Omaha company, National American Fire Insurance. The company’s management was buying up National American stock for $50 a share, but Buffett knew it was worth a lot more. He sent his friend Monen, an Omaha lawyer, on a journey across Nebraska. His job: to buy as much stock from ordinary shareholders as he could find, for $100 a share.

Monen spent three weeks on the road, buying shares from small-town bankers and farmers. By the time National American’s management heard about their activities, Buffett and Monen were well on their way to buying 10 percent of the company. They later sold their stake to a New York investor and split a profit of $100,000.

“That was my first big stake,” Monen says.

Now 70, Monen lives in a retirement apartment complex in west Omaha. Investing with Buffett enabled him to retire from his law practice at age 55. He bought a farm and a bank. Monen, who is divorced, eventually sold both

the farm and the bank and bought a California company that makes women’s sportswear.

He sold that business about two years ago and moved back to Omaha to be near his children and grandchildren.

Monen recalls digging dandelions with Buffett at about age 4 in the yard of Buffett’s grandparents in Omaha.

Monen later worked in the grandfather’s Omaha grocery store but saw little of Warren growing up. They eventually became friends as young adults.

When Buffett formed his first investment partnership in 1956, Monen put in $5,000 that he borrowed from his mother-in-law.

He kept investing. By 1969, he had $384,000 with Buffett. After the partnership was dissolved the next year, Monen says, he kept most or all of the money in Berkshire stock and held on.

When a visitor noted that such a stake would have grown to hundreds of millions today, Monen nods. He says he’s trying to decide where his money should go after his death.

Last year he gave $500,000 toward construction of an addition to Creighton University’s law library.

“By almost anybody’s standards, I’ve got a lot of money to give away,” he says.

Robert Soener—A retired stockbroker, Soener still watches the market on CNBC in the afternoons, checking Berkshire’s stock price and chatting with his broker on the phone from his upstairs den.

He and a son live in the two-story brick house near 38th and Cuming Streets that Soener bought in 1961. It was there that he and his wife, Mary, raised seven children. She died in 1980.

Today, even after sending seven kids through private colleges and giving away money to charity and family, Soener says he still holds millions of dollars worth of Berkshire stock. He says his wealth has allowed him to give significant sums to charity but hasn’t changed much else in his life.

“I live in the same house,” he says. “I drive a 1990 Buick Regal. My lifestyle hasn’t changed to speak of.”

In a golf shirt and shorts, Soener is the picture of relaxed retirement at age 74. He became acquainted with Buffett when the future billionaire was selling stocks for his father’s Omaha brokerage in the early ’50s.

A few years later, Buffett was lining up investors for his own limited partnerships. One day Soener got a bonus check for $10,000 from his firm, Cruttendon & Co. Buffett stopped by the Cruttendon office that day.

“I said, ‘Look what I got from Cruttendon,’” Soener recalled. “He said, ‘What are you going to do with it?’ ”

Soener, who could have paid off his mortgage with the $10,000, decided to put it with Buffett instead. He had become familiar with Buffett’s abilities when they taught an investment course together at Omaha University.

Soener later added an additional $9,000 to his holdings with Buffett as the investment began to grow. After Buffett closed the partnership in 1970, Soener kept some of his money in Berkshire Hathaway. “It just kept getting better and better,” he says.

He has established the charitable Soener Foundation, and he and his children designate the charities to which it contributes. The foundation had assets of $1.7 million at the end of 1997 and contributed $90,600 last year to 39 charities across the Midwest, its tax return shows.

Of that, $39,400 went to Omaha-based groups. Recipients included a number of Catholic churches, schools, and colleges, as well as hospitals and disease research funds.

Investing with Buffett, Soener says, “has had a beneficial effect on not

only myself but my whole family. The grandkids will have it for their college education.”

Charles E. Peterson Jr.—Holds the distinction of being one of the original investors in Buffett’s first partnership in Omaha in 1956.

He proudly displays the original partnership agreement for Buffett Associates Ltd. on his office wall at Byron Reed Co. Peterson is president

and owner of the Omaha company which manages real estate and employee relocations.

The document on the wall shows he put $5,000 into Buffett Associates, the minimum Buffett would accept.

“That was a lot of money to me,” says Peterson, who had been Buffett’s roommate at the University of Pennsylvania in 1950.

The other original investors were Peterson’s mother, Elizabeth; Buffett’s sister Doris Wood, and her husband, Truman Wood; Monen; Buffett’s father-in-law William Thompson; and Buffett’s aunt Alice Buffett. Together the Omaha group invested $105,000.

___________________

Peterson had seen Buffett’s exceptional mind in action at Penn.

He says Buffett read all the textbooks for his courses, cover to cover, by the end of September. “Then he’d throw ’em aside the rest of the semester and still earn A’s,” Peterson says.

A few years later in Omaha, Peterson was having lunch with his former college roommate. He asked Buffett what one of their professors at Penn had said about a certain aspect of contract law.

“Warren said, ‘Well, that was on page 221, paragraph 3,’ and he started to recite the book.” Peterson checked the textbook and found the paragraph as Buffett had recited it. “It was a little intimidating,” Peterson says.

They have remained friends. Peterson, a robust man of 71, says he bought Berkshire stock again and again over the years. He declined to discuss the size of his Berkshire holdings.

By 1969, Douglas County records show Peterson’s investment in Buffett’s partnership totaled $662,000. Another framed document on his office wall shows he sold all his Berkshire Hathaway stock to Buffett—4,228 shares—for $42 a share in 1970 when the partnership ended.

“Pretty smart, huh?” he said. At Friday’s closing price of $69,710 a share, the Berkshire stock he sold is worth $295 million.

Peterson says he reinvested in Berkshire again a few years later and kept buying. He says his investments with Buffett over the years have earned an average annual return of about 32 percent.

Investing with Buffett enabled Peterson and his wife, Marjorie, to take up flying airplanes as a hobby and to travel the world. She died in 1996.

Peterson’s advice to anyone considering buying Berkshire Hathaway stock: “Get your feet in the water because you’re never going to win until you do.”

The Hollands—Richard and Marilyn Holland met Buffett in the ’50s through Monen, a mutual friend.

“He (Buffett) was the first person I ever ran into who made investment ideas make sense,” says Richard Holland, a retired Omaha advertising executive.

As Holland remembers it, Buffett explained his method of buying stocks at less than half of what he believed they were really worth. “Eventually the asset value would be realized,” Holland says.

The Hollands live in the one-story house they built in 1957 near 84th and Pacific Streets. Partially hidden by trees, it’s a modest home for a couple of considerable wealth.

Although the Hollands decline to disclose the size of their fortune, tax returns of their charitable Holland foundation provide a glimpse. The foundation held $26.1 million in assets at the end of last year, including $22.1 million in Berkshire Hathaway stock.

The foundation gave away $812,700 in 1997, including $602,700 to Opera Omaha and $100,000 to Quality Living Inc., an agency that provides care to people with brain injuries or severe physical disabilities.

Earlier this year they donated $2.5 million to All Our Kids, a program that provides mentors for at-risk youths.

Being a long-term investor with Buffett has left them with more money than they need, Richard Holland says. That has presented them with a choice: Give some of their money to charity, or let more than half of it go to estate taxes at their deaths.

“If you aren’t charitably minded, you’ve got a terrible problem, because you’re going to wind up handing it on and letting 60 percent pass to the estate tax,” Holland says.

They plan to give away some money to their three children, but the bulk will go to charity, he says. They plan to leave it to Midlands-area causes that benefit children, education, and the arts.

The Olsons—Leland Olson, an obstetrician, took Buffett’s investment course at Omaha University in the mid-1950s. Olson was so impressed he took the course twice, the second time bringing his wife, Dorothy.

“The basic theory was that you’re not smart enough to do your own investing unless you spend seven days a week studying it,” Olson says. “So you’ve got to get somebody else to help.”

For the Olsons, that somebody became Buffett. They invested in a partnership that Buffett had established with a dozen other physicians.

Once a year, Buffett and his wife, Susan, were hosts at a catered dinner for the partners at their home. It was the partners’ one chance for the year to hear what Buffett had been doing with their money. To minimize distractions, he did not allow partners to ask questions about the investments during the year.

“We’d have a good social hour and then after dinner, he’d take us into the den and open it up to questions,” Olson says. “It was a fascinating occasion.”

At the University of Nebraska Medical Center, the Olsons’ gifts helped establish the Olson Center for Women’s Health. The center conducts research and educational programs focusing on women’s health issues.

Although they continue to live in the same house they’ve owned for 45 years, the Olsons have traveled the world and have homes at the Lake of the Ozarks in Missouri and in Arizona.

The income from his medical practice (he’s now retired) and other successful investments meant they didn’t need to sell much of their Berkshire stock.

“It’s made it possible for us to be able to give fair amounts to certain charities,” he says.

Warren Buffett—Like many of his partners, Buffett has lived a modest lifestyle considering his wealth. He drives a 1991 Lincoln Town Car and lives in the same house near 55th and Farnam Streets that he bought for $31,500 in 1958. The house is valued for tax purposes at $419,700.

The tax return for his Buffett Foundation listed charitable contributions of nearly $10 million in the 12 months ending June 30, 1997. Contributions included $10,000 apiece to 15 Omaha public school teachers who received Alice Buffett Outstanding Teacher Awards, named for his late aunt. An additional $370,000 went to the Boys’ and Girls’ Club of Omaha.

As it has for years, the foundation gave numerous gifts to groups dedicated to population control. Recipients included a number of local Planned Parenthood groups, including those in Omaha and Lincoln.

Buffett has said that the foundation will be the recipient of the bulk of his fortune after he and his wife die.

(With permission of the Omaha World-Herald)

MORE FROM SOENER, OLSON, AND HOLLAND

Soener, Olson, and Holland gave the following accounts of their early days with Buffett to Epic Weiner, author of What Goes Up (pp. 64-68):

SOENER: “I met Warren Buffett in the early 1950s. I was working as a stockbroker in Omaha at the time, and he just walked in the office one day. Talk about a red-letter day for me. He’s seven years younger than I am, and at that time he was going to school at the University of Nebraska and doing business with our office in Lincoln. So we started talking, and he asked me for a few quotes. He asked me what the price of Studebaker Packard was, and I told him that. And he said, ‘I’m short the stock.’ I was just a rookie at that point, but I looked at this young whippersnapper and said, ‘You can’t buy stocks. You’re too young.’ And he said, ‘I have it in my sister’s name.’ That put me in my place right away.

“Our friendship grew, and when he eventually went to Columbia University we corresponded. Then, when he got back home, he was working for his father, who operated an over-the-counter house in Omaha. Warren was selling stocks of his choice to clients, and he realized that he was making $45 to $50 in commission and the customers were making several thousand dollars. So he said, ‘I’d like to participate in that.’ I think that’s where the idea for the partnership came from.”

OLSON: “I was buying stocks on my own, but I didn’t really have any money. I was in my early thirties and I realized that I needed training and help if I was going to invest in the stock market. And that’s how I met Warren Buffett. He was teaching a night course at what at the time was the University of Omaha, but what is now called the University of Nebraska at Omaha. He had a night course going and I took it. In fact, I took it twice because I was so impressed with his teaching.

“He was only twenty-seven years old at that time, but he was so clear on how he evaluated stocks using the Graham technique. He was a value investor. And he evaluated not only the stock, but the background of it. I remember he was interested in a company that was based in Kansas City, and rather than just sit around and read reports, he went out to Kansas City to see what the company was doing. That impressed me very much.”

HOLLAND: “Around 1961, I convinced my wife, who had a little money, to put some with Warren. I think about that a lot because if I’d failed at that and given her bad advice, I would’ve been in trouble. Then, a little later, I went through the trouble of borrowing on my life insurance to put some of my own money with Warren. Over the years we gradually put in more because he just kept doing better and better. It was a real Goin’ Gussie. And then Warren and I became personal friends. We played bridge together, we played golf together, we played tennis and table tennis—God, we played everything. My wife got Warren interested in buying his house in Southern California, and Susan Buffett became one of my wife’s better friends. We were very close to them during that time and have been good friends ever since. So we never sold it. Even after he folded the partnership, we held onto Berkshire until beginning sometime in the nineties. It’s just been phenomenal. One time not too long ago I said to Warren, ‘You know, I want to thank you for all you’ve done for me.’ And Warren said, ‘Hell, Dick, I didn’t do anything for you. You never sold.’

“I think I get along with Warren because we have a similar outlook. We lead very simple lives. We don’t have mansions or fancy cars or all the paraphernalia. We’ve lived in the same house now for forty-seven years. Warren’s lived in the same house for thirty or forty years now. There’s a certain similarity to Buffett investors. They are like that. You don’t see a Buffett investor being very conspicuous. In the early days I went to all the partnership meetings; and I’ve got to say, looking at those guys you’d never guess that these were some of the richest people around. There were two old ladies, friends of [value investor and Buffett friend] Sandy Gottesman, who lived out on Long Island. There was an old guy who was the head of a school up in Vermont. There were some families here in Omaha who were early investors. But if you hung around these people, you never had any idea that they were worth a pile of money. The impression I’ve had is that this is the kind of person who is attracted to Warren. I’ve never met a Buffett investor who flaunted it.”

[Rick Holland, mentioned on the second page of this chapter, was honored on his 90th birthday celebration held by the Omaha Symphony on March 5, 2011. Buffett took the maestro’s podium and, sitting on a stool clad in a black sweat shirt, led the crowd in singing “Happy Birthday” to Holland, a longtime contributor to the symphony and other causes. Holland has been a noted philanthropist, friend, and bridge buddy of Buffett’s.]

The Story of Warren Buffett

3Of Permanent Value Buffett’s Early Investors



Dan, The Number Here Is 205-251-2828.

Investing with Buffett in 1956, enabled Dan Monen to retire at age 55. “By almost anybody’s standards, I’ve got a lot of money to give away,” he says.

(Omaha World-Herald)

Buffett’s Early Investors The Story of Warren Buffett



Bob, How Did You Know?

Wise man Bob Soener of Omaha used a bonus from his company to invest with Buffett in the 1950s instead of paying off his mortgage. Soener died on August 12, 2011 of liver cancer at the age of 87.

(Omaha World-Herald)

Soener once told Forbes (October 12, 1998): “There are three things in my life. God, Warren Buffett and my wife, and I’m not sure about the order of the first two.”



Charles, But How Much Is an Original Signed Buffett Partnership Agreement Worth?

Charles Peterson displays the original partnership agreement with Buffett Associates in his office, along with documents showing he sold all his stock in 1970.

(Omaha World-Herald)

3Of Permanent Value Buffett’s Early Investors

Buffett’s Early Investors The Story of Warren Buffett

3Of Permanent Value Buffett’s Early Investors





(Courtesy of Tom Knapp)

This Eagle Didn’t Fly

Postage on a modern-day letter from Tom Knapp contains some of the original Blue Eagle four-cent stamps that Buffett and Knapp rounded up in the 1950s when they tried to corner the market. In 1954, the U.S. Post Office issued what became known as Scott C48, blue, four-cent airmail stamps showing an eagle in flight against a cloud formation. In 1958, a similar red 5-cent stamp was issued.

25





CORNERING THE MARKET


An investor who studied under Ben Graham and was part of the Tweedy, Browne & Knapp brokerage firm, Tom Knapp recalls how he and Buffett once tried to corner the market in 1954 Blue Eagle four-cent airmail stamps for postcards. They thought the stamp might become a collectible.

It was in the late 1950s, and Ben Graham was to speak at an analysts’ meeting being held at Beloit College in Wisconsin. “Warren called me from Omaha and said, ‘Let’s go to the analysts’ meeting!’ I asked him how were we going to get to Beloit. He said, ‘Easy, come to Omaha and we’ll drive. We’ll see a lot of cornfields.’

“We got in his car. It took all day. We were talking about deals, and I said I had been reading in Linn’s Stamp News about a Blue Eagle four-cent stamp that was being taken off the market for a 5-cent Red Eagle stamp.”

Knapp kept telling Buffett about it; and on the drive home to Omaha, the two began stopping at post offices to buy the stamps. “We stopped at one place, and I found it had 23 stamps. Warren said, ‘Go buy them.’

“The big hit was Denver,” Knapp said, where the two bought about 200,000 stamps through the mail. Buffett and Knapp wrote to all the big post offices to find the stamps. In all they came up with some 400,000 stamps, a $16,000 investment. “We split them up and held them for some years. But we could see problems occurring. They were sticking together because of the cheap glue. A few sheets I had in Long Island stuck together. The ones in Omaha didn’t stick.”

As the years went by, Knapp and Buffett were disappointed by the lack of demand their stamps brought. Their problem was the post office had printed millions so there never was any scarcity of the stamps. “Warren was looking at the time value of money and saw things were evening out. He found the one buyer in the world. The fellow bought a lot of them at 10% from face value. I kept a few sheets of them for old times’ sake.”

Knapp, a Princeton University chemistry major, said he found a use for some of them. “When I was at Tweedy, Browne, we’d send a set of pink sheets [stock quotes for thinly-traded companies] to Warren so he could check the quotes that were not in the newspapers.”

Knapp, who is 10 years to the day older than Buffett, says he may be Berkshire’s oldest shareholder. “I got my shares when Dempster Mill [a windmill company Buffett owned] was liquidated. I received Berkshire stock, which was one of its holdings. My cost basis was between five and ten dollars a share. I never sold a share and bought some for my family, and they seem happy with it … I don’t know of a better company.”

After coming back from World War II, Knapp became a “beach bum” for a while, but one day he woke up and read that David Dodd was giving a night course in investments at Columbia. He took that course and became so interested he enrolled in Columbia Business School where he got an MBA. He took Dodd’s course again and added Ben Graham’s course. In 1968, Knapp and Ed Anderson, also a Graham disciple, helped form Tweedy, Browne Partners.

Knapp has a home in New York and one in Vero Beach, Florida—a terrific place when hurricanes aren’t hitting. Buffett has joked about a friend who likes the beach, adding, “Now he owns the beach.” That friend is Knapp.

Although Knapp is the older of the two, he says Buffett “was definitely ahead of everyone. His grasp and concentration were so incredible. And his integrity was 100%. If it was a matter of 10 cents, he’d report it. He wanted everything right straight in line.”

Noted value investor Walter Schloss, who runs his firm with his son Edwin, recalled: “I got out of the Army Signal Corps at the end of 1945 … In 1960, I was feeling sentimental about my buddies, and I decided to write all of them. It was about 140 people. Knapp saw that I had all these letters, and he said he had stamps for them.” Schloss recently said, “Most of the 833rd Signal Service fellows I had written to in 1960 who had been with me in Iran during World War II have now departed.”

Schloss put the stamps on all his letters and mailed them. He says it wasn’t long before a response came. “I got a call from the postmaster asking if I was the guy using airmail stamps on the letters.” Schloss said he was, and the postmaster said he wouldn’t send the letters because they were airmail stamps for postcards.

After much persuading, the postmaster relented but said Schloss would have to come to the post office and write “not an airmail letter” on each card. “I remember the story as if it was yesterday. A 4-cent postcard is now 20 cents and going up, which is better than the 4-cent regular stamp which now goes for 32 cents,” Schloss said.

Schloss became friends with Buffett during their Columbia days and later worked with him under Ben Graham. Buffett and Schloss shared an office at the Graham-Newman firm. Schloss said he knew back then that Buffett was an unusual person. “I could tell he was brilliant and would be successful, but I never thought he’d be this successful. He’s very focused. He’s always thinking of the future… He’s been like a shooting star.

“There’s never been anything like him. … The continued growth will be very hard. Maybe he’ll merge it [Berkshire] with Canada.”

Buffett has said of Schloss, who is known for his tight cost controls, “I think Walter’s operational style should be a lesson for us all (one Charlie has already mastered). In effect, Walter is running an office for a year on what it costs Berkshire to start the engines on The Indefensible” (Janet Lowe, Warren Buffett Speaks, p. 102, quoting a letter Buffett wrote about Schloss, October 3, 1994).

Was the investment in the four-cent Blue Eagle stamps worthwhile? Not according to Tom Knapp more than 40 years later:

Dear David Leib,



Warren sent me a copy of your letter regarding the C-48 4¢ Blue Eagle Air Mail stamp. The current update on the stamp was most interesting.



If one likes a negative return, plus a 40-year time span, this was an investment hard to beat.



We held these stamps for some years and then looked around for a buyer. Warren located a dealer who specialized in a “control mail” business. A control mail dealer purchases large amounts of mint stamps (at a discount from face). He will remove the plate blocks (usually worth a premium over face), and use the remainder as postage. He has some control over the recipients of the mail who return the cancelled stamps to the dealer. His profit consists of (1) the original discount from face value at time of purchase, (2) premium for plate blocks, and (3) sale of the retrieved canceled stamps.



As you may observe by the franking on this letter, I still have a few remaining copies of C-48.



Sincerely yours,

Tom Knapp



BUFFETT SPOTS AN ERROR IN UPSIDE DOWN HOTEL BILL

In early 2007, Tom Knapp recounted the story of Morgan Stanley’s R. J. Meurer driving with Buffett to Wisconsin to hear Ben Graham and to search for 1954 Blue Eagle four-cent stamps. He told of checking out of the hotel with Buffett: “During the settling-up process, he witnessed Buffett tallying up the bill upside down as the desk clerk was preparing the final charges. Not only was Buffett able to catch the error in the bill while reading it upside down, but the error was in favor of the hotel, and he pointed it out.”

The Story of Warren Buffett



Castle Schloss

Walter Schloss, now in his early 90s, works in his New York office, sharing a one room space—“Castle Schloss”—with the Tweedy, Browne firm known for value investing. Schloss still taps out notes on a typewriter made in the Middle Ages.

(Photo courtesy of Walter Schloss)

Of Permanent Value Cornering the Market



26





PLEASE PUT ME IN THE PARTNERSHIP


Here are two letters Buffett wrote to his friends about value investor Walter Schloss:

WATERGATE ERA LETTER

Buffett wrote the following letter to Walter Schloss during the Watergate era. The “Nixon Stationery” has been lost to time.



The Story of Warren Buffett



Of Permanent Value Please Put Me in the Partnership





27





LUNCH WITH STAMP AND COIN GUYS


Buffett wrote Tom Knapp (mentioned in a previous chapter) the following note on December 17, 2001:

Dear Tom:



I just met this fellow a few weeks ago after he bid at a charity to have lunch with me. It turns out he is a leading coin dealer but also ran a stamp business when in his teens. Naturally, I told him the C-48 story. Here is the letter and the envelope that I received today. I think he’s our kind of guy.



This note was referring to James Halperin, co-owner of Heritage Numismatic Auctions in Dallas, who sent to Buffett the following letter in an envelope sporting 4-cent Blue Eagle stamps:

I must start out by confessing that the irony of you thanking us for our generosity to Glide [a Methodist social services foundation in San Francisco] was not lost on me. Clearly you were the one who was being generous (see analysis below*). In fact, just say the word and, assuming you outlive me, I will gladly make lunch with you on the same terms, an annual event for the rest of my life.



So thank you for your generosity, both to Glide and to Scott [Tilson] and me.



I was also heartened to learn that we share the collector’s gene. As you have requested, you’ll remain on Heritage’s complimentary mailing list until the day you order us to discontinue sending catalogs. I plan to draft a letter to you during the next week about some of your comments and questions about collectibles at lunch, mostly as a thinking and communications exercise for my own benefit, but also against the off-chance that my opinions on the subject will be of some interest to you.



Thanks again, I had a blast!



All best regards,

James L. Halperin



*Here is just one of countless ways to look at it, and this method strikes me as conservative. Assuming your activities add only 2% to BRK’s and hence your annual investment return and if your every waking hour were included in the calculation the 90 minutes you spent with us represents roughly $155,000 versus our paltry $20,000.



cc: Scott Tilson



Halperin, who owns 65 A shares of Berkshire (including shares in his children’s trusts), said he and his business friend and fellow collector Scott Tilson first had lunch with Buffett at the Omaha Country Club on December 7, 2001. (Halperin, Tilson, and another friend of Halperin, Roger Low, also purchased the lunch the following year for $30,000. That lunch took place at The Plaza Hotel in New York City.)

“He [Buffett] knew as much about stamps as I did,” Halperin reported. “He knew about the publications, the dealers, and the stamps. He didn’t mess up a single bit of information.

“Perhaps the most impressive thing he told me at lunch is that his job only

takes about two hours a day, and the rest of the time he can do what he wants. My infinitesimally as important job, on the other hand, seems to take me two hours an hour!” Halperin said.

Buffett has since said, “We’ve made so many acquisitions in the last five years that I finally have a full-time job. I was used to going home early and playing bridge,” Buffett said (The Wall Street Journal, October 28, 2002).

Halperin, born in Boston in 1952, doesn’t collect coins himself but seems to collect about everything else. His private collection includes everything from Tiffany glass to Mad comic books.

Halperin later wrote Buffett with information about coin collecting, and Buffett replied:

Dear Jim:



I’ve been in California for a few weeks or would have gotten back to you sooner. I definitely have to keep you writing me in order to compile the world’s greatest collection of used C-48 plate blocks. Though I couldn’t corner the sheet market 40+ years ago, maybe I can pull off this coup with the plate blocks.



Your letter contains some unusually perceptive insights, and it was useful to me. When I was young, I thought that if I ever made a lot of money, I would compile the world’s greatest stamp collection and spend a lot of time on the project. But like similar ambitions to buy a professional sports team and to build my own golf course, my passions have evolved. I’m probably not ready for any new activities, but if I were, I think I would now actually prefer coin collecting. In any event, you have advanced my knowledge, and I appreciate that.



I’m looking forward to seeing you at the annual meeting. If you’re going to make it, be sure to let me know so that I can send you an invitation to a brunch I have for my out-of-town friends on the Sunday following the annual meeting.



Best regards,



Sincerely,



Warren E. Buffett



P.S. I probably came closest to fulfilling my passion for collecting (next to that which I do within Berkshire) when I bid on the auto collection at Harrah’s.



Halperin’s friend Tilson said, “I first got interested in Berkshire about 20 years ago when John Train featured Warren in The Money Masters. I was a teenager in high school. Unfortunately, I didn’t buy any shares until 21/2 years ago when Berkshire tanked to $40,000 on rumors of Warren’s health. It’s always amazing that the stock is not more popular to own. Here’s how I describe it to people: ‘Make believe that one day your phone rings and it’s Warren Buffett on the phone. He says he’s been thinking about it, and he’d really like for you to be his business partner. You can buy in for whatever you want, and he’ll do all the work for no fee, which you will benefit from based on what you throw into the partnership! How can you turn a deal like that down. Well, that’s the deal you get when you buy Berkshire.’”

Tilson is an entrepreneur in his own right: “I started collecting coins when I was 10 and started buying and selling them when I was 15,” he says. He had a major mail-order coin business during his last two years at Northwestern University. He graduated in 1985; and in four years, he had made his first million.

Tilson started a mass-marketing collectibles company in 1992 then sold it in 1997 to a venture capital fund after building the company to $45 million in annual sales. He still has one of the finest coin collections in the U.S.

Tilson and a partner from the collectibles business ran Poetry.com for a while, but Tilson sold it a few years back and moved to Utah where he has temporarily retired and enjoys skiing and biking with his family. No doubt he will reappear with a new business when his children go to college.

Following this chapter is an August 2005 letter from Halperin with a proposal to NetJets. A copy of the letter went to Buffett. Halperin batted 1 for 2. His offer wasn’t taken for NetJets, but he did get to meet with Buffett in response to Buffett’s reply letter (also included).

Halperin recalled the meeting with Buffett in his Kiewit Plaza offices:

He met me at the door to his offices himself, showed me around for a couple of minutes, then we sat on the couch while he asked me questions and dispersed stories and advice. There was no one else in the room. During the entire two-hour meeting, which flew by from my perspective (though probably not from his), he took just two phone calls lasting less than one minute each.



He spent an unbelievably generous two hours of uninterrupted time with me. Ostensibly I was there to explain Heritage Auction Galleries’ business model to him, but really I needed his advice since we were considering selling 50% of our business to a private equity firm, which in retrospect would have been a huge mistake. In under three minutes, Mr. Buffett verbalized what I had subconsciously known for the previous few months, i.e., exactly why, despite their assurances to the contrary, it was unreasonable to believe that our prospective partners were as interested in our long-term horizon as we were. The next day I was able to persuade my partners not to do the deal. Unfortunately, Heritage was and still is too small to meet Buffett’s ever-rising acquisition criteria. But I think we are gaining on it, and every important decision we make is now filtered through the question: Will this solution make Heritage a more worthy candidate to someday be acquired by a company like Berkshire Hathaway?



If imitation suggests admiration, further proof of Halperin’s esteem for Buffett occurred when a friend convinced him to auction off a lunch to benefit the American Numismatic Association. The auction description read, in part, as follows:

Lunch with Jim Halperin for Benefit of the ANA Heritage Auction Galleries Co-Chairman, best-selling author and acclaimed numismatic authority. All proceeds from the winning bid, including the buyer’s premium, will be donated to the ANA’s education programs for improving numismatic resources on the ANA website, including the successful Coins in the Classroom project that is used by teachers nationwide. The winning bidder will have a one-on-one lunch with Halperin at a mutually convenient time and place.



The first bid already has been received. Numismatic author and former ANA Vice President, Scott A. Travers of New York City, has opened the bidding at $1,500. Travers suggested the fund-raising auction after exchanging e-mails with Halperin about a recent charity auction involving a lunch date with renowned investor Warren Buffett, a subject of personal interest to Halperin. “About eight years ago, my friend Scott Tilson and I bought lunch with Warren Buffett at a charity auction for $20,000, and we enjoyed it so much that we bought it again the following year—for $30,000,” said Halperin. “Mr. Buffett has made it an annual event, and since then the price has been rising precipitously. Recently, the same lunch sold for $2.11 million. I’ll be thrilled if mine nets the ANA even 1/1000th of that amount.”



The auction took place in Baltimore on July 31, 2008, with a final realization for the ANA of $12,650; in other words, a full 1/167th of the price that Buffett’s lunch had netted for Glide that year.

“By comparison, I was vastly overpriced,” Halperin opined.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Collectibles Anyone?

Left to right: Coin and stamp collectors Jim Halperin, Buffett, and Scott Tilson had lunch at the Omaha Country Club. Halperin scored 800 on his math SAT, attended Harvard for three semesters, then left to pursue his coin career. Acknowledged as one of the leading experts in coins, Halperin is also the author of How to Grade U.S. Coins as well as two science fiction books, The Truth Machine and The First Immortal. The latter is about a man who suffers a heart attack but has arranged to have his body frozen. Halperin once asked Buffett about cryogenic freezing for himself. Buffett replied, “It certainly has no downside.” But he didn’t sign up for it.

(Photo courtesy of Jim Halperin)



(Photo by Mary Porter)

The First Immortal

This was not sufficiently convincing for Buffett to sign on for cryogenics.

Of Permanent Value Lunch with Stamp and Coin Guys

Lunch with Stamp and Coin Guys The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Lunch with Stamp and Coin Guys





28





CHARITY LUNCH WITH BUFFETT


What’s lunch with Buffett worth? Apparently, quite a bit and rising: $25,000; $32,000; $202,100; $250,000; $351,000; and $621,100! These are the prices people have paid in auctions for lunch with him. The proceeds go to charity.

The auction is sponsored by the Glide Foundation in San Francisco, a nonprofit agency which serves the poor, hungry, and homeless. Each year the auction is held with bids for the two-hour lunch with Buffett.

In the fall of 2000, the first power lunch, which was co-hosted by Robin (Good Morning, Vietnam!) Williams, was auctioned at $25,000.

Winning the bid was Internet millionaire Pete Budlong, who brought along some Internet friends to join Buffett and Williams.

Budlong was the first employee at Classifieds 2000.com, which was bought in 1998 by ExciteAtHome for $50 million in stock. He says Buffett knew a lot more about technology and industry trends than he lets on.

“We talked about everything from the convergence of phones and the Internet to why Europe is so far ahead in cellular communications,” Budlong said. Buffett explained that their traditional phone infrastructure was less reliable than in the U.S. thus creating a greater demand for new technology.

“He knows about technology, probably more than we do,” said Erich Breisacher, regional director at encryption software developer RSA Security Inc., who also attended the brunch (Bloomberg, October 4, 2000).

Beginning in 2003, a live auction was held on eBay for the Buffett lunch the following year.

The idea to auction the lunch on eBay came from the officials of Glide, a charity still backed by the Susan Buffett Foundation. After learning that the 2003 winning bid was $250,100, the Reverend Cecil Williams, Glide’s CEO, was quoted in press reports as saying, “All I can say is, Oh, my God, this is really something. We are going to be dancing in the streets tonight.” In a phone interview with CNBC, Buffett praised Rev. Williams as an inspirational leader who took over a dying church decades ago and has since helped people whose lives had hit rock bottom.

The winner was allowed to bring a group of friends. The bidding started at $10,000 and quickly moved above $100,000 as 141 bids were entered

New York money manager David Einhorn of the Greenlight Capital hedge fund submitted the top bid. He declined to be interviewed but issued a statement saying the power lunch “allows me to support a good cause and learn from the master.” On May 6, 2004, Einhorn, his wife, and Buffett dined at Michael’s, a Midtown Manhattan restaurant frequented by media celebrities. The $250,100 bid by Einhorn and one of the founders of Greenlight—a fund in the news in 2006 for buying 8.9 million shares of Microsoft—fell shy of the $425,000 that a round of golf with Tiger Woods sold for on eBay in 2002. However, no complaints have been heard from Glide. For their part in conducting the Buffett luncheon auction, eBay earned a fee of about $2,800.

Asked about the upcoming lunch, Buffett said, “I’ll have to think of something to say.” He said the winner could pick the restaurant but that his own choice would be Dairy Queen.

Scott Tilson, as well as Jim Halperin, has also placed winning bids for two Buffett lunches and said, “We always told Buffett that we were deep-value investors that thought his lunch at 20-25k (what we paid the last two years) was a severely undervalued asset, and we intended to continue buying as much as we could at that price. Now we plan on waiting through the Internet bubble until rationality is restored to the marketplace!”

Buffett said he would pick up the tab for the lunch and added: “They don’t have to have a hamburger and Cherry Coke with me, but it would show a little class” (The Wall Street Journal, July 11, 2003).

In 2004, the bidding ended at $202,100. A Singapore-registered eBay user with the e-mail address of “jchoo9” (Jason Choo of Singapore) won the online auction. The winner enjoyed a meal with Buffett along with the hoopla of a CNBC interview with Buffett before lunch. As before, all proceeds minus the eBay fee went to the Glide Foundation.

Before the bidding for the 2005 lunch, Buffett said he was prepared to see how much he’d be “marked down.” Actually he was marked up to $351,100 by “hanka3153.” Starting at $25,000, 110 bids were placed at the auction. In 2006, Buffett joked that the lunch with him is an all-you-can-eat affair. “I don’t eat for a week ahead of time” (The Wall Street Journal, June 10, 2006).

The eBay auction in June 2006 quickly attracted a bid of $455,100. The bid from “fastisslow” topped the $455,000 bid from Mohnish Pabrai, an Irving, California, Berkshire shareholder and manager of Pabrai Investment Funds. Pabrai teamed up on his bid with friend and fellow Berkshire shareholder Guy Spier who is a Zurich hedge fund manager and head of the Aquamarine Fund. Pabrai and Spier stopped bidding at $502,300. In the end, “fastisslow” won the right to dine with Buffett for $620,100. He turned out to be Yongping Duan, 45, a Palo Alto, California investor and founder of an electronics firm in China. He and seven other men had lunch with Buffett on May 9, 2007. Rocky Liang, a Taipei businessman, tried unsuccessfully to outbid Duan.

THE AUCTIONS

Mohnish Pabrai was the winner the next year with a bid of $650,100. A longtime Berkshire shareholder and author of The Dhandho Investor, he oversees more than $600 million in investments, including $30 million in Berkshire stock. “I owe a tremendous debt to Warren,” Pabrai was quoted (Reuters, June 23, 2006). Pabrai again joined forces with hedge fund manager Guy Spier on the bid. Pabrai has called his bid his “guru dakshina”—the payment given to a teacher in Hindu religious tradition.

Spier pledged one-third of the amount for the lunch; and Pabrai, who brought his wife and two daughters, paid two-thirds. Spier, who studied at Oxford with Britain Conservative Party leader David Cameron, wrote a column for Time magazine (June 30, 2008) saying the lunch was “worth every dime.” Buffett’s order: “A medium-rare steak with hash browns and a Cherry Coke.” Wisdom offered: “It’s very important to live your life by an internal yardstick.” One gauge of that: “Would you rather be considered the best lover in the world and know privately that you were the worst—or would you prefer to know privately that you are the best lover in the world, but be considered the worst?”

In 2008, the winning bid of $2,110,100 came from the head of a Chinese investment fund. Zhao Danyang, general manager of Pure Heart China Growth Investment Fund of Hong Kong, was the winner and was accompanied by seven of his friends.

The following is a complete list of winners and final bids since Buffett’s lunch to help Glide started in 2000:

Year Winner Winning Bid

20001 Former dot.commer Peter Budlong $ 25,000

2001 Anonymous $ 18,000

2002 Edward Jones Co and 2 Anonymous $ 25,000

2003 David Einhorn, Greenlight Capital $ 250,100

2004 Jason Choo, Singapore $ 202,100

2005 Anonymous $ 351,100

2006 Yongping Duan, California $ 620,100

2007 Mohnish Pabrai, Harina Kapoor, Guy Spier $ 650,100

2008 Zhao Danyang, China $ 2,110,100

2009 Salida Capital Corp. of Toronto $ 1,680,300

20102 Ted Weschler, Charlottesville, Virginia $ 2,626,311

20112 Ted Weschler, Charlottesville, Virginia $ 2,626,411

In 2009, the winning bid of $1.68 million was made by the Canadian firm of Salida Capital (Salida comes from the Spanish for “exit.”) whose CEO, Courtenay Wolfe was quoted by Reuters (July 8, 2009): “It is something we’ve been thinking about doing for a while. Warren’s success has transcended decades and all types of market conditions, and his wisdom and experience is of great value to us at such a sensitive time in history.”

In 2010, the winning bid was a record $2.63 million. According to eBay officials, the bidding started at $25,000, and after 77 bids, it closed at the record, “the largest ever single auction for charity that’s been sold on eBay” in its 15-year history.

Over the years, Buffett has raised more than $10 million for the Glide Foundation through these lunches.

AUCTIONING A UKULELE AND A COPY OF

THE INTELLIGENT INVESTOR

In 2006, a ukulele autographed by Buffett was auctioned off to an online casino based in Antigua with the proceeds going to Omaha Children’s Hospital. GoldenPalace.com won with a bid of $11,211.11, The ukulele fetched much less than the lunches. A copy of Ben Graham’s The Intelligent Investor drew even less than the ukulele. In fact, the book, signed by Buffett and Munger, failed to draw any interest with the hoped-for starting bid of $7,500.

DINNER WITH WARREN BUFFETT

In 2007, Buffett auctioned a dinner in which the company included actor Robert Redford, musician Tim McGraw, and actor James Denton of Desperate Housewives. The dinner was held March 10, 2007, at the home of Buffett’s daughter for the benefit of the James Redford Institute for Transplant Awareness, which advocates organ and tissue donation. The sole bid, which was made anonymously, was $5,000.

——————————

CELEBRITY WATCH

Smith & Wollensky general manager Tom Hart, who has worked at the restaurant since 1977, has seen many celebrities come to the restaurant.

Derek Jeter is among the fans and frequent patrons. Many other heroes from baseball, football, basketball, and hockey visit. Politicians and actors also often dine there.

Hart enjoys telling the following anecdote involving Buffett and one celebrity. One particular day, a world-famous movie star arrived. It was the glamorous Sophia Loren. “The table next to hers got quiet and then the whole restaurant went quiet,” recalls Hart. The sole person to top her was an unassuming fellow from Omaha. When Buffett walked in for his charity lunch, the restaurant fell completely spellbound. “In all my years, I’ve never seen anything like it,” says Hart.

Only Buffett, Hart says, can turn more heads than Sophia Loren.

So what kind of tipper is Buffett?

“The service by Branko and Mike is terrific,” Buffett has said, “but I don’t leave a 20% tip” (The New York Times, June 14, 2011).

Footnote: Buffett told Time (January 23, 2012) that Sophia Loren was his icon of beauty and that he wanted to be reborn as her boyfriend.



No. 1 Comic Genius

Robin Williams may be the only person funnier than Buffett.

(AP/ Wide

World Photos)

No. 2 Comic Genius

Pictured here are Buffett, left, and Brandt Hooker, president of Extraordinary Investors in San Francisco. Brandt was among the group that successfully bid for the 2003 lunch with Buffett in an auction for the benefit of Glide Memorial Church. Hooker recalled, “Warren had been in Seattle that morning finishing up some chess playing with Bill Gates. Buffett was his classic witty self. We all enjoyed lunch immensely. After lunch we took some pictures, and I asked to take a picture of Warren handing me his wallet. We all had some good laughs.”



(Photo courtesy of Brandt Hooker)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Charity Lunch with Buffett



Mohnish Pabrai with Momachi (10), his wife, Harina Kapoor, and Monsoon (12).

(Photo courtesy of Mohnish Pabrai)



Guy Spier

A photo of Buffett and Munger is

close by.

(Photo

courtesy of Guy Spier)



Lunch with Buffett

Mohnish Pabrai and Guy Spier had lunch with Buffett at Smith & Wollensky on June 26, 2008.

(Photo courtesy of Mohnish Pabrai)



Ted Weschler

1 Buffett later sent a copy, ahem, of Of Permanent Value to Budlong with a note saying: “To Pete, who will get a chapter in the next edition of this book if he can convert me to high tech.”

2 Weschler was anonymous until September 12, 2011 when Berkshire announced he would become an investment manager for the company. A Carol Loomis story in Fortune revealed that Buffett and Weschler had met as a result of the auction.



Smith &Wollensky

Smith & Wollensky restaurant in New York is the site of some of the Buffett luncheons. It has been called “the steakhouse to end all arguments” by The New York Times.

(Photo by

Debbie Bosanek)

Charity Lunch with Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett



Zhao Danyang

Chinese businessman Zhao Danyang with Pure Heart paid $2.1 million to have

a three-hour lunch with Buffett at Smith & Wollensky steakhouse on June 25, 2009.



Sophia Loren



Warren Buffett

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Tom Hart

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

Of Permanent Value Charity Lunch with Buffett



29





BODY, MIND, AND SPIRIT


Buffett is a genial, pleasant-looking, rather muscular man with large horn-rimmed glasses—glasses that The New York Times has called “Margaret Thatcher issued.” He is 5 feet 11 inches tall, has a medium build, and weighs 175 pounds. He does, however, occasionally bulk up to about 50 billion pounds.

I spoke with him briefly at Borsheims before the Berkshire Annual Meeting in 1998, and congratulated him on his weight loss from 190 to 175. He replied, “My goal is to weigh less than your book!” At that event, he also told my wife he has noted that about 62% of shareholders who return admission forms for the annual meeting actually show up. My wife, imitating him, had the presence of mind to say, “62.1384.”

With a fair complexion and buttery-soft hands, Buffett could pass for a clerk, accountant, banker, or the next guy in line at Wal-Mart.

In 1988, Everyman Buffett made a nonspeaking cameo appearance as a bartender in an ABC-TV soap opera, Loving.

In 1991, Buffett returned to the small screen along with his friend Cap Cities chairman Thomas Murphy for a four-minute appearance on ABC’s soap opera All My Children. Playing themselves, they were approached by femme fatale Erica Kane [Martin Brent Cudahy Chandler Montgomery Montgomery—because she supposedly married Montgomery twice] played by Susan Lucci, the actress many thought should have won an Emmy long before she did in 1999. Kane asked the financiers for advice about her cosmetics company. Buffett, Emmy-worthy himself, recommended, “Go public.”

For their advice, Ms. Kane gave Buffett and Murphy big hugs; and Buffett said, “Murph, Erica Kane gives a whole new meaning to the word ‘takeover.’ ”

Buffett would later say of his brief showbiz appearance, “If we run against the test pattern on the other two networks, I expect to do very well.” He followed up with flowers to the show’s producer and a note saying he wanted to renegotiate his contract.

In 1993, he made another cameo appearance on All My Children. A Cap Cities spokesman said Buffett changed his scripted line, “Hi, Marie. Any messages?” to use the name of his real assistant, Debbie Bosanek.

During the segment, Buffett was approached by the outrageous Opal Cortlandt (Jill Larson), who wanted Buffett to finance her husband’s company. Buffett, on the phone with his office from ABC headquarters, said, “Debbie, don’t go anywhere; I may need your help.”

Cortlandt, vamping in a wild hairdo, then leaned over the desk and cooed, “Is this Kismet, or what?” Buffett put her off, first asking if she left her medication behind and finally telling her, “Cap Cities is not a lending institution.”

At the Berkshire annual meeting in 1992, Buffett said that because of union rules he was paid $300 for his 1991 appearance and given a $10 wardrobe allowance, adding that the allowance was appropriate.

The wall across from his desk at Berkshire headquarters displays a small photo of Buffett, Murphy, and Susan Lucci, accompanied by documentation of the fees he received.

Showing a visitor the $10 wardrobe fee, Buffett joked about it again saying, “My daughter thinks that’s about what I spend on my wardrobe.” Berkshire vice chairman Charles Munger has said, “Buffett’s tailoring has caused a certain amount of amusement in the business world” (Los Angeles Times Magazine, April 7, 1991).

In 2008, Buffett made his third cameo appearance on the show. Playing himself, he came to the aid of Erica Kane who was in prison on an inside trading charge.

Buffett’s film career didn’t end there. He appeared in the Oliver Stone movie Wall Street: Money Never Sleeps; and in 2011, he made a cameo appearance on The Office as an applicant to replace the dim-witted manager played by Steve Carell on the NBC situation comedy.

“He looks like an old college professor,” said Omaha stockbroker Cliff Hayes. For years Hayes executed some of Buffett’s stock trades—including The Washington Post Co. and GEICO—that went on to make a billionaire out of Buffett. “He’s often just in casual clothes. He looks like a dressed up farmer,” says one observer. Vanity Fair, the arbiter egalitarian of appearance and style, said Buffett looks like a “demented pharmacist” (October 2002).

In a moment of insanity, Forbes, on the advice of Joan and Melissa Rivers, named Buffett as one of the best-dressed billionaires in 2003. Buffett was flattered but told the Omaha World-Herald (September 18, 2003) that he didn’t care about clothes: “What I would really love to wear is a sweat suit all day, every day.” He added, “People, when they look at me, they are overcome with sympathy.” Buffett’s assistant, Debbie Bosanek, was surprised at the Forbes’ finding: “This is for real, right? It’s not a joke?”

Someone once said, “I wouldn’t recognize him if he walked in with a group of three people, except for the halo over his head.”

His manner of dress is rumpled. His tie often comes up short, several inches above the belt. His shoes are sometimes scuffed. Coat and tie rarely match. If he has a suit on, it is off-the-rack conservative—few Continental cuts here, thank you very much; although, his family has given him a few in an attempt to improve his appearance.

Sometimes on weekends he wears a baggy navy blue sweatshirt with the Securities and Exchange Commission logo on it (The Wall Street Journal, December 11, 2000).

His hair is not blow-dried or styled into harmony; rather it has sort of a just-rolled-out-of-bed look.

A cowlick and an unruly thatch of thinning hair seems to fly around, standing atop a round, open, owlish face that often has an eager, quizzical look and somehow says, “I am from the Midwest.” His head is somewhat egg-shaped, dotted with hazel eyes that need the help of thick bifocals hooked around ears reminiscent of Lyndon Johnson.

His gait is loping. In his eagerness to get where he’s going, he seems to overstep slightly what would be a normal stride. He looks at times a bit ungainly as if he were trying to step across a room in one less stride than normal.

The forehead is high above rather wild, bushy eyebrows. His mouth is large, the smile wrinkles are deep, and an impish grin comes easily. His face is usually animated but can become positively grim at the bridge table, where his concentration is intense.

Buffett is the first to kid about his appearance, once telling Salomon clients during a telephone conference call that they were in a “preferred position” because they could hear him but not see him.

Buffett’s view of clothes corresponds to his view of most things. “There’s nothing material I want very much,” he has said (Esquire, June 1988).

But while his material desires are pedestrian, his personality is ablaze, making Johnny Carson in his day seem catatonic. Various people have described Buffett’s offbeat, brilliant mentality in different ways: “has an almost photographic memory” —“used to read encyclopedias”—“his mind is encyclopedic, has tremendous concentration”—“fast reader”—and “has no peer in security analysis.”

Buffett’s sister Bertie Bialek has said that her father once told her that Warren’s analytical powers were such that he “can see in the dark.”

Some downside must exist. Ask people to cite criticisms of Buffett, and you’ll get these types of replies: “He needs help turning on the radio.” He “can barely start a car.” He “wouldn’t know if a new piece of furniture or a rug were put in his home.” (Once when he was out of town, Mrs. Buffett redecorated the house. The story goes that when he came home, Buffett didn’t notice any change.) “I don’t think he understands how to use the fax machine. … [I] can’t put a call on hold.” Buffett admits, “I have a little trouble turning on a light switch.” But that’s OK since he can see in the dark. Maybe Superman wears Warren Buffett pajamas.

Are there any folks who don’t care for Buffett? A few, mostly out of envy. “There must be some people out there who don’t like the guy, right? Well, sure. A long list actually. Buffett has lobbied hard for expensing stock options, so the Silicon Valley crowd aren’t big fans. Some also point out that for all of Buffett’s grousing about corporate governance, Berkshire has a paucity of outside directors. Buffett gives money to Planned Parenthood, so he’s not a favorite of the right-to-lifers. Many investment bankers don’t like him—they can’t snow him—and he’s no friend to the Wall Street analysts—he won’t give them any guidance. And as someone (the only one!) who routinely and consistently beats the market, he must drive disciples of the efficient-market theory crazy. Former SEC chairman Harvey Pitt may be a bit peeved at him since Buffett was less than supportive of his tenure. And then there’s the matter of the 16,712 votes cast earlier this year against Buffett for director of Berkshire. (For the record, he received 1,140,816 votes in his favor.)” (Fortune, November 11, 2002)

Buffett can give the appearance of being every inch the absent-minded

professor: tousled hair, rumpled clothes, and a high Midwestern cackle and laugh.

Yes, “The world’s most profitable investor looks like an absent-minded professor. But as soon as he speaks that impression is dispelled. The words almost exploded from him with a pulsing energy” (The Mirror, May 13, 2003). People snap to attention in awe because of the crystal clarity, penetration, and facile summary he can bring to a complex problem. He is a master communicator whose verbal and written skills are unique. What he says is informative, useful, wise, and/or funny, it’s not passing chatter about what’s for dinner.

Buffett speaks to people as if they were as intelligent as he; somehow he makes them believe for a moment that they are equal with him in his reasoning. He conveys this by being so articulate that most listeners actually do understand what he is talking about—even if it involves complicated business concepts.

One day in 1986, Buffett showed up at Omaha’s Red Lion Inn for an interview with Channels magazine (November 1986). West Coast editor Patricia Bauer reported Buffett was wearing khakis, a jacket, and a tie. “I dressed up for you,” he said, smiling sheepishly.

His daughter Susan once said, “My mother was in town one day and said, ‘Let’s get him a new suit.’ … We were so sick of looking at those clothes that he’s had for 30 years. So we bought him a camel-hair blazer and a blue blazer, just to get some new ones. And he had me return them. He said, ‘I have a camel-hair blazer and a blue blazer,’ and he was serious. I sent them back.

“Finally I went out, unbeknownst to him, and picked out a suit. I didn’t even look at the price tag. I looked for something that would be comfortable and conservative-looking. He won’t wear anything that isn’t extremely conservative. And he tried it on. It was comfortable. He didn’t even look at the price tag. The suit was very boring and conservative, and he bought a few of them.”

Susan added, “He’ll wear clothes until they are threadbare.”

Virtually no one really cares whether Buffett wears a tux or a swimsuit to the office as long as he continues to work his magic. Occasionally, Buffett buys a suit that’s somewhere between off-the-rack and custom-made, requiring some slight alterations. It’s been reported he wears $1,500 Italian suits but only on rare occasions.

One Berkshire shareholder spoke with a tailor who has fitted Buffett and asked why his suits always looked so ill-fitted. The Omaha tailor replied, “He’s the hardest guy in the world to fit. Basically, he has no butt.”

His low-budget style is well-known to all. Washington Post’s Katharine Graham once described the frugality of her business teacher: “He was parsimonious in the extreme. Once, when we were together at an airport I asked him for a dime to make a phone call. He started to walk some distance to get change for a quarter. ‘Warren,’ I exclaimed, ‘the quarter will do,’ and he reluctantly handed it over” (Katharine Graham, Personal History, p. 536).

Mrs. Graham recalled another incident: “I am sitting down in Virginia with Ben Graham’s beginner’s book and How to Read a Financial Report by someone called Merrill, Lynch, Pierce, Fenner, and Smith. I am told I have to finish Ben Graham very soon because Warren is unwilling to pay the small fine involved in having the book out of the Omaha public library too long” (Katharine Graham, Personal History, pp. 535–536).

With a fast, dry wit, a sunny disposition and folksy manner, Buffett comes across as a mix between Jack Benny and Will Rogers. His talk comes in a rapid, fully-edited form in a Midwestern twang delivered with total intellectual honesty. Great energy, determination, and a zest for life are evident.

Money columnist Joseph Nocera wrote of Buffett’s uniqueness in the July 1998 issue:

One of the most important reasons for this difference between Buffett and the rest of humanity goes almost entirely unacknowledged among those who hope to find in Buffett an easily reproducible investing style. He is a genius when it comes to numbers. ‘Accounting,’ he likes to say, ‘is the language of business.’ It is a language in which his own fluency is unsurpassed, and which gives him an enormous competitive advantage. Usually, all he needs is a quick glance at a balance sheet to know whether he’s interested in buying a company or not—because he finds meaning in numbers that the rest of us don’t.



Buffett rarely gets ideas from other people; he reaches his own conclusions by reading and thinking. Maybe English historian Edward Gibbon had it right: “Conversation enriches the understanding, but solitude is the school of genius.”

Munger has said, “Warren gets blinding headaches if he sits in a room full of people around a table, and a lot of people are saying dumb things on and on” (Fortune, November 11, 2002).

During annual meeting weekends, shareholders can see Buffett’s insatiable thirst for the numbers. He constantly talks about the number of people in attendance, wants to know the number of people at various parties, and the number of people at the baseball game. He wants to know how many books some author sold. And, of course, he is always interested in the numbers associated with the sales at Borsheims and the Nebraska Furniture Mart. With Buffett, its numbers, numbers and more numbers. Buffett says, “GEICO sends me figures every Tuesday: Internet hits, business closed on the Internet, telephone inquiries closed. I love all that. Shaw [Industries] sends me the daily figures by fax. And around Christmas, the month before, I like to get daily sales figures from our jewelry store and from our candy business” (Fortune, November 11, 2002). Never ending numbers.

In the manner of a wise teacher searching restlessly for the truth, he seems to be sincerely trying to pass on to others his homespun wisdom about coping with an imperfect stock market in an imperfect world. Buffett teaches that the true investor swings at the misappraised stock price, the one that offers great value, as if it were the perfect pitch. As Buffett has said, you wait as long as it takes for the right pitch, and then when the delivery is “two inches above the navel,” you swing for the fences.

Like all great teachers, he remains an eager student. The ingredients for his success are his common sense, his own genius, and his lifelong intense study of his area of greatest interest—business. It’s as though Buffett has two brains: One is always alert and thinking about business. The other brain questions public policy, talks with friends, and plays bridge and golf. His immersion in business has done nothing to hamper a great sense of fun and sophisticated wit, whether it be needling himself, Wall Street, or general human conduct.

A large worry line runs straight down his forehead just to the left of center. One would guess it’s the result of intense study over the years of The Wall Street Journal, The Financial Times, Value Line, and Moody’s. He also reads the mainline business magazines, such as Forbes, Fortune, and Business Week, as well as trade publications, such as American Banker, in addition to annual reports by the hundreds and the works of classical economists, such as David Ricardo. Buffett reads The New York Times every day and has said if he were forced to have only one publication, that would be it. He reads USA Today on a daily basis and once even tried to buy the paper.

Buffett is a subscriber to Henry Emerson’s Outstanding Investor Digest, joking that reading it is a good way to keep up with what Munger, Berkshire’s number two man, is doing. As part of his weekend reading routine, Buffett used to stop at Cris’s Rexall Drugstore for a Barron’s. It later became Kohl’s Pharmacy before closing.

Buffett is an avid reader of a huge range of annual reports and wants the reports mailed directly to him, not through the slow bureaucracy of brokerage firm mailings that often take several weeks longer. He tells shareholders to do the same, to have at least one Berkshire share registered in one’s own name to receive direct company correspondence.

FOLKSY AND HOMESPUN

His aw-shucks attitude is genuine, and his manner is open and straightforward. His is often described as folksy, corn-fed, homespun, and decidedly low-maintenance.

Once a Peter Kiewit Sons’, Inc. pilot, who flew the Berkshire plane, called Buffett’s office to inquire if he needed lunch reservations anywhere. Buffett’s administrative assistant at the time, Gladys Kaiser, said not to bother, that Buffett wouldn’t need a thing.

“He [Buffett] arrived with his mother and a picnic lunch when he came to the airport,” says Omaha stockbroker George Morgan.

A lunch favorite for Buffett is popcorn, potato chips, and Cherry Coke. He munches from a Cracker Jack box at ball games.

NO WATER

His daughter, Susan, has said that she’s never seen him have a glass of water and that he rarely eats vegetables. His menu has not impressed his doctors, but they declare him healthy.

Many mornings find Buffett on the treadmill, and he has cut back a little on the junk food but not his liberal use of salt. Fritos are a food group for him. Simply put, Buffett loves his food. He could eat the blinds off a window.

One Sunday in the mid-1980s, Buffett found himself unable to pay a small food tab. “He was in his grubbies having a malt and chips or something, and I realized there was some problem in paying the bill,” recalls Virginia Lee Pratt, a retired schoolteacher and longtime bridge friend of Buffett’s mother.

“I said, ‘Warren, could I help?’ and he said, ‘This is pretty embarrassing.’”

The bill at Goodrich Dairy was $2.88. Buffett said he was unable to pay because he had given his children his small bills and had only a $100 bill on him that the little dairy shop couldn’t change. Pratt stepped in and paid the bill.

“He sent a check the next day with a letter saying that since he had established credit, could he up his line of credit to five dollars,” she said.

She was so honored to have a check signed by Buffett that she didn’t cash it and wrote him that he should check his books because he’d be off by the amount of the bill. (No one would cash Picasso’s checks either.) Miss Pratt turned the check over to her nephew, Bruce Anderson, a Buffett fan.

“At our next bridge game, his mother brought me $3.50 in cash,” Pratt said.

Ms. Pratt has been honored by the Buffett Foundation for her involvement with a 20-year undefeated math team in Nebraska.

Buffett is conscientious about paying his bills, but he also wants full value when he’s on the receiving end, even to the point of taking advantage of discount coupons.

Once before having dinner at the French Café, Buffett presented a coupon for $3.95 to the waiter, Chris Nisi. “I want this to show up on the check,” Nisi recalls Buffett telling him. “When the bill came, he checked it over and found it was there. He had kidded about it all along. He was half-kidding, but he was half-serious, too.”

Using coupons is not unusual for the Wizard of Omaha. In 1990, at a time when Berkshire’s stock price was heading south, Buffett showed up at Bronco’s, a hamburger drive-in in central Omaha, with a coupon. He presented it and said, “This [stock dip] isn’t going to stop me from buying lunch here, is it?”

Buffett has been known to have dinner often at Ross’s steak house with the Blumkin family that runs the Nebraska Furniture Mart. A waitress recalled serving Buffett in early 1993: “He was through dinner and the check had come, and he wanted a Shirley Temple. He said just run a new tab and I did. It was for $1.50, and he forgot to pay it. The joke around here is that I had to buy Warren Buffett a drink,” she laughed.

One Berkshire employee reported that while having dinner with Buffett at an Omaha restaurant, Buffett saw a cockroach on the wall. “I got to watch an international icon take a swipe at a cockroach.”

Taxicab drivers and waiters say Buffett tips adequately but not generously.

Despite all his folksy ways, it’s the high and mighty who seek his advice. Back in 1984 when the Getty family was embroiled in complex merger talks, Ann Getty flew to Omaha to seek Buffett’s counsel. General Electric’s CEO Jeffrey Immelt has also visited Buffett in Omaha. “He’s the world’s most astute investor, and I’m trying to pick his brain,” Immelt said (Fortune, August 11, 2003).

Buffett’s easy manner and down-home ways mask a highly-sophisticated man who enjoys being with large-scale thinkers and doers. Occasionally, he does put on a black tie, as he did to escort The Washington Post Co.’s Katharine Graham to her 70th birthday party. He has had dinner with Ronald and Nancy Reagan and has been seated between Barbara Bush and Jane Muskie at a dinner party. He has been to the White House for small private dinners with Bill Clinton and has had breakfast with then treasury secretary Robert Rubin at The Mark hotel in Manhattan.

Buffett doesn’t accept every invitation. In September 1993, he declined one from Mrs. Graham for dinner with then President Clinton on Martha’s Vineyard (Forbes, October 18, 1993). He did, however, show up at Martha’s Vineyard on August 27, 1994, for a golf game with Clinton. “I can give you a scoop,” he told the Omaha World-Herald (August 29, 1994). “The President had a 39 on the front nine with a couple of birdies.” Buffett said he played only the front nine with Clinton, who finished the 18 with Microsoft’s Bill Gates. “The President finished with an 83,” Buffett said. “He played better with me than he did with Gates.”

In early 1998, Buffett was among the rich and powerful to show up at a formal dinner in the East Room of the White House when then President Bill Clinton hosted Britain’s Prime Minister Tony Blair. Mrs. Buffett sat next to Clinton, with Mrs. Blair on the other side. Steven Spielberg, Barry Diller, Jack Welch, Tom Hanks, Ralph Lauren, John F. Kennedy Jr., Tina Brown, Anna Wintour, Barbara Walters, and Peter Jennings were among those attending (Time, February 16, 1998).

Buffett, Sen. Bob Kerrey, and InfoUSA founder Vinod Gupta hosted a fund-

raiser for Hillary Rodham Clinton in Omaha on March 9, 2000. Buffett took her to Borsheims where she shopped for china and silverware for her new house in New York. She left Borsheims with three shopping bags. She joked that she may have left as many dollars as she would take back to New York for her Senate race (Omaha World-Herald, March 10, 2000).

Buffett has popped up at fancy watering holes such as Lyford Cay. He also showed up at the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary, Alberta, where Agnes Nixon, creator of All My Children, talked him into his first soap opera appearance.

On March 16, 1993, Buffett appeared at The 21 Club in New York for the celebrity-studded party marking the opening of the TV version of Barbarians at the Gate, the story of the RJR Nabisco takeover. James Garner, who played RJR Chairman, Ross Johnson, was there along with Lauren Bacall, Robert and Georgette Mosbacher, and Carl Icahn. Oreo cookies and caviar were served.

A photo of Buffett is included in the book Lilly, about playwright Lillian Hellman of Martha’s Vineyard. There’s Buffett, in sneakers, slacks, golf shirt, and white hat, standing on a dock with Lillian Hellman, Barbara Hershey (wife of writer John Hershey), and author William Styron.

Each summer, Buffett shows up in Sun Valley, Idaho, at the plush Sun Valley Lodge built by W. Averell Harriman in 1936. The media conference is hosted by investment banker Herbert Allen. Over the years, the participants have included Gerald Levin, co-chairman of Time Warner; Sumner Redstone of Viacom International; H. Wayne Huizenga of Blockbuster Entertainment; Tom Pollock of Universal Pictures; Jeffrey Katzenberg, the “K” of DreamWorks SKG; Robert Wright of NBC; John Malone of Liberty Media; and Barry Diller of QVC, as well as top officers of Coca-Cola, McDonald’s, Fidelity Investments, and J. P. Morgan. Other attendees have included AT&T’s C. Michael Armstrong, Amazon.com’s Jeff Bezos, AOL Time Warner’s Steve Case, Washington Post’s Donald and Katharine Graham, Playboy’s Christie Hefner, Yahoo’s Jerry Yang, Oprah Winfrey, and former Democratic National Chairman Robert Strauss. Buffett has had talks with Intel’s Andy Grove and others.

Comcast Cable’s Brian Roberts received a letter from Buffett following a golf outing at Sun Valley after Roberts and Buffett beat Gates at golf and Buffett won $7. Buffett wrote that he wanted to make Roberts a permanent golf partner because it was the first time he had won money from Gates (CNN, January 9, 2000).

Mexican President Vicente Fox, a former Coca-Cola executive, spoke at the conference in 2001; and former Senator Bill Bradley, now an investment banker with Allen & Co., was a participant. Fox had breakfast with Buffett and lunch with Gates seeking greater investment in Mexico.

Sadly, Washington Post’s Katharine Graham fell on a concrete walkway outside a condominum at the conference on July 14, 2001. She underwent seven hours of brain surgery then remained in critical condition. She died three days later.

In the book Work in Progress (drawing on James Joyce’s working title for Finnegans Wake), Disney’s Michael Eisner describes one scene (p. 12) from the 1994 Herb Allen conference in Sun Valley, Idaho:

I spent most of dinner talking with Warren Buffett, while Jane spoke to his wife, Susie. Warren hardly looked the part of one of the wealthiest men in the world. Casually dressed and understated in manner, he exuded a quiet self-assurance but had no interest in drawing attention to himself. At one point, David Geffen, who made a lot of money selling his record company to MCA, walked into the room and spotted Buffett. He walked over and immediately dropped to his knees, genuflecting. “Oh my lord,” he said. “I’m at the feet of the king.” Warren seemed amused, but said nothing.



In September 1995, Buffett visited Ireland, then continued on a train trip through China with Microsoft Chairman Bill “A Computer on Every Desk and in Every Home All Running Microsoft Software” Gates, before showing up in Switzerland for a Coca-Cola board meeting.

On October 9, 1999, Buffett, Rev. Jesse Jackson (by phone), and Sen. Bob Kerrey led a forum at Omaha’s Doubletree Hotel to help high school students attain economic literacy. (Omaha World-Herald, October 1, 1999). Buffett’s advice to the teenagers was this: Develop integrity and avoid credit card debt. After some of the invitations for the forum, originally named “Financial Fitness,” were misdirected to physical education teachers. The name of the forum was changed to the Nebraska Education Forum.

Buffett is a member of the Alfalfa Club (the name comes from a plant whose roots would do anything for a drink). The group of about 225 heavy hitters assembles once a year to drink Scotch and trade quips. In its 1997 dinner meeting, President Bill Clinton asked the group to join him to build a “bridge over the 22nd Amendment,” the law that limits presidents to two terms. Buffett and such luminaries as Colin Powell; Supreme Court Chief Justice William Rehnquist; Disney’s Michael Eisner; and Jack Valenti, head of the Motion Picture Association of America, were on hand that night (The Washington Post, January 27, 1997).

BUFFETT AND GATES

Buffett was introduced to Gates on July 5th, 1991, by the late Washington Post editorial page editor Meg Greenfield. They were all attending a picnic at Gates’s parents’ home. (“Of what did the duumvirate deliberate during their itinerary?”—James Joyce’s Ulysses when Leopold Bloom talks with his son-like figure, Stephen Dedalus.) Immediately upon meeting, Buffett asked Gates his opinion of the changes and challenges facing IBM. Gates said, “I was dying for someone to ask me about that” (The Wall Street Journal, December 11, 2000).

Gates gave a fuller account of meeting Buffett in a Fortune story (June 20, 2008):

My mom called me at the office to come out to Hood Canal for a Fourth of July barbeque because she wanted me to meet Warren Buffett. And I said, “Mom, I’m working.” But she insisted. So I took a helicopter so I could spend my couple of hours there and then get back quickly and work on software.



Then I met Warren and I thought, “Oh wow, this guy isn’t just about buying and selling stocks and businesses. He is thinking about how the world works.” And he asked me questions that I always wanted somebody to ask me; about why hadn’t IBM been able to do what we had done, and how software gets priced, and why does one company have a defensible position. He wanted to understand the dynamics of the industry. To me it was way far away from, “What is your company worth?”



Then he explained to me about how Wal-Mart had not only changed things in its business, but how it had an effect on newspapers because they bought their advertising differently than individual local stores had. And he talked about how banking really worked in terms of credit risk. The whole time all I could think was, “Hey, I’ll be smarter about running Microsoft after I talk to this guy.” So I stayed the whole day.



Buffett, no Nebraskan hayseed, can talk for hours about business, politics, literature, or public policy. However, Buffett once told Gates that explaining technology to him was a waste, that Gates would have “better luck with chimps.” Considerable kidding goes on about how little Buffett knows about technology. Still he has spent hours at a time swapping stories with Bill “Reach Out to the World of Information” Gates.

The two have attended Nebraska-Washington football games together; and they spent a week together in Bermuda with other business leaders in the fall of 1993 in connection with a reunion of “The Buffett Group,” a close circle of his friends that meets every two years to discuss world affairs. Buffett, who has visited Microsoft several times, has encouraged Gates to study Ben Graham.

There have been occasions when Buffett and Gates have played bridge together on the Internet for an entire day.

At the Comdex convention in 1999, Gates showed a video in which he and Buffett appeared before television’s Judge Judy to resolve a $2 dispute over a bridge game the two played on the Internet. The event was filmed in a county courthouse in Monterey, California. In the video, Buffett explained the situation to Judge Judy: “We were playing bridge on the Internet, and I was cleaning his clock as I always do. This miserable little cheat unplugged his computer to avoid losing.”

Judge Judy found in favor of Buffett: “Mr. Gates, pay the man his $2. Maybe he’ll invest it and make something of himself.”

Gates was once asked, “Who’s your favorite CEO outside Microsoft?”

Billion-Dollar Bill replied: “Warren Buffett. The guy thinks. I love people who just think. The conventional wisdom, they don’t fall into it” (Forbes ASAP, December 1992).

Buffett, who refers to Gates and himself as “the odd couple,” returned the compliment in a December 29, 1992, Fortune story: “I’m not competent to judge his technical ability, but I regard his business savvy as extraordinary. If Bill had started a hot dog stand, he would have become the hot dog king of the world. He will win in any game. He would be very good at my business, but I wouldn’t be at his.”

Buffett said in Forbes (October 18, 1993): “Bill Gates is a good friend, and I think he may be the smartest guy I’ve ever met. But I don’t know what those little things [computers] do.”

“I bought 100 shares of Microsoft personally [not for Berkshire] the day I met him to get the reports,” Buffett said at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1995. But Buffett said that didn’t mean Berkshire and Microsoft will be doing business with one another. Buffett said he didn’t understand computers. “I’d walk by a PC and be afraid it might bite me, but once I got started it was easy. Bridge is the only thing I know how to do with the machine” (Janet Lowe, Warren Buffett Speaks, p. 18). Still, the media continues to be a consuming common interest for the world’s two richest people.

Buffett told Nightline’s Ted Koppel (March 2, 1999) about Gates tutoring him in Microsoft: “He [Gates] spent nine hours explaining Microsoft to me. Couldn’t have been a better teacher. Couldn’t have had a dumber student. But I still understood a fair amount of what he was saying because he is a good teacher and I bought 100 shares when I got all through it. That shows you how many dumb things you can do in this world.”

Gates said he wrote his book The Road Ahead with the nontechnical Buffett a bit in mind:

Warren Buffett, who’s famous for his investment savvy, is a good friend of mine. For years I kept trying to think of how to induce him to use a personal computer. I even offered to fly out and get him started. He wasn’t interested until he found he could play bridge with friends all over the country through online services. For the first six months he would come home and play for hours on end. Despite the fact that he had studiously stayed away from technology and technology investing, once he tried the computer, he was hooked. Now, many weeks, Warren uses online services more than I do (p. 207–8).



Early on, posters on Berkshire’s message board insisted that Buffett had to have a computer and use charts to absorb all the financial data out there. His daughter Susan e-mailed this: “I promise that he does not have a PC or any other kind of computer (or chart for that matter) on his desk.”

Buffett means it when he says he’s no expert in the computer business. Early in his career he passed up an offer from a relative to buy into fledgling Control Data, the large computer firm in Minneapolis (Regardie’s, February, 1986).

At a Fortune seminar in Palm Springs in the spring of 1995, Carol Loomis surprised a breakfast gathering by introducing Buffett and Gates, saying, “One of these men is the richest man in America and the other is second” (Fortune, May 1, 1995).

Gates wrote about his friendship with Buffett in the Harvard Business Review (January-February 1996):

We recently vacationed in China with our wives. I think his jokes are funny. I think his dietary practices, lots of burgers and Cokes, are excellent. In short, I’m a fan. …



When you are with Warren, you can tell how much he loves his work. It comes across in many ways. When he explains stuff, it’s never, “Hey, I’m smart about this and I’m going to impress you.” It’s more “This is so interesting and it’s actually very simple. I’ll just explain it to you, and you’ll realize how dumb it was that it took me a long time to figure it out.”



We are quite candid and not at all adversarial. Our business interests don’t overlap much, although his printed World Book Encyclopedia competes with my Microsoft Encarta. Warren stays away from technology companies because he likes investments in which he can predict winners a decade in advance—an almost impossible feat when it comes to technology.



Buffett once said he didn’t eat a bite of Chinese food during his China trip with Gates. When Gates’s entourage asked Buffett what he’d like to eat on the trip, Buffett spelled it out plain and simple: “Hamburgers and french fries. And nothing else.” He underlined “And nothing else.”

When Time ran a cover story (January 13, 1997) about Gates, Buffett was called for an interview. The story reported: “Buffett’s secretary apologetically explains that Buffett isn’t giving interviews these days and at the moment is traveling, but she promises to pass along the request. Less than three hours later, Buffett calls to say he happens to be in the Time & Life Building with some free time between meetings in Manhattan, and he would be happy to come by to be interviewed. He likes to talk about Bill Gates.”

In the story, Buffett told about Gates’s family visiting him and Susan Buffett in San Francisco. They ended up playing bridge for nine hours.

The story went on to describe a movie Gates made for Buffett’s birthday: “It featured Gates pretending to wander the country in search of tales about Buffett and calling Melinda [Gates’s wife] with them from pay phones. After each call, Gates is shown checking the coin slot for loose change. When she mentions that Buffett is only the country’s second richest man, he informs her that on the new Forbes list Buffett had (at least that year) regained the top spot. The phone suddenly goes dead. ‘Melinda, Melinda,’ Gates sputters, ‘you still there? Hello?’”

In his early days, Buffett served on some civic boards, such as Planned Parenthood and the local Boys Club. These days he has so many self-imposed demands on his time that he doesn’t do a lot in the way of civic or charity functions, and there is some grumbling about that in Omaha. However, he has given to the local United Way and has contributed to education generally, and to AIDS education specifically. He has also backed some fund-raising activities in Omaha. For example, he once bid $44,000 on a polar bear necktie. The tie, decorated with the large, white animals, was auctioned at the Henry Doorly Zoo’s 1997 fund-raiser by Peter Kiewit’s chairman Walter Scott. The first bid was for $5,000, but the bidding escalated to Buffett’s final bid of $44,000—of his own money.

Scott has been a true philanthropist in Omaha spearheading multi-million-dollar efforts for the Henry Doorly Zoo, the Omaha Zoological Society, the Mahoney State Park, Strategic Air and Space Museum, and the University of Nebraska at Omaha’s Peter Kiewit Institute for Information Science.

Two years later, the Zoofari ’99 fund-raiser brought in about $1 million. The following is a partial account of the event. “During the auction, Walter Scott bought back his polar bear necktie from Warren Buffett for $59,000. Buffett had bought it from him at the previous Zoofari. Then Buffett bought the animal print Scott was wearing for another $59,000. The bidding brought a rousing round of applause and ovation from the crowd” (Omaha World-Herald, September 11, 1999).

When a fund-raiser for breast cancer survivors was held at the Nebraska Furniture Mart, the most popular auction items were sheets of $2 bills signed by Buffett and Gates.

Despite appearances at charity events and board meetings, Buffett is sometimes described as almost reclusive.

“He’s not comfortable around people he doesn’t know,” said his daughter Susan. She continued: “He’s even a little shy. He doesn’t like parties.… He would be happy in a one-room apartment with his Wall Street Journal, his TV, and a Pepsi [now Coke]” (Register, February 1984). One of Buffett’s pals who attended a New Year’s party with him in the early 1980s said Buffett spent most of the evening off in a corner killing time until he could leave. Neighbors rarely see him; he is not much of a yardman. Instead, he spends time indoors reading or attending board meetings related to Berkshire’s far-flung empire. At his office, very few people drop in—maybe two or three people a week will get a short audience, and they will not be stockbrokers or analysts.

He does, however, have an extraordinarily wide range of friends with whom he stays in contact by phone and letter. He occasionally lectures at colleges such as Columbia and Stanford. For nearly 30 years, Buffett has given a talk every other year at Stanford’s Graduate School of Business class taught by finance Professor Jack McDonald. (See Sons of Stanford chapter.) Buffett also has spoken to students at Harvard, Yale, Notre Dame, Vanderbilt, MIT, Georgetown, and Creighton University in Omaha. Dartmouth’s Amos Tuck School induced him to speak in May 1993, for the dedication of the business school’s Byrne Hall. It was in honor of his longtime friend, Jack Byrne, a top figure in the insurance world who once headed GEICO and later Fund American Enterprises.

In the fall of 1998, he addressed the Warrenton [not named for Warren] College of Business at the University of Florida. His talk was sponsored by the Graham-Buffett Teaching Endowment funded by Florida business alumnus O. Mason Hawkins. For the occasion, Buffett was decked out in a SunTrust Banks T-shirt. SunTrust, a major presence in Georgia and Florida, is also a Berkshire investee.

In a talk at Stanford in 2002, Buffett said his biggest error of omission in the previous four or five years was not buying more Wal-Mart. He started buying at $22 a share and stopped at $24. He said he left $6 billion on the table by not continuing to buy.

He also said he’d have a section in the 2002 Annual Report with reported earnings and pro forma earnings, adding that Berkshire would have the only reported pro forma earnings that are lower than reported earnings because they would include potential losses from hurricanes, etc.

Buffett had come unannounced to that 2002 Stanford class and 20% of the students enrolled in the class missed his talk! Later in 2002, Munger came to the class and asked, “When do higher prices mean higher volumes?” His answer: “Higher prices can mean higher volumes when the higher prices denote higher quality, and the extra revenue is used for advertising and promotion.”

Buffett almost never goes on television. Interviews with him are getting even rarer. He hoards a good portion of his time for reading and studying. Although some people have described him as shy, he has been known to talk up a storm and dominate conversations. He is quite gregarious around his friends.

Even if he is a bit shy, Buffett still has confidence in his own abilities. After all, he has said he knew all along, even as a youngster, that he would be rich. Anyone starting an investment partnership in his own bedroom has to have confidence and be able to ignore those who push him to get a real job.

Whatever he’s doing, it’s with self-assurance. “I’ve never had any self-doubt,” he says. “I have never been discouraged,” (U.S. News & World Report, June 20, 1994). In person, Buffett is totally unpretentious, though he is well-aware of his folk-hero status and that Wall Street watches his every move.

“I watch my every move, and I’m not that impressed,” he quips.

Though his success may be obvious, sometimes it is understated. Who’s Who in America carries just a brief mention of him, describing him as a “corporate executive,” the equivalent of saying Babe Ruth played baseball. The World Almanac (1994, p. 317) lists Buffett among “noted personalities” but misspells his name!

Buffett doesn’t particularly care for small talk. He is open, accessible, forthright, speedy, and cheerful. Munger has said despite Buffett’s amazing memory, he’s not as good at remembering names as one would expect.

“He’s like talking to a neighbor,” says Ronald K. Richey, the former chairman of Torchmark, an insurance and financial services company in Birmingham, Alabama, in which Berkshire has a small investment—about $10 million. By Berkshire’s standards, that’s small.

“He called up one day and said he’d like to meet with us,” Richey recalls. Richey, who was in Torchmark’s New York office at the time, said he’d be glad to meet with Buffett wherever he liked, including Omaha. Buffett, in New York at the time, said, “Oh, no, I know where you are; I’ll just walk over.”

A short time later, Buffett walked in, basically told Richey and Jon Rotenstreich, then Torchmark’s president, that he was not a threat to the company, just an investor, then left.

Herbert Sklenar, former CEO of Birmingham’s Vulcan Materials, the nation’s foremost producer of crushed stone, grew up on a farm near Omaha, attended Benson High School, and sees Buffett at class reunions. “He [Buffett] was the second person I ran into at the reunion in 1988,” Sklenar recalls.

During the reunion, attendees were asked to update their lives, and Sklenar said he was with a company “that makes big stones into little stones.” Buffett himself got up before the group and offered a little witty investment advice.

Sklenar, who went to the University of Nebraska at Omaha (graduating summa cum laude) and to Harvard Business School, has had lengthy experience on the financial side of corporations and admitted he’d want to think twice about any possible business proposition with Buffett. “He’s just so darn smart,” Sklenar said.

At his 50th reunion at Harvard Business School in 2004, Sklenar said, “I joined Vulcan Materials Company as CFO in 1972, and retired from the Board in 2001. In retrospect, that probably was the best career move I ever made. Warren Buffett, my grade school classmate of many years ago, has said that if you find a company whose competitive advantages constitute a virtual moat around it, you’ve found an excellent business. Well, Vulcan’s principal business isn’t protected by a moat, but it does enjoy some important competitive advantages. It’s been almost 32 years since I joined Vulcan. Over that period, Vulcan’s average annual shareholder return has been 16.7%. The comparable S&P 500 return was 11.3%.”

Buffett’s style is tackling problems his intellectual brilliance can solve and steering clear of problems it cannot. Often he has said he’s trying to step over one-foot obstacles, not jump over seven-foot obstacles. He strives to make things as easy as possible by seeking sensible, efficient paths—making the layups as he puts it. Because half-court shots are not high-percentage shots, he works hard at the possible and avoids the unlikely or impossible. One of his great messages is to avoid trouble. In the stock market, that means staying away from capital losses.

Following Ben Franklin’s advice, Buffett is generally early to bed and early to rise; although, his sleep hours do vary. He jokes that his bed is no better than most people’s: He gets 7–8 hours of sleep a day, and his “sleep experience” is about the same as everyone else’s.

He watches television about seven hours a week, keeping abreast mainly of news and sports. He is a statistics nut, and his recall of baseball batting averages and trivia is nearly encyclopedic. In a New York Times Magazine story (April 2, 1990), L. J. Davis wrote that Buffett has no calculators, no Quotrons, and no computers in his office. “I am a computer,” Buffett flatly declared to Davis.

For better or worse, a lot of Berkshire’s records are kept in Buffett’s head. Once John Hillery, a Canadian investment advisor, wrote to Buffett asking for a breakdown of Berkshire’s bond portfolio—what was taxable, which bonds were convertible, and what the maturities were.

Buffett replied in a letter dated December 15, 1980: “We may be able to put something in the reports, such as you suggest, relating to bond types and maturities. We get very little in the way of formal reports, and most of that sort of information is in my head rather than in any computer printout. But I may try to give some general impressions if I have a section on bond investments again this year.”

Basically a homebody, Buffett prefers to stick close to his own home and office as well as to his own counsel. Yet he does have to travel as he serves on a number of corporate boards, and occasionally he manages to get away to his second home in Laguna Beach, California.

People who have worked with Buffett for years say they have never seen him lose his temper. If he finds a typo he might say, “Let’s change those letters around,” or “Maybe I gave you the wrong word.” Accountants can give him sheets of numbers only to be shocked when he quickly may say, “There’s a problem with that number.”

There is rarely any pomposity or moodiness in this multibillionaire. He responds to situations with rationality, not anger. His reply to things that are agreeable with him is usually, “Yeah, sure.” If something displeases him, his reply can be; “We don’t need any of that.” When he says, “I follow that a little,” you’re in for quite an information avalanche.

Ever the gentleman, he never yells or screams. His hands-off, respectful manner with managers involves only the slightest hints of considering a new direction. A rebuke could come in a gentle form: “I might have done it differently.” Managers sometimes call him for a push when a deal is at the 50-50 point, but he rarely steps in even when invited.

His response to the world, after giving it a thorough examination, is positive and witty. He often delivers self-deprecating humor, as in, “Your chairman has blundered again.” Or he may offer stories about how he studied the soft drink industry for more than 50 years and eventually determined that the industry’s two main rivals, Coca-Cola and Pepsi, have both done well.

UPBEAT

Those who have worked with Buffett describe him as almost unfailingly upbeat and supportive, hardly ever testy. Debbie Bosanek, his assistant, says, “Yes, I need roller skates to keep up with him, but I’ve never seen him get mad. I don’t think he’d like to be lied to, though. If you make a mistake and are honest about it, that’s okay; but you wouldn’t want to cover it up” (Fortune, November 11, 2002).

He works hard. “He’s thinking about three things at a time. He’s thinking about it [Berkshire] 24 hours a day,” says an employee of a Berkshire subsidiary. Yet he says his work is not work for him at all, rather fun. Fun to Buffett is studying the world of business through voracious reading. His health (see chapter on his health) has always been good; although, he suffers somewhat with back problems, the result of playing handball years ago. It forced him to cut back his tennis.

Buffett, a member of Augusta National, site of the Masters, has played golf over the years. These days he occasionally shows up at the Seminole Golf Course in Palm Beach, Florida, or with Bill Gates or Charles Munger at Pebble Beach or Palm Springs in California. The two, like many Americans, have been known to worship at Our Lady of the Fairways. Buffett and Gates once talked about buying the Pebble Beach Golf Course, but it never came off (The Wall Street Journal, December, 11, 2000). Buffett has a 22 handicap. Those who have played with him describe his game as average; but they say he is very competitive, improving as the round progresses. He tends to come through in the clutch, say, when things are tied up on the 18th.

According to one golf partner, his style in golf is to save his two mulligans for the last two holes, says a golfing partner. Bob Hancock, head of Robert Hancock Investments in Omaha, once asked Buffett how he’d play Augusta, and Buffett said, “I’d tee it up and hit it directly into the water.”

Once a fellow asked Buffett how he had managed to shoot a round of 108. Buffett replied, “I three-putted 18.”

Buffett lives as if he were oblivious to temptation—living a modest lifestyle marked by few parties, no cigarettes, and very little drink other than the Cherry Cokes he craves. Buffett bears no moral outrage about smoking or drinking, he just doesn’t find much point in such.

He shuns fancy restaurants, choosing steak and potatoes at Gorat’s Steak House in Omaha, with its “Go Big Red” signs (that’s only one notch below a “Go, God, Go” cheer).

Linda Grant described his eating habits this way: “He orders Cherry Coke for his aperitif and consumes steaks and thick, juicy hamburgers with no regard for the current cholesterol phobia. Heavily salting his T-bone one recent evening at Gorat’s Steak House, his favorite Omaha hangout, Buffett said, ‘You know how our life span depends on how long your parents live? Well, I watch my mother’s exercise and diet very carefully. She has 40,000 miles on her bike.’ Chuckling, he dives into sides of hash browns and spaghetti.”

One Friday evening in January 1993, Buffett attended a function for the powers that be of Omaha’s Emmy Gifford Children’s Theater, now the Rose Blumkin Center for the Performing Arts. Everyone, that is, except Buffett, had a Greek buffet. He had a cheeseburger, fries, and a Coke.

Buffett just says no to all drugs except one: Caffeine. The man is wired on the stuff. To satisfy his caffeine habit, bolstered by a desire to give wings to Coke stock, Buffett constantly drinks Cokes and has an occasional piece of See’s candy. Before Coke, it was Pepsi. His wife once said, “Everyone who knows Warren knows he doesn’t have a bloodstream—it’s a Pepsi stream; he even has it for breakfast” (Janet Lowe, Warren Buffett Speaks, p. 19).

Over the years a slight paunch has developed in his middle, but it’s one that might be attached to someone 15 years younger. He admits his diet and exercise habits are not all they should be. Once at the height of the Salomon bond trading crisis in the early 1990s, Buffett called his friend James Burke, the former chairman of Johnson & Johnson. Buffett said he was having trouble sleeping and asked Burke for help. When Burke said he ran three to five miles a day during Johnson & Johnson’s Tylenol crisis, Buffett hesitated and then said, “Any other suggestions?” (The Wall Street Journal, November 14, 1991).

Even so, Buffett appears generally healthy and is enormously energetic.

He lives in a respectable home, with a well-kept yard with plenty of trees and a roomy driveway. Over the years, he has furnished the home largely with items from Omaha’s Nebraska Furniture Mart, a business he bought in 1983. In short: His nice, rambling house complete with a 40-by-20-foot racquetball court and exercise equipment—is a pleasant feature in the quiet, tree-lined neighborhood. Ostentatious it is not.

The house is simply furnished and has only a few luxuries, such as 30-inch, 40-inch, and 50-inch television screens, according to Nebraska Furniture Mart salesman Doug Clayton, who sold him two of the big screens.

Harvey Lipsman of Omaha recalled that his son, Rocky, used to visit the Buffett home to see Buffett’s son, Howard. Their talk was often about girls, not money. Later in life, Rocky—realizing Warren Buffett’s success—got him to sign a book. Warren Buffett wrote, “Rocky, you should have talked to me instead of Howie.”

Once Washington Post Co. Chairman Katharine Graham visited Buffett’s modest home and joked, “Warren, is this all you can afford?”

His home is full of books, including a shelf of Bertrand Russell tomes from which Buffett can quote long passages. Buffett says he admires Russell “Because he thought like Graham.” This is Russell’s prologue to The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell written in 1956:

Three passions, simple but overwhelmingly strong, have governed my life: the longing for love, the search for knowledge, and unbearable pity for the suffering of mankind. These passions, like great winds, have blown me hither and thither, in a wayward course, over a deep ocean of anguish, reaching to the very verge of despair.



I have sought love, first, because it brings ecstasy—ecstasy so great that I would often have sacrificed all the rest of life for a few hours of this joy. I have sought it, next, because it relieves loneliness—that terrible loneliness in which one shivering consciousness looks over the rim of the world into the cold unfathomable lifeless abyss. I have sought it, finally, because in the union of love I have seen, in a mystic miniature, the prefiguring vision of the heaven that saints and poets have imagined. This is what I sought, and though it might seem too good for human life, this is what—at last—I have found.



With equal passion I have sought knowledge. I have wished to understand the hearts of men. I have wished to know why the stars shine. And I have tried to apprehend the Pythagorean power by which number holds sway above the flux. A little of this, but not much, I have achieved.



Love and knowledge, so far as they were possible, led upward toward the heavens. But always pity brought me back to earth. Echoes of cries of pain reverberate in my heart. Children in famine, victims tortured by oppressors, helpless old people a hated burden to their sons, and the whole world of loneliness, poverty, and pain make a mockery of what human life should be. I long to alleviate the evil, but I cannot, and I too suffer.



This has been my life. I have found it worth living, and would gladly live it again if the chance were offered me.



____________________

Buffett also admires the writings of British economist (and investor) John Maynard Keynes, such as Essays in Persuasion. Keynes was known for investing only in a very few companies in which he had full confidence.

Buffett particularly likes biographies. He has read such books as Father, Son and Company; McDonald’s, Behind the Arches; The Big Story; Influence; Bonfire of the Vanities; Liar’s Poker; Den of Thieves; and Barbarians at the Gate. “He’s read all the usual books, but they are usually financially related,” said his daughter Susan.

Required reading for investors, Buffett says, includes the chapters about “Margin of Safety” and about investors’ attitudes towards the market in The Intelligent Investor, the 1934 edition of Security Analysis, The Money Masters, and investor Phil Fisher’s first two books. Buffett wrote Forbes (October 7, 1996) about his appreciation for Fisher’s and Graham’s influence, particularly Fisher’s at this time: “How lucky I have been to have Phil [Fisher] and Ben Graham write down their ideas when they had no financial incentive to do so. I am leagues ahead, richer than I would be if I hadn’t read Phil. I can’t even calculate the compound rate of return from the few dollars spent buying his books 35 years ago.”

Fisher was quoted by Forbes (October 19, 1987) on the day of the stock market crash:

There are two fundamental approaches to investment. There’s the approach Ben Graham pioneered, which is to find something intrinsically so cheap that there is little chance of it having a big decline. He’s got financial safeguards to that. It isn’t going to go down much, and sooner or later value will come into it.



Then there is my approach, which is to find something so good—if you don’t pay too much for it—that it will have very, very large growth. The advantage is that a bigger percentage of my stocks is apt to perform in a smaller period of time—although it has taken several years for some of these to even start, and you’re bound to make some mistakes at it. [But] when a stock is really unusual, it makes the bulk of its moves in a relatively short period of time.



The disadvantage of Ben Graham’s approach, as he preached it, is it is such a good method that practically everybody knows it and has picked up the things that meet his formula.



I don’t want to say that mine is the only formula for success. But I think, and I may be conceited about this, that I started my business before the term growth stock was thought of.



From his house, Buffett can nose down Farnam Street to his spartan office in less than five minutes. Another several minutes away is downtown Omaha, should he need to go that far. One of his mantras is that it’s much easier to stay out of trouble now than to get out of trouble later. Along with his motto of keeping things simple, he wants to keep distractions to a minimum and to be consistent. If you can live close to the office, do it. If a nearby restaurant serves a hamburger or steak you like, why search out a restaurant across town?

The Stage Deli in New York has a sandwich in Buffett’s honor. It’s one of his favorites: roast beef on white with extra mayo. It’s listed on the menu as “The Oracle of Omaha” (Omaha World-Herald, May 11, 1999).

Wall Streeter Marshall Weinberg, a stockbroker with Gruntal & Co., recalled going to the old Reuben’s deli in New York for a meal with Buffett: “He had an exceptional ham-and-cheese sandwich. A few days later, we were going out again. He said, ‘Let’s go back to that restaurant.’ I said, ‘But we were just there.’ ‘Precisely. Why take a risk with another place? We know exactly what we’re going to get.’ ” Weinberg continued, “By that logic, we’d go there every day,” to which Buffett replied, ‘Precisely. Why not eat there every day?’”

Another of Buffett’s tenets: Don’t run all around without a good reason. You can do most of what you need to do right where you are. “I’ll be in Omaha as long as I live,” Buffett has told Berkshire shareholders.

Another lesson Buffett has learned is do things himself. He drove himself to the Berkshire annual meeting in 1989, parking his car around back of the Joslyn Art Museum with its collection of 10,000 works dating to antiquity. Just before he got back to his car after the meeting, a Berkshire shareholder came up to him with a thick pile of papers and asked him if he would look at them. He said he would, and she asked if she should mail them to him.

“Oh, no. I’ll just take them and read them back at the office.” He took the papers, got in his 1983 dark blue Cadillac, and no doubt drove back to the office and read them.

It was not until 1991 that Buffett actually bought himself a Lincoln Town Car. In reference to that particular purchase, Omaha stockbroker George Morgan said, “I think he’s getting a little mellower.” When filling up, Buffett uses the self-serve pump to fill his unwashed car.

Morgan has another story about Buffett refusing the luxury of valet parking. A big event was held one night in the summer of 1999 to celebrate the opening of the Peter Kiewit Institute of Information Science, Technology and Engineering at the University of Nebraska at Omaha. More than 1,000 of Omaha’s finest were invited to the event which included dinner as well as entertainment by Liza Minnelli. Valet parking was the order of the evening for most of the attendees. When the event was over, Morgan saw Buffett walking over a little grassy knoll toward his car which he had parked himself.

Buffett long owned a blue Lincoln Town Car because it had dual air bags. Actually Buffett didn’t pick out his car. His daughter Susan shopped for it in the early 1990s. “I bought it for him (he paid!) without any consultation about color, make, anything except that the two requirements he had were that it had air bags and that it weighed a certain amount of pounds (obviously both safety issues). Anyway, the big bonus was that I ended up paying less because it was hail damaged….The damage had been fixed when I bought it, but they couldn’t sell it for the regular new price because of the hail.” It was not until 2001 that he bought another Lincoln.

After former GM CEO Jack Smith pointed out a Cadillac has air bags for the passenger, the driver, and a person in the middle, Buffett told Smith his next car would be a Cadillac (Fortune, May 2, 1994).

In earlier years, Buffett, already wealthy, picked up friends in a baby-blue Volkswagen bug. “My father loved that car,” Susan said. One Berkshire shareholder recalled a time in the early days when he visited Buffett in Omaha. “He picked us up in a Volkswagen and was sort of apologetic about it,” the visitor said.

By and large, Buffett has followed the creed of Albert Einstein: “Possessions,

outward success, publicity, luxury—to me these have always been contemptible. I believe that a simple and unassuming manner of life is best for everyone, best for both the body and the mind.”

____________________

Buffett has no aides, no advance team. Once, when he was already the richest person in the country, he arrived at National Airport in Washington, D.C., walked up to the corporate jet counter and asked, “How do I get a taxi?”

The same attitude was captured by BusinessWeek reporter Anthony Bianco (July 5, 1999):

Warren Buffett is returning to the U.S. from Europe in a private jet. As his plane nears its destination, the flight attendant gives out landing cards and a warning to all eight passengers aboard. “The customs inspector here is utterly humorless,” she says, “so no wisecracks or he will tear the plane apart from fore to aft.” Buffett, who quips as reflexively as he breathes, takes his card without comment.



In the terminal, a surly looking man with a crewcut and a pistol on his hip sits behind a small table. Buffett hands over his passport and landing card to the inspector, who does not seem to realize that the professorial-looking 68-year-old standing before him is America’s second-richest man. Or perhaps he just gets a kick out of trying to take the high and mighty down a peg. “You left some things blank,” the inspector says peevishly. “Do you have $10,000?”



The question could have launched a dozen snappy retorts, but Buffett restrains himself. “I have what I left with,” he says carefully. The inspector furrows his brow—was that some kind of joke?—but does not press the issue. He asks Buffett if he has anything to declare. “I was given two books,” Buffett says. “Well, you have to put it down, then,” snaps the agent, who fills in the blank himself.



Buffett shows not a flicker of annoyance at being treated like a misbehaving child. He stands mute and impassive before the inspector, who, after a few more curt remarks, can think of nothing else to do but let “the Oracle of Omaha” be on his way.



For all his relaxed ways, Buffett tracks business not only in the U.S. but around the world, according to former GE CEO Jack Welch:

Warren was a bit more aggressive when in 2001 GE Capital tried to participate in a restructuring of Finova, a finance company. As a major bondholder of Finova, Warren was trying to do a workout of the troubled concern. I would have liked to have worked with Warren, but he couldn’t go with us because he already had a partner in Leucadia. We bid for the company. Warren improved his offer and won Finova.



This time, we were on the outside, looking in. (Jack Welch, Jack: Straight from the Gut, p. 247)



With Buffett, there are no airs. His shoes are scuffed. His pen is a Bic. He does his own taxes, saying they are really quite simple. He’s even kept all his tax returns since 1944. Though his tastes may be simple, Buffett is anything but. Things at Berkshire also appear simple. But the reality of what’s been built is something grand to behold.

CELEBRATING MENTORING

On September 12, 2003, TeamMates celebrated mentoring at the “Calling the Plays” fundraiser at the Strategic Air & Space Museum. The event featured a memory-sharing time with Tom Osborne and Barry Switzer, who called the plays on and off the football field as fellow coaches and famous rivals. Also featured was Hall of Famer and ABC sideline reporter Lynn Swann. More than 800 people attended, with proceeds going to TeamMates State Program Development Annual Fund. The program, founded by Tom and Nancy Osborne, provides mentoring for more than 2,400 youngsters.

73RD BIRTHDAY PARTY

In 2004, a belated birthday party for 73-year-old Buffett was held at Rao’s, an exclusive 107-year-old restaurant in East Harlem. Over the years, Rao’s has had an air of intrigue with a reputation as a mob hangout. Even a fatal shooting, apparently the result of a patron’s criticism of a singer on December 22, 2003, did not shut down the eatery.

The celebrants included former Coca-Cola Chairman Don Keough, former Capital Cities Chairman Tom Murphy, investment banker Herb Allen, MidAmerican Energy CEO David Sokol, NetJets CEO Rich Santulli, First Manhattan CEO Sandy Gottesman, Sequoia Fund’s Bill Ruane, and private eye Bo Dietl whose Beau Dietl & Associates has a client list that includes Columbia Pictures, Coca-Cola, and the Royal Family of Saudi Arabia.

LOU DOBBS

Journalist Lou Dobbs said, “Warren Buffett is my personal investing hero and arguably the most successful and famous of our time—maybe of all time.”

FAMOUS IN KENTUCKY

Buffett and University of Kentucky basketball coach John Calipari had lunch on November 3, 2010. Calipari was able then to check off “Meet Buffett” on his bucket list.

The coach took Buffett to lunch at a Kentucky Fried Chicken and later related this story: A woman approached the two men. Calipari expected her to want his autograph, but instead she asked him to take a picture of her and Buffett (Deal Journal, November 4, 2010).

INVESTMENT IN ARKANSAS

An unusual partnership has formed between The University of Arkansas at Little Rock and Delta Trust Investments in Little Rock called the Delta Trust/UALR Berkshire Hathaway Seminar. It’s for UALR students who have completed course work in finance and investments, according to J. French Hill, CEO of Delta Trust.

The selected students “spend all semester studying investments and the philosophy of Charlie and Warren,” Hill said. They also spend time at Delta Trust in trading, sales, and investment management.

Then comes the reward for their work under UALR finance professor Larry Holland: A trip to Omaha for Berkshire’s annual meeting weekend where the students attend the “Woodstock for Capitalism” meeting, eat a meal at both Piccolo’s and Gorat’s, attend seminars and enjoy a Blizzard at the local Dairy Queen.

One of the students, Nathalia Garay Castillo, originally of Bogota, got a full indoctrination into the Berkshire family by bumping into Coca-Cola CEO Muhtar Kent at the meeting in 2011 and capturing the moment in a photo.

People who have worked with Buffett for years say they have never seen him lose his temper. If he finds a typo he might say, “Let’s change those letters around,” or “Maybe I gave you the wrong word.” Accountants can give him sheets of numbers only to be shocked when he quickly may say, “There’s a problem with that number.”



Shining Stars

Buffett and Susan Lucci at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2008.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

The Story of Warren Buffett

The Stage Deli in New York has a sandwich in Buffett’s honor. It’s one of his favorites, roast beef on white, with extra mayo. It’s listed on the menu as “The Oracle of Omaha” (Omaha World-Herald, May 11, 1999).

Of Permanent Value Body, Mind, and Spirit

Body, Mind, and Spirit The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Body, Mind, and Spirit





(Note and check courtesy of Bruce Anderson)

Body, Mind, and Spirit The Story of Warren Buffett



Power Dinner

Buffett shakes hands with President Clinton at a dinner in 1998 for British Prime Minister Tony Blair and his wife, Cherie. Also in the photo are Hillary Clinton, ABC’s Barbara Walters, and Senator John Warner. Mrs. Buffett, or at least the top of her head, is pictured between Warner and Buffett.

(Photo courtesy of Time Inc./Diana Walker)



Former Treasury Secretary

Robert Rubin

(AP/Wide

World

Photos)



Exploring Sun Valley

Buffett walks with Astrid Menks and his daughter, Susie Buffett, in Sun Valley on July 14, 2006.



Buffett with Astrid Menks

Of Permanent Value Body, Mind, and Spirit



Talking Business or Politics?

Buffett chats with Senator Bill Bradley.

(AP Photos)



Former Mexican President

Vicente Fox

(AP/Wide World Photos)



(AP Photo)

Golf Cart One at the

Sun Valley Scene

Buffett is driven to the Allen & Co.’s annual media conference on July 8, 2004, in Sun Valley, Idaho. Allen & Co. first held the gabfest, known as “summer camp for mogels,” in 1982. In addition to Buffett and Gates, the guest list also included the following: Miramax CEO Harvey Weinstein, News Corp.’s Rupert Murdoch, Time Warner’s Richard Parsons, Hewlett-Packard’s Carly Fiorina, eBay’s Meg Whitman, Canadian Prime Minister Paul Martin, New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg, and Google founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin who have cited Buffett as a role model.



(AP/Wide World Photos)

No Epitaph

Katharine Graham, interviewed on January 27, 1997, is pictured here at 79. Mrs. Graham wrote a book on her life, but when asked for her epitaph, she replied, “Too hard.”



Three Heads of Communications Communicating

Left to right: The Washington Post’s Don Graham, Berkshire Hathaway’s Warren Buffett and Google’s Eric Schmidt chat during the annual Allen & Co.’s media conference on Thursday, July 7, 2005, in Sun Valley, Idaho.

(AP Photo)

Body, Mind, and Spirit The Story of Warren Buffett

“I Could Talk to Him

My Whole Life.”

Chairman Bill Gates is pictured at Microsoft’s annual meeting in 1997. Buffett has said of Gates, “He may be the smartest guy I ever met.” Gates of Buffett, “Favorite CEO … He thinks .... I think Warren has had more effect on the way I think about business and the way I think about running it than any business leader.” Gates also has said, “People really underestimate what he has created at Berkshire” (Business Week, July 5, 1999). “I could talk to him my whole life” (CNBC, November 20, 2006).



(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)



(Photo by Kiley Christian Cruse)

“I knew the game

was in the bag when

I saw that Pepsi

was Washington’s

official drink.”

Billionaires at the Ball Game

Left to right: Peter Kiewit & Sons’ Chairman Walter Scott, Buffett, and Gates attended the Nebraska-Washington football game in 1997. “I offered to bet my house against his, but he turned me down,” Buffett said. Gates has a $75-million home on Lake Washington where he keeps a guest bathroom stocked with Nebraska toilet paper for Buffett (The Wall Street Journal, December 11, 2000). In the late 1990s, Buffett’s home in Omaha was valued at $385,000 (Omaha World-Herald, September 20, 1997). Yes, that item between the world’s two richest people is a Pepsi cup. The Husky Stadium in Washington served only Pepsi. Buffett said the Pepsi belonged to Gates, adding, “I knew the game was in the bag when I saw that Pepsi was Washington’s official drink” (Omaha World-Herald, September 23, 1997).

Of Permanent Value Body, Mind, and Spirit

Body, Mind, and Spirit The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Michael O’Brien)

Bill Gates and Warren Buffett

This photo of Bill Gates and Buffett was taken by Michael O’Brien at Sun Valley in the summer of 2004. Maybe Buffett and Gates are thinking, “Hey, if we put our companies together, we could buy Idaho and the rest of North America.”



Two Americans, One Translator

Gates and Buffett pause with guide/translator Joe Zhou on the Li River in China on October 1, 1995.

Of Permanent Value Body, Mind, and Spirit



Combined IQ: About 600

Stanford Business School professor Jack McDonald, his wife Melody, and Buffett are pictured together during the Berkshire annual meeting weekend in 2004.

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)



Combined IQ: 100,000

McDonald’s 2005 investment class of 60 MBA students met with Buffett in Omaha on May 13, 2005. The students visited the Nebraska Furniture Mart, met with Buffett at Kiewit Plaza, ate lunch with him at Gorat’s, and then went to Borsheims. This photo was taken outside Gorat’s. (Melody McDonald is to the left.)

(Photo courtesy of Jack McDonald)



Combined IQ: About 400

Melody McDonald, a Harvard grad, presented the Robert G. Kirby Investor’s Prize to Buffett on May 13, 2005. (Stanford Business School graduate Bob Kirby, who founded Capital Guardian Trust Co. in Los Angeles, died in 2005.)

(Photo courtesy of Jack McDonald)

Body, Mind, and Spirit The Story of Warren Buffett



Cicero at Cardozo

Buffett spoke with Cardozo Law School students in New York in 1998. Buffett, ever the teacher, wrote in Berkshire’s 2004 Annual Report, “This school year we will have visiting classes, ranging in size from 30 to 100 students, from Chicago, Dartmouth (Tuck), Delaware State, Florida State, Indiana, Iowa, Iowa State, Maryland, Nebraska, Northwest Nazarene, Pennsylvania (Wharton), Stanford, Tennessee, Texas, Texas A&M, Toronto (Rotman), Union, and Utah.” Buffett gave special praise to a Texas A&M group who visited in 2006. The group pooled together $1,500 to donate to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, but Buffett returned the gift with a note to donate it to a local Texas charity.



A Modern Maharaja

A group of Wharton Business School students met with Buffett at Kiewit Plaza on October 10, 2003. After receiving a letter from Aaron Byrd, Buffett invited him and his classmates to Omaha. Byrd was helped in the process by Stanford professor Jack McDonald.

(Photo courtesy of Guy Spier)



Roll Tide

About 70 University of “Roll Tide” Alabama business students visited Buffett in Omaha on October 12, 2007 and had lunch with him at The Field Club. About 140 students from Nebraska and TCU also attended. Alabama’s faculty was headed by Susan West.

(Photo by Susan West)



Go Badgers

University of Wisconsin students are pictured with Buffett at the Field Club in Omaha in 2006.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



The Secret of Life

After lunch at Dairy Queen, about 40 Wharton students met with Buffett in the Cloud Room on the 16th floor of Kiewit Plaza. Buffett had plenty of Sprites, Cokes, and Cherry Cokes on hand for the students. Wharton sophomore Douglas Sherrets offered to pay Buffett $500 if he would hire him as an intern. Buffett turned him down, but Sherrets remains such a fan that he founded the Warren Buffett Club, which meets regularly to discuss all things Buffett (The Daily Pennsylvanian, April 22, 2004).

(Photo courtesy of Aaron Byrd)

Of Permanent Value Body, Mind, and Spirit



Tuck Students from Dartmouth



UCLA Students



University of Missouri Students

(Photos courtesy of Debra Ray)





University of Texas Football Team—Oops—Business Students with Buffett



Mississippi State University Students in Nebraska Country





2005 Kansas State Business Students

(Photos courtesy of Debra Ray)



Body, Mind, and Spirit The Story of Warren Buffett



Visited by Mayhew not Mayhem

Shelly and Rick Mayhew visit with Buffett at headquarters in connection with a visit by students from Fort Scott Community College in Fort Scott, Kansas. Mayhew, who works for The Hartford, is an alumnus of Fort Scott.

(Photo courtesy of Rick Mayhew)

Reunion for Rosehill

Grade School

Shown here are Rosehill Grade School alums in 1988. Included in this group are Herbert Sklenar and Buffett (circled).



Benson High School’s 40th Reunion

This 40th reunion shot of Benson High School alums in 1988 shows Buffett and Sklenar (far lower left). Buffett did not actually attend Benson as he had moved to Washington D.C., but he is a regular attendee at the reunions because many of his friends went from Rosehill to Benson.



(Photos courtesy of Herb Sklenar)



Harvard

Herb Sklenar is shown in the 1996 Vulcan Materials Co. Annual Report.

(Photo

courtesy of

Vulcan

Materials Co.)

Extra Study

After earning admission to Terry College of Business at the University of Georgia’s full-time MBA program, Sham Gad (right) made it his personal goal to win an audience with Buffett for himself and his classmates. Gad found a fellow trip leader in evening MBA student Jeff Cole, MD (left), and the duo recruited more than 50 students—evenly split between the two MBA programs—to make the trip with them to meet Buffett. The payoff came January 19–20, 2007, when they made a round trip from Georgia to Nebraska for the chance to quiz Buffett about his investment philosophies.

(Photo by David Stormo)



Of Permanent Value Body, Mind, and Spirit



Brain Power

Buffett (center) poses with USC Marshall undergraduates and MBA students after a 90-minute question-and-answer session.

r

Body, Mind, and Spirit The Story of Warren Buffett



Games People Play

Buffett plays for a celebrity tennis match in Omaha in 1992, with tennis champions Pam Shriver (left of net) and Martina Navratilova (right) along with former NFL quarterback Danny White (far left). Buffett said his preparation for the match was to learn to say “yours” in Czech to Navratilova. Even that didn’t work because Shriver and White won the match on a one-point tie-breaker.

(Photo courtesy of

Omaha World-Herald)

Of Permanent Value Body, Mind, and Spirit

Body, Mind, and Spirit The Story of Warren Buffett



Billionaire in Plaid

Buffett and daughter Susan were surprise guests at the Weitz Funds shareholder meeting at the Peter Kiewit Institute in 2003. Buffett’s plaid shirt was a tribute to Wallace Weitz, right, who often sports a trademark plaid shirt. The Weitz Funds invest heavily in Berkshire, a stock Weitz has owned since the mid-70s.

(Photo courtesy of Omaha World-Herald)

Of Permanent Value Body, Mind, and Spirit



(Photo by Mary Porter)

Jack Welch’s Winning

“No other management book will ever be needed,” says Buffett’s blurb.

Body, Mind, and Spirit The Story of Warren Buffett



Play Callers

Playcallers Tom Osborne, Warren Buffett, and Barry Switzer pose for a picture at the SAC, formerly known as Strategic Air Command Museum.

The Eyes Have It.

Bo Dietl, not Derek, wrote an autobiography, One Tough Cop: The Bo Dietl Story, which has been made into a movie. It details his 18 years with the New York Police Department where he made more than 1,500 arrests and was one of the most highly-decorated detectives in the history of the department. He received 80 awards for bravery.





Lou Dobbs in

1995 Photo

(AP/Photo)

Green-Speak Spoke

Buffett and former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan along with Chamber President David Brown were at the Greater Omaha Chamber of Commerce’s annual meeting on February 20, 2004, where Greenspan offered some Green-speak.



(Photo courtesy of the Greater Omaha Chamber of Commerce)

Of Permanent Value Body, Mind, and Spirit



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Billionaires Served

Buffett and Bill Gates have eaten at Petrow’s in Omaha where sometimes the sign reads: “Over two billionaires served.” Buffett has the steak; Gates gets the shrimp. They both have vanilla ice cream.



(AP/Photo)

“I’m Going to Take Notes”

Buffett and Gates spoke to business students at the University of Nebraska in Lincoln, on September 30, 2005. Gates said not to expect him to take over Berkshire one day just because he had joined the board. When a student posed the question to Gates, Buffett said, “I’m going to take notes on this.” Gates added, “It won’t be me. Berkshire’s got a lot of people who understand their system.”

Dining with Jeff Immelt

Buffett and GE CEO Jeff Immelt have dinedat this Omaha steakhouse.



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



(Photo by Roberta Wilhelm)

LeBron and Warren

Buffett and LeBron James had lunch at the Crescent Moon Ale House across the street from Buffett’s office in Omaha on September 25, 2006. James, all 6-foot-8-inches of him who was playing for the NBA’s Cleveland Cavaliers at the time, was wearing a Cavs uniform. In a 2005 Associated Press interview, James said one of his main goals was to “be the richest man in the world.” In addition to the millions that basketball brings in, James is estimated to have endorsement deals worth about $150 million. Maybe LeBron James is the next Warren Buffett. This photo was taken by Girls Inc’s Roberta Wilhelm at Omaha’s Qwest Center before the lunch. At one point, Buffett said, “Watch me in the playoffs.” Earlier in the year, he dropped in at the same restaurant with New York Yankees star Alex Rodriguez.

Body, Mind, and Spirit The Story of Warren Buffett



(AP/Photo)

Witness This

On March 25, 2007, Buffett attended a Cleveland Cavaliers home game to “witness” James play. Buffett joked that James “wanted a few tips on basketball, and I wanted a little advice on money.” Buffett sat courtside in his “Witness” T-shirt with James’s business manager, Maverick Carter. Nike, who signed James to a seven-year, $90-million deal while he was still in high school, hung a 10-story banner of him on a building with its marketing campaign slogan, “We Are All Witnesses.” A Web site encourages fans to post “testimony” about James’s best plays. Nike gives rewards for the best posts.



(Omaha World-Herald)

The Federal Reserve Board

Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, center, sits with Buffett and Nebraska Governor Dave Heineman at the Chamber of Commerce’s annual meeting February 6, 2007, in Omaha. Buffett and Bernanke had a private chat; but Buffett did share a bit of what he said to Bernanke, who was promoted to admiral in the mythical Nebraska navy. “I told him that 55 years ago when I was married, the whole town was flooded, and being an admiral could come in handy,” Buffett said (Omaha World-Herald, February 7, 2007).



(Omaha World-Herald)

Buffett’s Undervalued Tennis Strategy

At a December 2010 charity tennis event, Buffett showed off his doubles strategy: Yours! Buffett played in the Rock-n-Racquettes exhibition in Omaha with such players as Omahan Jackson Withrow, right, tennis great Pete Sampras, and pro Bob Bryan.

Of Permanent Value Body, Mind, and Spirit



Nathalia Castillo and Muhtar Kent

(Photo courtesy of French Hill)



30





BUFFETT IN CHINESE-MADE SUITS


Dressing for success at the annual meeting in 2009, the China Daily reported, Buffett wore a suit made by the Chinese company Dalian Dayang Trands, according to the Omaha World-Herald (September 13, 2009). A video was made at the request of Dayang Chairwoman Li Guilian. Reportedly, Buffett threw away his other suits after receiving tailor-made ones from the Chinese company. Buffett was quoted as saying, “Imagine starting 30 years ago with a sewing machine and now turning out about 5 million suits, something like that, a year … I have to tell you I now have nine suits made in China. Our director, my partner, Charlie Munger, Walter Scott, and even Bill Gates now are wearing suits made by Dayang Trands.”

Dalian Dayang Trands makes high-end suits at more than 20 factories and employs 8,000 workers. It makes clothes for Marks & Spencer and Macy’s. The suits range in cost from $1,000 to about $3,000.

Dalian Dayang Trands is the leading garment maker in China.



Madam Li Guilian and Buffett

(Courtesy of Dayang Trands)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Buffett in Suits Made by Chinese Tailors



Ready for the Runway



(Photos by

Debbie Bosanek)

Of Permanent Value Buffett in Chinese-made Suits



31





BUFFETT RECEIVES HIGHER EDUCATION


The following is a list of 31 colleges that had each scheduled 15 sessions with Buffett in the 2007–2008 school year:

October 12 – Field Club

TCU – 75 students

UNL – 50 students

University of Alabama –

60 students

October 19 – Cloud Room

Harvard Women – 150 students

November 9 – Cloud Room

Stanford – 120 students

Notre Dame – 40 students

November 19 – Field Club

Arizona – 60 students

Berkeley – 100 students

Oxford/London Business

School – 25 students

January 11 – Cloud Room

IMBEC – Brazil – 40 students

UCLA – 50 students

Creighton – 70 students

February 1 – Field Club

Harvard Business School –

200 students

February 15 – Cloud Room

Emory – 100 students

University of Texas – 50 students

February 18 – Field Club

UC Davis – 120 students

New York University – 50 students

February 29 – Cloud Room

Singapore – 20 students

University of Minnesota –

70 students

Toronto, Rotman – 70 students

March 14 – Cloud Room

Missouri – 120 students

March 21 – Field Club

Texas A&M – 45 students

Columbia – 150 students

March 31 – Cloud Room

Western Ontario; Ivey –

110 students

UNO – 50 students

April 4 – Cloud Room

Wharton – 150 students

April 18 – Cloud Room

Tennessee – 50 students

MIT – 80 students

Duke – 50 students

April 25 – Cloud Room

Ohio State – 100 students

University of South Dakota –

60 students

During the Berkeley students’ visit with Buffett on November 19, 2007, he was awarded the Berkeley Award for Distinguished Contributions to Financial Reporting. The award was announced by Tom Campbell, dean of the University of California at Berkeley’s Haas School of Business, at their 18th Annual Financial Reporting Conference in San Francisco on November 9, 2007. Buffett was given the award by Solomon Darwin, executive director of the Center for Financial Reporting and Management (CFRM), who said in a statement, “Warren Buffett has been a role model for the business community and an outspoken ambassador for transparent and honest accounting practices that go far beyond the letter of the law.”

Buffett now has students from 48 universities who visit him each year.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Buffett Receives Higher Education



32





AGNOSTIC JOINS JEWISH COUNTRY CLUB


Buffett, raised as a Presbyterian but now a self-proclaimed agnostic, joined the Jewish club Highland Country Club in Omaha in the late 1960s.

“At the time, the Omaha Club did not take Jewish members and the Highland Country Club, a golf club, didn’t have any gentile members,” The Buffalo News publisher Stan Lipsey told the Jewish Times (May 21, 2006). “Warren volunteered to join the Highland” rather than the gentile club “to set an example of non-discrimination,” added Lipsey, former chairman of the Jewish Press, Omaha’s Jewish newspaper.

Buffett was quoted in the story as saying, “It created this big rhubarb. All of the rabbis appeared on my behalf, the ADL [Anti-Defamation League] guy appeared on my behalf. Finally, they voted to let me in.”

But Highland had a rule requiring members to donate a certain amount of money to their synagogue. Buffett had no synagogue, so the club changed its policy so that members could give to synagogues, temples, or churches. In the end, the club said members could contribute to charity, and Buffett’s membership was approved.

Buffett has ties with many Jewish persons. Under his leadership, Berkshire has bought Borsheims and Nebraska Furniture Mart, among other companies, from Jewish families. Buffett’s teacher at Columbia, Ben Graham, was Jewish. In 2006, Buffett bought Iscar Metalworking Companies of Israel. On a trip to tour the facilities, he also met with the Israeli prime minister as well as other political and business leaders.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Old Highland Country Club

This photo of the former Highland Country Club, located at 126th and Pacific Streets, was taken in the mid-1980s. In 2000, it was renamed the Ironwood Golf and Country Club. The club was opened in 1924 by Omaha’s Jewish community in response to policies at Omaha’s established country clubs which excluded Jewish members.

(Photo courtesy of John Gass)

Of Permanent Value An Agnostic Joins Jewish Country Club



33





BRIDGE


Buffett has been known to enjoy a game of Scrabble, but his particular passion is bridge—played at times with a deck of cards inscribed, “Make checks payable to Warren Buffett.” Bridge, he is fond of saying, is better than a cocktail party. Buffett jokes that once he asked his bridge partner how he should have played a hand and was told, “Under an assumed name.”

“I always say I wouldn’t mind going to jail if I had three cell mates who played bridge,” says Buffett, whose bridge partners have ranged from Peter Lynch to George Burns. Burns played Buffett (and Munger among others) at a table reserved for Burns at the Hillcrest Country Club in Los Angeles under a sign that reads, No Cigar Smoking if Under 95. Burns’s team was victorious over Buffett’s.

Buffett recalled what Burns said after one of these bridge games: “As I left, he said, ‘If you ever need any money, kid, I have an 800 number’” (Omaha World-Herald, August 30, 2003).

At the Berkshire 1998 Annual Meeting, Buffett repeated a joke Burns told when he was 98. Burns, surrounded by five or six beautiful young women at a hotel one night, said, “At my age, one of you is going to have to leave tonight.”

From 1993 to 1995, Buffett was captain of a corporate team that for three years topped a team from Congress in bridge matches.

Buffett likes to play bridge with Sharon Osberg of San Francisco, twice a member of the world’s women’s championship team and silver medalist in Greece in October 1996, in world mixed teams.

Ms. Osberg, an executive vice president at Wells Fargo Bank for online financial services until early 2000, said, “I met him about three years ago at a celebrity bridge tournament through Carol Loomis.” Later Ms. Osberg gently tried to convince Buffett to play computer bridge. After much urging, Buffett finally agreed.

“We bought a computer—at the Nebraska Furniture Mart, of course—and set it up in his home,” Osberg said. “We play a couple of times a week in the evenings. He really loves it.”

“T-Bone” is Buffett’s handle for games on his IBM Aptiva PC. Gates plays under the name “Chalenger” [yes, spelled with one l]. Buffett kids that you can be as rich and successful as Gates and still not be able to spell. They play at the Web site OKbridge.

Buffett has since become so entranced by the computer that he now regularly surfs the Internet, Osberg said, adding that he sends and receives e-mail messages and looks up corporate filings. He’s now so advanced that he buys books from Amazon.com.

Early one Saturday morning, Buffett called Ms. Osberg for a game. “T-Bone” and “Sharon O” searched cyberspace for partners and came across a couple of players from Israel who recognized “Sharon O.” Ms. Osberg asked, “Who is your group?” The players explained they were part of the Israeli national bridge team practicing for the world championships. “T-Bone” and “Sharon O” took them on. “We lost, but held our own,” Osberg said. She and Buffett have found partners in Europe and South America as well as all other parts of the world.

Osberg, Buffett’s bridge teacher, says his game has improved to the point of being a world-class player. “We played in the World Championship recently. We had to drop out because he had a business emergency, but we made it to the finals. He is moving toward holding his own at the world level. He can play with anyone. It’s because of his logic, his ability to solve problems, and his concentration.”

Osberg, through her friendship with Buffett, has played with Bill Gates, Katharine Graham, and U.S. Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O’Connor, who graduated third in her class at Stanford Law School. Osberg recalls, “The most intense game I’ve ever played was a six-hour game with Bill Gates.” She continued: “We played Buffett and Munger. We lost $28. Warren named the stake of 1/2 cent a point.”

The game, which started about noon, took place at Gates’s house. Buffett said, “Seven hours later, dinner guests were knocking at the door, but Bill wanted to keep on playing” (Forbes, June 2, 1997). Buffett calls his games with Gates “low-stakes, high-level bridge.”

Buffett speaks of the value of playing bridge: “It’s got to be the best intellectual exercise out there. You’re seeing through new situations every ten minutes, … In the stock market you don’t base your decisions on what the market is doing, but on what you think is rational…. Bridge is about weighing gain/loss ratios. You’re doing calculations all the time” (Forbes, June 2, 1997).

At festivities connected with Berkshire’s 1996 Annual Meeting, Osberg and Loomis played Buffett and Munger. “We won!” Osberg announced proudly.

Buffett often played bridge with his sister, Bertie, and her husband, Hilton Bialek, of Carmel, California. Mr. Bialek died March 18, 2002. Buffett still plays with William H. Gates, Sr., a Seattle attorney and the father of Microsoft’s founder. He occasionally plays bridge with his Omaha friends, one of whom is Richard Holland, a retired advertising executive who thinks highly of Buffett’s bridge skills: “Warren’s an excellent bridge player. If he had time to play enough, he’d be one of the best in the country” (Omaha World–Herald, October 30, 1993).

In December 2003, Buffett and Gates finished second after playing seven of the 24 teams in a tournament at Lakewood Senior Center in Lakewood, Washington. They showed up unannounced. Fred Gitelman of Las Vegas played with Gates, and Sharon Osberg played with Buffett.

Perhaps similarities exist between the intuitive abilities common to great bridge players and those in great security analysts as they both try to figure probabilities. They trust their decisions relating to intangible factors, and they always are being dealt new hands.

As a youngster, Buffett played Monopoly for hours at a time.

In a story about Osberg and Buffett playing online bridge, the San Francisco Chronicle (August 27, 1998) said, “Buffett, who has played the game since childhood, has become an Internet bridge junkie, known to play all night until the stock market opens. In response to a question typed in by Osberg, T-bone said he plays about 12 hours a week. ‘I’m glad you asked about quantity rather than quality,’ T-bone wrote back.” The article went on to say, “Buffett’s game gives little insight into his investment strategies. Buffett routinely declines press interviews but agreed to answer several questions posed through Osberg.”

Buffett said, “The approach and strategies [for bridge and investments] are very similar in that you gather all the information you can and then keep adding to that base of information as things develop. You do whatever the probabilities indicated based on the knowledge that you have at that time, but you are always willing to modify your behavior or your approach as you get new information.

“In bridge, you behave in a way that gets the best from your partner.” He adds, “And in business, you behave in the way that gets the best from your managers and your employees.”

When the reporter asked whether his bridge game resembles how he plays the stock market, Buffett said, “I don’t play the market. I buy businesses.”

Buffett concentrates hard whether he’s working or playing bridge. Once, Nancy Line Jacobs of Omaha asked if she could take his picture playing bridge, saying she hoped it wouldn’t distract him. Buffett replied, “It won’t distract me, but I’ll pretend it will.”

Afterwards Jacobs sent him some photos to sign along with a note stating she had “crashed” the previous annual meeting as a member of the press, though she didn’t write an article. However, she wrote that she has since become a Berkshire shareholder and would be at the next meeting as an honest woman. “He even returned my pen,” Mrs. Jacobs said.

Buffett signed a photo for her: “To Nancy, Finally, an honest woman.” He has a witty style for signing personal comments. For a photo for Omaha stockbroker George Morgan, who says his net worth is no different from Buffett’s except for some zeros, Buffett wrote, “To George, Here’s to more 0’s.” To me he wrote, “To Andy, You have treated me better than I deserve—thank God!”

FUN AND GAMES

In addition to champion bridge players at Berkshire’s annual meeting, other impressive fixtures are Patrick Wolff, twice U.S. chess champion, and Bill Robertie, one of only two players to twice win the backgammon world championship.

When in New York, Buffett usually calls on John and Carol Loomis and his close friend, George Gillespie III. Gillespie is a partner in the Cravath, Swaine & Moore law firm in New York, which has such clients as IBM, Time Warner, and Salomon. The firm also helps with Buffett’s estate planning and has advised the Buffett Foundation. Gillespie is a large Washington Post Co. shareholder and a supporter of the fight against muscular dystrophy.

On one of those visits, the foursome passed the evening playing bridge and eating peanuts, ice cream, and deli sandwiches—Buffett’s idea of the glamorious life in the Big Apple.

Sharon Osberg, in a story in The New York Times (November 27, 2005), said that Buffett and Gates, stressing the importance of bridge, asked her to organize a bridge program for public schools, with Buffett and Gates giving $1 million to back the effort. The effort was launched nationally as the School Bridge League in 2007.

GOING INTERNATIONAL

After requests from Irish and British bridge players, Buffett gave thumbs up to a unique bridge tournament between top European and American players to be held in Ireland before the Ryder Cup golf competition.

The Sunday Times (August 20, 2006) reported that a dozen players from the two continents will compete not for money but for the Warren Buffett Cup in a triennial event staged just before the Ryder and in the same country.

The Times went on to say that the new championship revives a tradition of transatlantic games held in the 1930s, which pulled in large crowds and rivaled other sporting events in popularity.

“I spend 12 hours a week—a little over 10% of my waking hours—playing the game,” the Times quoted Buffett. “Now I’m trying to figure out how to get by on less sleep in order to work in a few more hands.”

Buffett travels the world for bridge competitions, sometimes partnered with Bill Gates. The Times continued, “It was during the world championships played in Verona, Italy, last June that Buffett pledged $31 billion to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.”



Laurel and Hardy Play Go Fish

Buffett, Carol Loomis, Sharon Osberg, and Charles Munger settle in for a bridge game the day before Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1996. For these folks, investing is a game, but bridge is serious. Buffett said that he and Bill Gates “play bridge every Friday—10 hours” (Wired News, May 20, 2004).

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



George Burns

He apparently meets the age requirement.

(AP/Wide World Photos)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Buffett’s Bridge Face

The Oracle of Omaha, whose idea of downtime is an intense game of duplicate bridge, plays here at the Omaha Bridge Studio in November 1993. A cans of Coke, another fraction of a penny to Berkshire’s bottom line, is in the background.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Bridge



Just Another Couple of Computer Geeks

Two unassuming participants play in a bridge tournament in Omaha on

December 2, 2000.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Bill, Your Fly Is Open!

Buffett and Gates share a laugh at a bridge tournament in Omaha in 2002.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

21st-Century Captains of Industry and Finance

The world’s two richest men, Gates and Buffett, talk with students and staff on November 15, 2001, during a visit to Conestoga Elementary School in Omaha. The duo talked with students about stock picks and learning the basics: math and reading.



(Photo courtesy of Omaha World-Herald)

Bridge The Story of Warren Buffett



Do You Think Warren Would Be a Fourth Player?

Gates; Bob Hamman, men’s world bridge champion; and Sharon Osberg, the women’s world champion, confer. Hamman has been the World Bridge Federation’s top-ranked Grand Master player since 1985, making him the Babe Ruth of bridge. “That takes an unbelievable mind,” says Buffett. “I could have started playing bridge when I was a 3-year-old and worked at it every day of my life, and I wouldn’t be fit to sort his cards” (Knight-Ridder Newspapers, May 16, 2004). Hamman is the coauthor of At the Table.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



George Gillespie III

(Photo stolen from

2002 White Mountains Annual Report)

Of Permanent Value Bridge



The Backwash Squeeze

This book mentions Buffett and Gates in an entertaining look at bridge, which author Edward McPherson says is “popular with both businessmen and serial killers.”

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Don’t These People Know Who We Are? We’re Supposed to be No. 1 and No. 2!

Gates and Buffett chat between games of bridge at the National Bridge Regional Tournament in Omaha on August 5, 2005.



(AP/Photo)



The Bridge Studio

This is the ultra-swanky, glamorous studio where Buffett and Gates have duked it out over bridge. The bridge studio is located next to the Midlands Business Journal. The area clearly hasn’t changed one iota in 30 years.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Lefty Signing

Maybe Gates is signing a check to Buffett after a bridge game during the Berkshire 2006 Annual Meeting weekend.



(AP/Wide World Photos)



A Happy Hand

I’m trying to pay for my drink.

(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)



34





WORLD HEADQUARTERS


Buffett has dubbed Berkshire’s unassuming office in midtown Omaha as “World Headquarters.” It has almost 10,000 square feet of recently expanded leased office space. Think of it as Noah’s Ark even though the ark was much bigger. Berkshire is more like the size of a football stadium. The Bible says the ark was 450 feet long, 75 feet wide, and 45 feet high. God could easily have put a pair of Berkshire headquarters on board.

Noah may have had a plan laid out for him, but Buffett does not. “Not only do we not have a strategic department, we don’t have a strategy. Berkshire does not employ an economist; and if we buy a business that has one, he’s gone,” Buffett said (talk to Georgetown MBA students, November 14, 2002).

At Berkshire’s Mission Control of the supernova, there may be no mission statement, but there is a definite mission. Berkshire shareholder Ken Monroe has reduced the mission to a written formula: “Make a profit. Buy a great business. Repeat. Continue forever.”

Entering Berkshire headquarters one day, Buffett said, “We’re now entering the maximum-security ward.” He has also described it as the “Playpen,” “The Pleasure Palace,” the “Temple,” and “Monolith in 2001.” Headquarters is a small group of library-quiet offices on the 14th floor of modest-sized Kiewit Plaza.

“The whole operation could fit inside less than half a tennis court,” said Peter Lynch in 1994 (Foreword of The Warren Buffett Way by Robert Hagstrom). One shareholder questioned that statement: “Isn’t half a tennis court 39 x 36 = 1,404 square feet? How could all those Cokes he drinks even fit inside the service box?”

Headquarters has been described as “linoleum floors and throw rugs.” That’s a bit of an exaggeration, but the space is far from being some plush corner office with mahogany paneling. A sign on the outside of the front door says, “No admittance except by appointment.” The entrance to Berkshire has been described as “a wooden door that looks as though it could hide a broom closet” (Omaha World-Herald, September 2, 2001).

Russ Fletcher, president and CEO of White Mountains Re Underwriting Services, had an appointment one Saturday in the mid-1980s to see Berkshire’s Michael Goldberg. “I walked in and he (Buffett) was behind his secretary’s desk opening the mail,” Fletcher recalled. “He was dressed in blue jeans and a turtleneck.… He said ‘Hi’ and we exchanged pleasantries… He’s very unassuming.”

Another fellow who got into the inner sanctum in 1988 was Michael O’Brien of Austin, Texas. “I was there to shoot a picture of him for Esquire. … I asked him about the crash, if that made him fearful. He said no, that if the market had dropped another 500 points, he’d really have found bargains.”

World Headquarters contains a mini conference room and just enough room for the 23 employees to operate.

Berkshire (which the dictionary defines as “any of a breed of medium-sized black swine with white markings”) does have other locations for its team of accountants responsible for insurance subsidiaries, and a data processing building to track the insurance operation’s complex finances. Still, Berkshire’s operations are lean beyond belief even after remodeling and expanding in 2003.

Buffett runs Berkshire’s empire from a rather small desk piled with reading material, such as The Wall Street Journal, the Omaha World-Herald, and magazines. A news junkie, Buffett often keeps a TV on his bookshelf on mute and turns up the volume if something catches his attention. The desk, at times, sports notepads with various messages, such as, “In case of nuclear war, disregard this message.”

The printed message on a note Buffett once sent me attached to a photo of Coca-Cola’s President Don Keough (now chairman of Allen & Co.) was classic. A number of Berkshire shareholders had their pictures taken with Keough at the Berkshire 1991Annual Meeting. Coke folks sent Buffett the photos and he forwarded them to shareholders. Mine came with a little Post-it note saying he thought I’d enjoy the photo. It was signed in his looping handwriting with a large ‘W’, a legible ‘a’ and a sort of loop representing two ‘r’s’ to form a scrawled “Warren.”

The printed inscription at the bottom read:

“An absolutely brilliant memo”—NY Times

“Clear … concise … to the point”—Fortune

“Masterful use of the language”—Atlantic

Sometimes Buffett jots messages on sticky notes like these:

He has sent other jotted messages, one on a comical sticky note that read, “Most sex maniacs send purple notes.” (The note was purple.)

Visitors to his pale green office, owned by privately held construction conglomerate Peter Kiewit Sons’, Inc., are greeted by a gift from his wife, a porcelain plaque which hangs just inside the door which says: “A fool and his money are soon invited everywhere.”

Inside, ementos of the stock market abound, particularly from the crash of 1929. Scattered about are miniature sculptures of bulls and bears. On the walls are stock quotations from the crash, a portrait of Buffett’s father, and a photo of Ben Graham. One wall is also graced with the Pulitzer Prize for the exposé of Boys Town by his now defunct Omaha Sun newspapers.

Rare photos of Buffett’s office and Berkshire’s headquarters show little more than a few remarkably plain chairs, desks, couches, and framed documents on the walls. An original Thomas Edison stock ticker tape machine given to Buffett by a friend many years ago is displayed. A bookshelf contains financial volumes and several editions of Graham and Dodd’s Security Analysis, including a worn copy of the 1934 first edition.

The walls also display Wall Street memorabilia, such as a copy of The New York Times (October 31, 1929) bearing the headline, “Stocks Mount An All-day Rally: Rockefeller buying heartens market; Two-day closing ordered to ease strain.” Other headlines about the crash and assorted Wall Street events are also present.

His desk is neither clear nor messy. “It’s in between,” says Dr. Ronald W. Roskens, former president of the University of Nebraska, who has occasionally called on Buffett at his office concerning civic or charitable missions. “It’s what makes sense. He’s trying to keep things simple. There’s a sofa here; his desk is over there. It’s not a dump, but it’s not ornate either,” he added.

His tiny staff for years included his administrative assistant Gladys Kaiser who was with him from December 1967, when she walked in as a “temporary” Kelly Girl, until she retired 25 years, four months, and 13 days later in 1993. She was replaced by Debbie Bosanek. Mrs. Kaiser still has lunch with Buffett every month or so. He once said of her, “Things just wouldn’t quite work around here without her.… I wish her immortality. If Gladys can’t have it, I’m not sure I want it either” (Fortune, April 11, 1988). Perhaps the quote is a descendant of the old Irish saying: “May the men have long lives, and may the women live forever.”

One of the few people working closely with Buffett has been Michael Goldberg, who for years headed Berkshire’s insurance businesses from headquarters. Goldberg now lives in Montecito, California (where Munger has a home) and continues to work for Berkshire heading up special operations. Describing Buffett, Goldberg shared the following with Buffett’s friend and chronicler, Carol Loomis of Fortune magazine: “He’s so damn smart and quick that people who are around him all the time feel a constant mental pressure trying to keep up. You’d need a strong ego to survive in headquarters.”

Goldberg, who attended Columbia, Northwestern, and Stanford Business School, came to Berkshire as a young man, already a top executive with the Pacific Stock Exchange. He told Loomis, “I’ve had a chance to see someone who can’t be believed. The negative is: How do you ever think much of your abilities after being around Warren Buffett?”

Goldberg later told Linda Grant (Los Angeles Times, April 7, 1991): “Warren Buffett is a person who, the closer he gets, the more extraordinary he gets. If you tell people about him, the way he is, they just think you were bamboozled.” A lot of things about Buffett and Berkshire are so unbelievable—such as the letter’s six-digit stock price—that at first, people are skeptical.

Buffett works a regular day at the office roughly from 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. He’s on the phone about an hour and a half a day. The rest of the day he thinks and reads. One day in 2005, The Wall Street Journal reported he took only 13 calls, including a wrong number. His first call was from John Freund, a broker at Citigroup who briefed him on a stock position Buffett was building. Buffett said, “If we bought a couple million [shares], that would be fine” (The Wall Street Journal, November 12, 2005). He also found time to compose new lyrics to “Love Me Tender” for a birthday party for Bill Gates and then demonstrated to reporters a technique he once used as a newspaper boy to throw newspapers.

For years, Buffett’s one acknowledgement of modern technology was a bank of two telephones—his version of a cosmic switchboard—that connect him with different brokerage firms when the need arises. Berkshire finally went high tech and now sporrs a fax machine.

Buffett roams around the suite of offices at Kiewit Plaza getting his own Cherry Cokes and pulling his own files from the office storeroom. He doesn’t mind if someone brings him a hamburger for lunch. Just don’t let him cook it himself.

MR. NON-TECH BLOWS UP THE MICROWAVE TWICE

According to highly-placed sources, history’s greatest investor has twice blown up the office microwave by heating foil-wrapped sandwiches, then calmly coming out and telling Gladys Kaiser, “I think there’s a fire here,” and wandering back to his office. Both times, the Nebraska Furniture Mart delivered replacement microwaves.





Calls steadily stream into Berkshire. Often they are requests for annual reports. “I called Berkshire in 1988 because I didn’t get my annual report. I cannot prove this in a court of law, but I’m 99% sure I got him.… He had a clipped, fast voice. He said ‘That’s awful’ that I didn’t get the report,” recalled Dr. Wallace Gaye who once taught medicine at UCLA and is a Berkshire shareholder currently living in Durham, New Hampshire. Dr. Gaye left the medical world, in part, to track the ticker tape and his Berkshire shares.

“I started to ask if he was Warren Buffett, but I just couldn’t … he was fast. He said something like he’d fix it. Two days later I got the report,” Gaye said.

Gilman Gunn, of Wellesley, Massachusetts, sold securities for Mabon Nugent in the late 1970s. He once called Buffett, got him on the phone and tried to sell him 600 shares of Doubleday publishing stock, which was trading at $13,000 a share.

“He said send the information and that he’d take a look. I called him a few days later and he said he had reviewed it and decided, ‘It wasn’t cheap enough for us,’” according to Gunn, who was surprised Buffett took his calls.

Other folks have encountered Buffett’s quick responses. As his fame has grown, well-meaning people have besieged Buffett with investment advice. Rarely does he want it. Once a significant holder of Berkshire stock, Ernie Williams of Village of Golf, Florida, called him, excited about an investment publication he wanted to share with Buffett. Buffett’s reply was, “Please don’t send it.”

Buffett once pointed out the “boardroom” to a visitor, saying of the 7- by 10-foot room, “We could change it to a closet if we had to.” He has kidded that he turns off the air-conditioning during board meetings so that the meetings will finish quickly.

For another visitor, when the subject of bridge came up, Buffett instantly pulled from his files a 1929 newspaper article reporting the acquittal of a woman who killed her husband over a bridge game argument.

At headquarters, 20 blocks from Buffett’s house, only a small number of people run Berkshire. In Berkshire’s 1995 Annual Report, Buffett said

that although acquisitions in 1995 Berkshire bought 11,000 new employees, “Our headquarters staff grew only from 11 to 12. (No sense going crazy.)”

By 1998, he did go nuts and had 12.8 people at headquarters, as he stated in the annual report: “We have enlarged the staff at world headquarters from 12 to 12.8. (The .8 doesn’t refer to me or Charlie: We have a new person in accounting, working four days a week.) Despite this alarming trend toward corporate bloat, our after-tax overhead last year was about $3.5 million, or well under one basis point (.01 of 1%) of the value of the assets we manage.”

By 2000, 13.8 people inhabited Berkshire headquarters. Buffett said, “Charlie and I went soft last year and added one more person at headquarters. (Charlie, bless him, never lets us forget Ben Franklin’s advice: ‘A small leak can sink a great ship.’)” There are now 20 people at headquarters. (See two chapters ahead.)

One of them, Buffett’s assistant Debbie Bosanek, known for her efficiency, once slowed Berkshire’s operations for a moment by causing Buffett to be put on hold. She had called a fellow who happened to be on the phone with Buffett at the time. The man put Buffett on hold and told his secretary he’d take Bosanek’s call; he wanted to thank her for help on a business matter. Buffett and a mortified Bosanek figured out quickly that she had caused him to wait. “It was probably the first time he’s ever been put on hold,” she moaned.

Bosanek gets many calls for Buffett, but she puts through only a few. Once an insistent caller said he had to get in touch with Buffett. When Bosanek refused, the caller said he’d see to it her next job was at Burger King.

Another time a man called saying he was a good friend of Buffett’s and demanded to speak to him. Again, Bosanek declined. The caller then said he knew Buffett so well he’d “call him on his car phone.” She knew immediately that he was bluffing because Buffett didn’t have a car phone; although, he did get a cell phone at the turn of the new millennium.

Once a caller asked Bosanek if she ever actually saw Buffett, who happened to be standing at her desk. She looked up at Buffett and replied to the caller, “Yes, sometimes I do see him!”

Occasionally Bosanek writes on sticky notes inscribed, “God’s on vacation and I’m in charge.” And at times, she may well be since she has been at Berkshire so long. She says, “I was at Berkshire before we had a fax and when we used to mail the annual report with stamps.”

One time when Buffett took Mrs. Bosanek and office friend Kelly Muchemore-Broz to lunch, all forks in the restaurant seemed to stop in mid-air as people stared at Buffett. “I guess they’re looking at Kelly and me,” Bosanek cracked.

Speaking of Debbie and Kelly, here’s an item from the “Berkshire message board” at America Online. A fellow named Tony wrote that he was looking for a possible reinsurance deal and wanted to know which “division” of Berkshire he should call.

Buffett’s daughter Susan (online name: “Doshoes”) answered that query. “There are no divisions at Berkshire. There are almost no people at Berkshire (that was sort of a joke). Call 402-346-1400 and ask Deb or Kelly the question. They can help you.”

Buffett has joked that Dudley has an office at Berkshire (Omaha World-Herald, October 10, 2004). Buffett has called Muchemore the “Flo Ziegfeld of Berkshire.”

If you have a question for Berkshire, you can call and probably get a quick yes or no. Once a woman called Berkshire saying she’d like to have a photo of Buffett. She was told headquarters didn’t have any photos of Buffett.

A shareholder called once and got Buffett’s then assistant, Gladys Kaiser. The shareholder asked if Buffett would be interested in buying a certain brokerage firm. Kaiser turned to Buffett, and the caller got an immediate answer directly from Buffett: “Thanks, but no thanks.”

World Headquarters is the home of Berkshire’s investor relations department, which, of course, doesn’t exist. Buffett was once asked what kind of investor relations Berkshire would have in the future. Buffett replied, “Our performance.”

Near an area where Buffett stashes his Cherry Coke supply is a sign: Coca-Cola Sold Here Ice Cold. Buffett buys his own and brings them from his home to the office.

No signs are posted, no logos, nothing really to indicate anything about Berkshire. Even Berkshire’s insurance business in Omaha is in a nondescript building not far from Kiewit Plaza, which carries a modest sign saying National Indemnity Co. It is through NICO that Buffett makes a great number of his investments.

It is at his office that Buffett reads and works the phone, staying in touch with his managers, friends, and brokers and responding, usually with short, witty notes, to wave after wave of mail. A fanatic about the mail, he reads virtually every piece that arrives. Sometimes he grabs up the mail before assistants have a chance to get it to him. When the boss is out of town, Bosanek overnights him the day’s new batch of mail. He says, “I spend an inordinate amount of time on the mail.”

Buffett often will dictate quick replies to letters. Here’s one to Tom Keegan, of Fairfield, Connecticut, who wrote suggesting that Buffett look at the possibility of “shorting against the box,” some of Berkshire’s stock positions. The technique allows postponement of taxes on stock sales. Buffett replied December 5, 1995: “Thanks very much for your letter. We’ve looked at the technique you describe, but there are some serious obstacles. We’ll look again to see if these can be overcome.”

Linda Humes, of Laguna Beach, California, wrote him saying that she enjoyed the annual meeting, had been a GEICO policyholder since she was 17, and loved See’s candy. His May 20, 1997 reply: “Dear Linda: Thanks for your nice letter. I’m delighted you could make the annual meeting and will accept no excuses in the future. In the meantime, double your input of See’s and drive carefully. Sincerely, Warren E. Buffett.”

A shareholder once wrote that he had bought one Berkshire’s Class A share for his newborn daughter and that as an owner of the company, he’d carefully watch Buffett. Buffett replied, “You can be sure that I’ll tend to business now that I know you’re watching.”

Many of the letters are pleas for contributions or help, often with the notation that the writer wouldn’t tell anybody if Buffett would give to his/her cause. Buffett is anguished by each request he refuses. He is sensitive to reporters’ requests for interviews, which he usually turns down. He asks his assistants, “How did he take it?” To his innumerable requests to speak, he replies with a polite note to the effect, “Too many invitations, too little time.”

He’s always been diligent and prompt in his correspondence, often writing a thank-you note the same day he gets a letter. For example, back in 1981, three Berkshire investors, Fred Whitridge, Gifford Combs, and Bill Scargle, asked to have a meal with him during the annual meeting weekend. Buffett declined but wrote a cordial letter.

There are no hovering assistants, no typing pool. Tan metal filing drawers line the walls, almost 200 of them, containing everything from correspondence with Ben Graham to copies of Buffett’s own letters and annual reports. The cabinets, in alphabetical order, say, for example, “Silver—Sotheby’s,” “Turner—20th Century,” and “USAir—Wesco.”

When Adam Smith interviewed Buffett for a Money World show, which aired after the annual meeting in 1990, the two men sat in small, nondescript chairs at Berkshire’s headquarters just a few feet apart facing one another.

Very few people get access to Buffett’s office. Many of the top managers of Berkshire operating units have never been to headquarters in Omaha. Buffett sees a few people a week and very rarely gives interviews.

Buffett’s aversion to interviews was documented in a four-page story in Money magazine by Gary Belsky, who wrote of being unable to get an interview with Buffett. Even after Belsky flew to Omaha, he got the same answer when he called Kaiser from the lobby of Kiewit Plaza.

He reported that the guard who heard the phone conversation said, “You took that better than most.”

Belsky: Most? Do people drop by like this a lot?

Guard: About once a day.

Belsky: Does she ever let them up?

Guard: Sometimes.

Belsky: Do you think she’ll let me up?

Guard: No. (Money, August 1991)

The story was reported in the Omaha World-Herald under the headline: “Buffett Ignores Money.”

One fellow who did get in to see Buffett, according to the Sacramento Bee (July 13, 1998), is Randall Fairchild, an economics teacher at Florin High School in the Elk Grove School District. Fairchild had written a paper about Berkshire for an MBA course at UC Davis School of Management. He wrote Buffett and asked if he could see him. Fairchild was told to come June 29 at 4 p.m.

“I sent the letter on a Friday and the following Tuesday I received an e-mail from one of Buffett’s assistants telling me that, sure enough, he doesn’t give interviews but would like to meet me for three minutes for a photo opportunity.

“They buzzed me into the office and within a few minutes Buffett came out from a hallway with a smile on his face and an open hand to greet me.” The two talked for three minutes and had their picture taken: The usual Fairchild holding Buffett’s wallet. Buffett then turned and left.

Buffett’s aide told Fairchild, “Buffett sees less than one out of every 1,000 people who write him requesting an audience” (Sacramento Bee, July 13, 1998).

Another fellow who got an audience in 1998 was Nike Tour golf leader Joe Ogilvie, a young Duke graduate in economics. In an interview he had told the Omaha World-Herald that Buffett was one of his heroes. Ogilvie was invited for a visit to headquarters where Buffett showed him the ledger sheet from his first stock transaction. The commission was 10 cents (Omaha World-Herald, August 7, 1998). The two usually have Thanksgiving dinner in Omaha, and they stay in touch by e-mail.

Notre Dame football player Grant Irons got a call from Buffett shortly before the Nebraska-Notre Dame football game in 2001. Buffett phoned after a friend told him of Irons’ admiration. Buffett jokingly offered the defensive end stock tips in exchange for Notre Dame’s playbook. “No deal,” said the 6-foot-5-inch, 275-pound business major; but Irons did send an autographed photo and a thank-you note (Associated Press, September 3, 2001).

Almost no information slips out of headquarters. It would be fitting for Berkshire to have this aphorism on its wall:

What You Say Here

What You See Here

What You Hear Here,

Let It Stay Here

When You Leave Here

(From Coach Vince Lombardi’s locker room)

With few visitors, Buffett hunkers down over his work, often snacking at his desk. The storeroom is filled with staples of Buffett’s phoneside snacks—Hawaiian potato chips, Cherry Cokes, and See’s candy.

Buffett sticks largely to his favorite diet of hamburgers, chips, and Cokes for real lunches and rare steaks with a double order of hash browns for dinner. He likes to snack on Planters peanuts and Häagen-Dazs strawberry ice cream.

Unlike the ladies of Sex and the City, Buffett doesn’t lick lettuce or have a hot cup of water with a lemon for lunch. Of course, he doesn’t have to wear heels and little black dresses either.

After lunch, it’s back to his reading and phoning in the quiet of his office where the blinds are down. It is all as simple as simple can be.

In Berkshire’s 1996 Annual Report, Buffett wrote, “Our after-tax headquarters expense amounts to less than two basis points (1/50th of 1%) measured against net worth. Even so, Charlie used to think this expense percentage outrageously high, blaming it on my use of Berkshire’s corporate jet, The Indefensible [later Indispensable, now NetJets].”

Buffett said at the 1998 Berkshire Annual Meeting, “Our after-tax cost of running the operation has gotten down to a half a basis point of capital. In contrast, many mutual funds are at 125 basis points. That means they have 250 times the overhead ratio, overhead relative to capitalization, that we do.”

Plenty of work gets done at World Headquarters, as Buffett described in Berkshire’s 2000 Annual Report: “This tiny band works miracles. In 2000 it handled all of the details connected with our eight acquisitions, processed extensive regulatory and tax filings (our tax return covers 4,896 pages), smoothly produced an annual meeting to which 25,000 tickets were issued, and accurately dispensed checks to 3,660 charities designated by our shareholders. In addition, the group dealt with all the routine tasks served up by a company with a revenue run-rate of $40 billion and more than 300,000 owners.”

Work and preparation are all-important. Buffett says: “Preparation is everything. Noah did not start building the ark when it was raining.”

Reports surfaced that Buffett “forgot” to tell his assistant, Debbie Bosanek, that he was endorsing Arnold Schwarzenegger in his campaign for governor of California. After returning from lunch the day of the announcement, she was swamped with calls. Buffett, seeing she was annoyed, poked his head through the doorway and asked, “Are you speaking to me?”

Her answer was “No.” He laughed and shut the door.

Debbie later was heard to say, “If you hear of a billionaire in Omaha being strangled by his assistant, you know who it is” (Omaha World-Herald, August 16, 2003).

____________________

For years Berkshire hummed from the humble headquarters described in this chapter. It splurged, believe it or not, in 2003 when it expanded significantly and took over all of the 14th floor except for an area where the Buffett Foundation has a suite.

COSTS AT WORLD HEADQUARTERS

In Berkshire’s 2010 Annual Report, Buffett wrote, “Our annual rent is $270,212. Moreover, the home office investment in furniture, art, Coke dispenser, lunch room, high-tech equipment—you name it—totals $301,363.”



Limited Number of Heads at Headquarters

This photo shows the September 2007 crew at Berkshire headquarters. Back row, left to right: Bob Reeson, Assistant Controller; Dan Jaksich, Controller; Jennifer Tselentis, Assistant Controller; Alisa Krueger, Tax Manager; and Mark Vinton, former Assistant Controller who left to become CFO of Dairy Queen. Third row: Marilyn Weber, Manager of International Tax; Angie Wells, Staff Accountant; Warren Buffett, Chairman, CEO, and Nebraska Football Fan; Debra Ray, Administrative Assistant; Marc Hamburg, Chief Financial Officer; and Mark Millard, Director of Financial Assets. Second Row: Becki Amick, Director of Internal Auditing; Ellen Schmidt, Administrative Assistant to Marc Hamburg; Kelly Muchemore-Broz, Annual Meeting Director who retired in 2010, handing the duties baton to Carrie Kizer; and Jo Ellen Rieck, Director of Taxes. Front row: Ian Jacobs, Financial Analyst who left Berkshire to form his own investment partnership; Debbie “If-You-Make-One-More-Change-to-the-Annual-Report, I’ll...” Bosanek, Buffett’s Administrative Assistant; Kerby Ham, Treasurer; and Jackie Wilson, Administrative Assistant and Jack(ie) of All Trades. In Berkshire’s 2006 Annual Report, Buffett wrote, “This crew occupies 9,708 square feet of space, and Charlie—at World Headquarters West in Los Angeles—uses another 655 square feet. Our home-office payroll, including benefits and counting both locations, totaled $3,531,978 last year. We’re careful when spending your money.” Sharon Heck, Vice President–Taxes, joined Berkshire headquarters in 2008. Jackie Wilson left to have a baby, and her sister Carrie Kizer took her place. Mark Sisley, Director of Information Technology, who once worked in Internal Auditing, rejoined Berkshire in 2009 after a 10-year absence. Marilyn Weber left Berkshire in 2009. Joanne Manhart, Tracy Britt, Tiffany Vogt, and Allison Ballard have since joined Berkshire, and investment manager Todd Combs works at Berkshire headquarters. In January 2012, Ted Weschler joined Berkshire as an investment manager, making a total of 23 employees.

.



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs taken at Berkshire headquarters on September 11, 2007)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Trick or Treat!

The dignified and obviously stuffy chairman of the board and CEO of the Berkshire mothership poses as Frankenstein at World Headquarters on Halloween in 2000.

(Photo by Debbie Bosanek)

Of Permanent Value World Headquarters



Most Sought-After Business Card in the World

American Idol’s Ruben Studdard of Birmingham may have made area code 205 famous, but Buffett has made area code 402 famous.



(Photo by Bob Miles)

Piles and Piles of Cash and Smiles

Buffett sits in “The Playpen” on August 28, 2000, turning piles of paper into plenty of cash. The desk is one used by his father some 75 years ago.





World Headquarters The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Becki Amick)

Howard Buffett

A photo of Buffett’s father, Howard, hangs in Buffett’s office. Buffett works at a desk that once belonged to his father.



“The Pleasure Palace”

Maybe Kiewit Plaza in midtown Omaha is the origin of the term “smart building.” Berkshire’s offices are on the 14th floor. Buffett variously calls it “World Headquarters,” “The Temple,” and “The Pleasure Palace.”

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value World Headquarters



Debbie, Lyle, and Debra

Berkshire’s Debbie Bosanek and Debra Ray hold signs given to them by Yellow BRKer fan club chieftain, Lyle McIntosh. Debra Ray’s sign says: “Hi, I’m Debra R and Warren is busy. So if you cross that line I’ll break your legs! It’s Your Choice.”

(Photo by Lyle McIntosh)



A Whole Person At Last

After Jerry Hufton’s retirement, Jo Ellen Rieck was promoted from 0.8 of a person to a whole person, taking Hufton’s job as director of taxes.

World Headquarters The Story of Warren Buffett

Becki

Accountant Becki Amick, Berkshire’s entire Audit Department, is presented a T-shirt at Berkshire’s 2002 Annual Meeting weekend. The shirt says, “I seldom cook at home and I never cook at work.”



(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)



Secretary in a Small Office

Debbie Bosanek, Buffett’s administrative assistant, fields many calls, ranging from important to peculiar. She once introduced herself at a luncheon saying, “I’m a secretary in a small office.” Here in her office, her sign from the Yellow BRKers fan club says, “Hi, I’m Debbie B and Warren is not available and I have no comment.”

(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Debbie and Kelly decided that for Buffett’s 67th birthday on August 30, 1997, they would take him to Gorat’s for lunch. Buffett marked it on his calendar and then brought the calendar for them to sign to confirm that THEY were treating.

At lunch they gave Buffett a made-up certificate for a free lunch at Gorat’s. The certificate carried disclaimers in fine print saying it could be used only that day and only with Debbie and Kelly. Not to be fooled, Buffett tore out the disclaimers.



(Photo courtesy of

Debbie Bosanek)

The Moving Oval Office at Home Plate

Debbie Bosanek, right, enjoys a rare break from work (although she’s always attached to her Blackberry) with her son, Jerry, and sister, Barb Skradski at a New York Yankees home game in May 2008.

Of Permanent Value World Headquarters



Future Nebraska Lineman

Jerry Bosanek after a football game in 2007.



(Photos by Sherrie Gregory)

The Next Warren Buffett

Now the world knows! According to this newspaper headline “Bosanek Succeeds Buffett,” Debbie Bosanek is the chosen one. Mystery solved.

Linda and Yogi

Shareholder Linda Humes of Laguna Beach, California, shares smiles with Buffett at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1998.



(Photo courtesy of Linda Humes)

World Headquarters The Story of Warren Buffett





A Champion

Golfer Joe Ogilvie



Champ to Champ

Former Notre Dame

sensation Grant Irons received a rare call from Buffett.

Of Permanent Value World Headquarters



Joba Chamberlain

New York Yankees pitcher Joba Chamberlain, who is from Lincoln, Nebraska and known for 100 mph fastballs, has received an invitation to headquarters.



Invest Like a Champion

Notre Dame has nothing on Berkshire, which lives under this motto of “Invest Like a Champion Today” at headquarters.

(Photo by

Becki Amick)

World Headquarters The Story of Warren Buffett



Employee Lounge



New Elevator Lobby at the Redecorated Berkshire Headquarters

THE HIGH TEMPLE OF COMMERCE

Berkshire in the 21st Century



Reception Area

Decor at Berkshire—a la Nebraska Furniture Mart



(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value World Headquarters

$275-Million Man

When New York Yankees slugger Alex Rodriguez was seeking a new contract, he turned to Buffett and Goldman Sachs executives (The Wall Street Journal, November 17, 2007). Rodriguez, who had opted out of his contract, had become a free agent. He called Buffett, who suggested he approach the Yankees solo without an agent. He did, olive branch in hand. Soon a 10-year, $275-million contract was in the works.





(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Occupant of World’s Most Powerful Office

Debbie Bosanek, seen here in her office in 2007, logged 72 changes from Buffett for the 2007 Annual Report.



$11-Billion Woman

Debra Ray, who doubles as a Berkshire administrative assistant and a Pampered Chef representative, displays her wares at a show at Debbie Bosanek’s house. Debra Ray flew Buffett’s $11-billion stock certificate to Wells Fargo’s Minneapolis office to be converted to B shares so Buffett could begin his charity gifts announced in 2006.

(Photo by Debbie Bosanek)



No Rhinestones

“Cowgirl” Debbie Bosanek sports her Justin boots for Berkshire shareholder Lyle McIntosh in Kiewit Plaza’s cafeteria. But where are the rhinestones?

(Photo courtesy of Lyle McIntosh)



Nobody Gets In

Former spokeswoman Jackie Wilson at work under her sign:

“Nobody Gets in to See the Wizard. Not Nobody. Not No How.”

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



35





DANCING WITH THE STARS




Becki Amick

Director of Internal Auditing



Kerby Ham

Treasurer



Allyson Ballard

Senior Tax Manager



Marc Hamburg

CFO



Debbie Bosanek

Administrative Assistant, TV star, and Heroine to

the Middle Class



Sharon Heck

Vice President of Taxes



Tracy Britt

Financial Assistant

to the Chairman



Dan Jaksich

Controller



Warren Buffett

Chairman and CEO,

Likes Sophia Loren



Carrie Kizer

Administrative Assistant



Todd Combs

Investment Manager



Alisa Krueger

Tax Manager

Of Permanent Value Dancing with the Stars



Joanne Manhart

Administration



Mark Sisley

Director of

Information Technology



Jennifer Tselentis

Assistant Controller



Mark Millard

Vice President of

Financial Assets

Debra Ray

Administrative

Assistant





Tiffany Vokt

Assistant Controller



Angie Wells

Staff Accountant



Bob Reeson

Assistant Controller



Jo Ellen Rieck

Director of Taxes



Ted Weschler

Investment Manager

Sophia Loren

Italian Film Actress,

International Sex Symbol, and Berkshire’s Next Girl Friday





Ellen Schmidt

Administrative Assistant to

Marc Hamburg



36





BANQUET BERKSHIRE-STYLE




Holiday Luncheon at World Headquarters

All employees at Berkshire’s World Headquarters shared a holiday lunch in 2011. They are: Top row, left to right: Ellen Schmidt, Jennifer Tselentis, Jo Ellen Rieck, Debra Ray, Mark Sisley, Angie Wells, Alisa Krueger, Todd Combs, Dan Jaksich, Tracy Britt, Carrie Kizer, Mark Millard, and Debbie Bosanek; Bottom row, left to right: Joanne Manhart, Allyson Ballard, Bob Reeson, Sharon Heck, Warren Buffett, Becki Amick, Kerby Ham, Tiffany Vokt, and Marc Hamburg. The sign at the back reads: Waitress Not On Duty. Self Service.

(Photo courtesy of Berkshire Hathaway)

Of Permanent Value Banquet Berkshire-style



37





MEMORABILIA


INSIDE THE NEW WORLD HEADQUARTERS



Behind the Green Door

A Wall Street sign is positioned boldly above a door at World Headquarters. Cardboard cutouts of Warren Buffett and Charles Munger are in the foreground.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



(Photo by

Becki Amick)

Memorabilia

Memorabilia in a display case at headquarters includes a Nebraska football helmet and a jersey signed by baseball’s Alex Rodriguez.



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Academy Award

An “Oscar” from Jordan’s Furniture was awarded to Buffett for best actor in a TV commercial.

The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Berkshire’s Wells Fargo Stock Certificates Kept

Safe Here.

A model of a Wells Fargo stagecoach is among the items of memorabilia in Buffett’s office.



Go Nebraska

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



On the Bookshelves

Legal documents relating to Berkshire’s acquisitions include a volume on Pampered Chef.

(Photo by Becki Amick)



Buffett as Rembrandt. Why Not?

This painting by Alan Campbell, a University of Georgia alum and artist in Athens, Georgia, hangs in the hallway at Berkshire headquarters. The Washington Post announced Buffett’s address to the University of Georgia’s Terry College of Business in Athens, Georgia, on July 18, 2001.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Memorabilia



Berkshire Nightgown

Above is a 1960 nightgown from the old Omaha-based department store, Goldstein Chapman’s. It was made by Berkshire Hathaway in its day as a textile mill. The price tag of $3.98 is still attached.



(Photos by

Nancy Line Jacobs)

r





Coach Buffett and Team Berkshire

Here it is, everyone: The most respected team in the world.



(Photo courtesy of Becki Amick)



#1 Coach

Here Buffett apparently is emerging from Berkshire’s locker room after perhaps telling the players that it’s not enough to be named No. 1 by Barron’s. “Next year, we want the China Daily to say this,” he may have exhorted.

(Photo courtesy of Becki Amick)



Autographed Helmet

After University of Michigan students visited with Buffett, they came up with the idea of getting former Michigan Coach Bo Schembechler to autograph a helmet, but Schembechler died. It isn’t known if he had signed it for Buffett before his death, or if he signed it from the great beyond;, but one day it arrived at Berkshire headquarters—signed.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Memorabilia The Story of Warren Buffett



Play Ball

This collection of baseballs, hats, bobble heads, and pennants relates to the baseball games that used to take place during Berkshire’s annual meeting weekends. A baseball signed by Willie Mays, Ted Williams, and Joe DiMaggio is one of Buffett’s favorite keepsakes.

“95 mpm”

The pennant shown here is from the days when Warren “The Whip” Buffett threw out the first pitch for the Omaha Royals during Berkshire’s annual meeting weekends. Shown also is a baseball seat cushion with Berkshire’s unique logo: a fistful of money.



Of Permanent Value Memorabilia



Gen Re Mug and

Gen Re Travel Coffee Cup

and Mug



Helzberg’s

“I Am Loved” Bear

See’s Motorcycle

with Sidecar





Queen of Memorabilia

Becki Amick, Berkshire’s Director of Internal Auditing, is also the company’s Queen of Memorabilia. Her “Shrine to Berkshire” in her office includes artifacts from a vast array of Berkshire’s businesses.



(Courtesy of Becki Amick)



38





BERKSHIRE’S “IQ TEST”


Years ago, Berkshire had what was billed as its IQ test for prospective employees. Actually, it turns out to be a short math test. It is no longer used, but see if you can pass it. You have 15 minutes.

The text and the answers follow. Get set . . . Go!



The Story of Warren Buffett



Of Permanent Value Berkshire IQ Test





39





MAKING WARREN PROUD


An indescribable aspect of Buffett’s personality motivates people to please him. Perhaps it’s because of the trust he extends. People want to keep that trust and show him it’s well placed.

Most people who have worked for Buffett mention his unique personality. His respectful treatment of the managers of Berkshire’s operating units has often caused them to comment that they do not want to disappoint him; they want to “make Warren proud.”

Michael Goldberg has worked at Berkshire headquarters for years, first running Berkshire’s insurance units and later running special projects. He says, “Somehow, Warren has been able to keep a diverse cast of characters working harder than they did for themselves. I see it every day—and I still don’t know how he does it. But I do know that all of us feel this incredible responsibility to him.”

The following are quotes from some Berkshire managers found in The Warren Buffett CEO by Robert P. Miles:

• GEICO’s Tony Nicely: “I sincerely want to make him proud.”

• FlightSafety’s Al Ueltschi: “I try to make him proud.”

• Nebraska Furniture Mart’s Irv Blumkin: “I do it to make Warren proud.”

• H.H. Brown’s Frank Rooney: “I run H.H. Brown in order to make him proud.”

• R.C. Willey’s Bill Child: “He has a way of motivating you. He trusts you so much that you just want to perform … the challenge, and the fact that I don’t want to let Warren down, don’t want to disappoint him. … We want him to be proud.”

• Scott Fetzer’s former head Ralph Schey: “He makes you want to do well, partly for yourself, but also because you know it will make him proud, and you want to make him proud.”

Business Wire CEO Cathy Baron Tamraz said after Berkshire’s acquisition of the distributor of corporate news, “We look forward to making our new owner very proud.”

NetJets’ CEO Rich Santulli says, “He is the best judge of human talent there is. And people want to work for him” (Fortune, November 11, 2002).

Buffett understands his CEOs want to run their own shops as they see fit. “If I told Lou Simpson of GEICO to be at the office at 9 a.m., and he could only get one hour for lunch, he would leave,” Buffett has said. Perhaps this is the flame to Buffett’s genius.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Making Warren Proud



40





MRS. SUSIE BUFFETT’S LEGACY


In the parade of losses of old age, none could have been greater for Buffett than losing his first wife, Susie.

While visiting the Cody, Wyoming ranch of investment banker Hubert Allen, Susan Buffett, Buffett’s wife of 52 years, suffered a stroke. She died July 29, 2004.

Mrs. Buffett’s funeral service was a private ceremony held in Omaha on August 3. Rock star Bono, who had worked with Mrs. Buffett on AIDS-prevention programs, sang at the funeral and later paid tribute to her in U2’s How to Dismantle an Atomic Bomb. The services took place at Countryside Community Church. Her body was cremated.

Mrs. Buffett, 72, had been a Berkshire director since 1991 and owned about $3 billion of its stock, a 2.2% stake in the company.

She stood to inherit her husband’s fortune had he predeceased her. At the event of his death, almost all of their stock was slated to go to the Buffett Foundation of which Mrs. Buffett was president. However, the bulk of Buffett’s fortune has been reassigned to the Gates Foundation.

A statement from Berkshire said that Mrs. Buffett’s estate would sell 1,200 to 1,500 Class A shares in the two-year period after her death to pay taxes, expenses, and other cash bequests. The rest of her stock would be transferred to the Buffett Foundation. Her estate transferred common stock with a value of $150 million in equal amounts to three private foundations set up by the Buffett children when the estate was probated in 2005.

Before the estate officially closed in 2007, it paid $110 million in taxes, even more than she gave away to family and friends. The also exceeded the 95% of her estate which went to tax-free foundations (Omaha World-Herald, February 28, 2007).

Warren Buffett is the executor of Mrs. Buffett’s estate. She owned 31,530 Class A shares and 177 B shares at the time of her death. Berkshire board member Ronald Olson was the trustee. In the end, after tax-free contributions to charity, $135 million was taxed. It was reported the estate tax on that amount came to $95.6 million.

Three separate foundations were set up so the three Buffett children could make charitable contributions individually rather than by committee (Omaha World-Herald, August 10, 2004).

Mrs. Buffett’s will bequested $100,000 to each of the couple’s nine grandchildren “as a big hug from me,” and set up a $2-million trust for their additional educational expenses. A trustee would give out the money for their support and education until they reach age 25, when they would get any remaining money, according to wire reports. Also a $10.5-million trust would pay education costs for the couple’s great-grandchildren. The Buffetts had five great-grandchildren when she signed her will in October 2003.

Mrs. Buffett left $10 million to each of her three children. Further, she left a total of $13 million to 25 friends. She left her personal possessions, including residences, to her husband. Reportedly, the will said Buffett could consult with their daughter about distributing the possessions among their children.

The rest of Mrs. Buffett’s shares went to the Buffett Foundation after the close of probate.

Buffett had no written contract with his wife stating that the shares would go to the foundation, but an understanding existed between the two that it would. (Forbes, October 18, 1993), Buffett explains, “The deal is whoever dies last would leave the Berkshire Hathaway shares with no strings attached. I’ve got this fund that’s growing at a rate of 25% to 30%. When I’m dead, I assume there’ll still be serious problems of a social nature as there are now. Society will get a greater benefit from my money later than if I do it now.”

Buffett has said the original plan to leave his Berkshire stock to his wife first, before it goes to the foundation, preserved the most flexibility in terms of reacting to changes in the laws. Wives are not taxed on inheritance from their husbands, no matter how large the amount.

Mrs. Buffett once said, “Our foundation is focused on population [issues], and my other giving is very personal” (Janet Lowe, Warren Buffett Speaks,

p. 168).

____________________

The Buffetts were married in 1952 in Omaha, had three children, and then separated in 1977 when Susan Buffett moved to San Francisco. The two never divorced and remained close all their lives, traveling together and jointly attending public functions, such as the Berkshire annual meetings.

In 2003, Mrs. Buffett was diagnosed with mouth cancer. She underwent surgery and radiation, but still managed to attend the Berkshire annual meeting in 2004.

Always popular and charming, she was actively involved in charities and causes such as civil rights, women’s rights, family planning, and education.

Her stake in Berkshire gave her a rank of 153rd on the Forbes list of the world’s richest people.

Berkshire issued the following press release after her death:

Susan T. Buffett, wife of Warren E. Buffett and President of the Buffett Foundation, died early this morning in Cody, Wyoming after suffering a stroke at the ranch of investor Herbert Allen where she and Mr. Buffett were making an annual visit. She was 72.



In commenting, Allen Greenberg, Executive Director of the Buffett Foundation, said, “She will be remembered by all who knew her as a quiet humanitarian whose voice spoke for disadvantaged women around the world. She was deeply touched by the hardships faced by the world’s poorest, especially women. She was far-sighted in establishing programs in countries whose needs were generally overlooked. She did this work quietly and never cared about receiving credit or acknowledgement.”



For over 40 years Mrs. Buffett fulfilled her commitment to social justice through personal activities and as president of the Buffett Foundation. She began this work in Omaha in the 1960s working with a variety of civil rights and educational organizations. This work expanded to include support for organizations working in the field of family planning and reproductive health, both in the U.S. as well as internationally. In recent years she traveled to many countries, including Vietnam, Turkey, India, Ghana, South Africa, and Mexico, to see first hand the struggles women face.



“She was as comfortable in a small village in India as she was in a friend’s home in the U.S.,” Mr. Greenberg continued. “Susie loved talking with a broad range of people about their lives. She had an amazing ability to connect with anyone. They knew she cared about them and would do what she could to help improve their lives.



“She was a compassionate and caring person who helped many friends face death. She took a long time friend in the final stages of AIDS to visit the Dalai Lama in India. This was a lifelong dream of his and it was Susie’s mission to see it come true,” Mr. Greenberg said.



She is survived by husband Warren Buffett of Omaha, Nebraska; three children, Susan Buffett of Omaha, Nebraska, Howard Buffett of Decatur, Illinois, and Peter Buffett formerly of Milwaukee, Wisconsin [he currently lives in New York]; nine grandchildren; and six great grandchildren.



In lieu of flowers, memorials were requested for the following charities:



Glide Memorial Church

330 Ellis Street

San Francisco, CA 94102

Planned Parenthood of Nebraska and Council Bluffs

4610 Dodge Street

Omaha, NE 68132

Central High School

124 N. 20th Street

Omaha, NE 68102

Details of a memorial service will be announced at a later date.



____________________

The following were among the tributes to Mrs. Buffett:

Microsoft Chairman Bill Gates: “Melinda and I talked often with Susie about people in the world who are less fortunate, and she was very influential in encouraging our philanthropic work. Susie was unique in her compassion and commitment and served as a great example for all of us.”

Television journalist Charlie Rose: “Warren is convinced that without Susie’s understanding and formative presence, he might be in a very different place today. She had her own unique spirit, and at the same time she filled in the blank spaces in his at a crucial time. In our last conversation several months ago, she told me with poignancy how comforting it was for her that he was with her in her toughest battle.”

Washington Post Chairman Don Graham: “Susie was the definition of grace and humor. Anyone who knows anything about Warren understands that Susie had 10 times more to do with Warren becoming the man he is today than anyone else.”

Thomas S. Murphy, retired Chairman of the Board, ABC Inc.: “Susie Buffett was an extraordinary woman, self-effacing, modest, and committed to making the world a better place. She will be remembered for her warmth and intelligence and for her unwavering drive to help women throughout the world.”

____________________

Susan grew up a block and a half from Buffett’s present home. Their parents were friends, and she roomed with Buffett’s sister Bertie at Northwestern University.

After Buffett successfully courted her, she dropped out of college to marry him. Singing had long been her passion. After the Buffett children were grown, Mrs. Buffett was briefly a cabaret singer at the French Café, a fancy restaurant in downtown Omaha. In 1997, she recorded a CD on which she sang such songs as “Come In From The Rain,” “Up Where We Belong,” and “Send in the Clowns.”

In the brochure accompanying the CD entitled What Is There to Do With Such a Heart but Sing, she thanks her producer, Dave Stryker, and others close to her: “Thank you, W.E., for the love and encouragement—Thank you, Peter, for the joy of making music together. Thank you, Howard, for the beautiful photography.” Howard shot the photos for the brochure.

Mrs. Buffett, who used to say her husband would be happy with “a book and 60-watt light bulb,” always radiated a calm, empathetic demeanor.

An open, friendly, and dignified woman, she lived apart from her husband; although, she still described him as the most interesting person she’d ever met. “He’s like a color TV instead of black and white. Most people come in black and white,” she once said (Register, February 1984).

She indicated that a factor in her move from Omaha was getting “hit from all sides” by community groups in Omaha looking for help (Regardie’s, February 1986).

She lived in San Francisco for a long time; although, she used to say she really lived everywhere because she traveled so much. Keeping her on the road were a variety of civic causes, especially civil rights and Planned Parenthood. She not only volunteered to help people in Omaha housing projects but also worked with minority youths, keeping in touch with them by letters over the years and encouraging their studies.

She and Buffett remained close.

Of the separation Buffett said, “It works well this way. She sort of roams; she’s a free spirit” (Forbes, October 21, 1991).

Howard Buffett once said, “If the comment, ‘Behind every good man there is a good woman,’ has any truth to it, then you absolutely must give my mother credit for a good share of my dad’s success. She is the most understanding and kind person I have ever known, and her support throughout his career has been very important to him.”

She devoted much time to daughter Susan, who had a difficult pregnancy with her son Michael. She also helped her son Howard campaign for the county commission, and she was on hand when her sister faced a lengthy battle with cancer.

Mrs. Buffett, president of her class at Central High, was inducted into Omaha’s Central High School Hall of Fame in 1999 and told the Omaha World-Herald (September 30, 1999), “For me, Central has always been symbolic of what you want an urban school to be. It’s all-inclusive, academic and socially diverse, as a school ought to be. It’s full of all kinds of kids living different lives but coming together and learning together.”

The story also told of her desire for privacy and love of travel:

To protect her privacy, Susan Buffett—sometimes called “Susie Sr.” to distinguish her from daughter Susie—rarely gives interviews. Susie Sr. declined to talk Wednesday about the Buffett Foundation, of which she is president, except to say she chose to be in Omaha tonight instead of in Vietnam for the foundation.



She lives in San Francisco but says she is there only 20% of the time. She travels widely, kidding that she’s a “geriatric gypsy.”



“Warren’s parents and my parents were great political and personal friends,” she also said. “They were a little to the right of Queen Victoria. Warren and I fell far from that tree.”

Once asked for comments about her mother, daughter Susan Buffett had this to say:

I don’t want to add anything … about my mother because she really tries to keep her life private. The only thing I will say is that she is one of the best people I know. She’s one of the first people my father names when he’s asked to list his heroes. And my parents have a wonderful relationship. They are very close and have a deep respect and love for each other. Actually my dad would say that my mother and his father are the two people who have had the most influence on his life.”



In October 2003, Mrs. Buffett was diagnosed with oral cancer even though she didn’t drink or smoke. She underwent surgery for a tumor at the base of her mouth as well as reconstructive surgery and radiation therapy—all at the University of California, San Francisco.

Afterwards, Warren Buffett gave more than $6 million to support the work of five UCSF faculty members in appreciation of the help with Mrs. Buffett’s battle. The donated money is for each of the doctors to use at his or her own discretion for research.

Dr. Deborah Greenspan, professor of clinical oral medicine at UCSF, found the growth and immediately referred her to Dr. Brian Schmidt, who diagnosed her life-threatening cancer. Mrs. Buffett then met with Dr. David Eisele, who led the tumor-removal surgery which was followed by reconstructive surgery, performed by Dr. Pablo Leon. The radiation was conducted by Dr. Jeanne Quivey.

“UCSF should be proud to have these exceptional people on its staff,” said Warren Buffett. “Each of them combines talent and compassion” (UCSF Campaign Insider, 2004).

Status in life was not as important to Mrs. Buffett as what one accomplished during life. Once Mrs. Buffett sent the following plaque to a friend: “A hundred years from now it will not matter what my bank account was, the sort of house I lived in, or the kind of car I drove, but the world may be a different place because I was important to a CHILD.”

She believed that people come and go, but life goes on. Each year my wife and I have a party in Omaha during the Berkshire annual meeting weekend. Mrs. Buffett came several times, but in the spring of 2004 she left a voice mail that she’d have to miss that year’s party. Even with slurred speech because of her mouth operation, she was clear that she would miss the party, that parties were wonderful things, and that “the party must go on.”



Leaving a Legacy

Susan and Warren Buffett before the opening of the 2001 Berkshire Annual Meeting. Mrs. Buffett was best known for a lifelong interest in a variety of causes, particularly civil rights and women’s issues. In 1961, she helped organize an Omaha group called the Panel of American Women, made up of Catholics, Jews, Protestants, and blacks.

(AP Photo)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Mrs. Susie Buffett’s Legacy

Mrs. Susie Buffett’s Legacy The Story of Warren Buffett



Susie the Singer

Table card for Susie Buffett’s appearance at the French Café

(Photo courtesy of Sherrie Gregory)

Of Permanent Value Mrs. Susie Buffett’s Legacy



Stand Beside Her

Mrs. Buffett stopped flying around long enough to sing during Berkshire’s shareholder weekend in 2003.



Buffett’s Daughter Susie Jr., and His Wife Susie Sr.

(Photo by Marlin Stockwell)



(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Rocky Balboa and Adrian Singing,

“Flying High, Now”

A Nebraska duo breaks into the music world.

Mrs. Susie Buffett’s Legacy The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Buffett and His Wife, Lindbergh

Warren and Susan Buffett are captured in this photo taken before Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1999. He may have written her epitaph when he said, “She flies more than Lindbergh ever did.” She, no doubt, would have had an epitaph for him, too, but it would have to top, “He came, he bought.”

Buffett once



said that his wife’s use of Berkshire’s NetJets

air travel service keeps soaring, jumping from

200 hours to 300 hours a year.



( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( (



(Photo by Mary Porter)

Lindbergh’s Book

The Spirit of St. Louis

Lindbergh, a Biography

by A. Scott Berg



(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Mrs. Susie Buffett’s Legacy



Activity Queen

This is the senior picture of Susie Thompson (Buffett) as it appeared in the 1950 Central High yearbook.



Ladies in Waiting

Susie Thompson (Buffett), left, as seen in a 1950 Central High School yearbook photo, played the role of a “lady in waiting” for the “Winter Fantasy Queen.” Others in the photo are Marie Zadina, center, and Sue Brownlee.



Mrs. Buffett’s High School Activities as Listed in

Central High School’s 1950 Yearbook.

(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Mrs. Buffett to Be: Front and Center

Class officers in Central High School’s 1950 yearbook are shown with Susie Thompson (Buffett) at the center of the front row.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

A 1950 Yearbook Photo

This picture was part of a photo montage on a page in the 1950 Central High School’s yearbook with Susie Thompson (Buffett) shown on the right. The other woman in the photo is Inga Swenson (Harris), also Class of 1950, who was regarded as one of her generation’s most versatile actresses. She was best-known for her roles in the films The Miracle Worker (in which she played Helen Keller’s mother, Kate Keller) and Advise and Consent.



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



41





THE CHARLIE ROSE INTERVIEW


Charlie Rose interviewed Mrs. Buffett about three months before her death. The segment aired August 26, 2004, four weeks after her death.

Mrs. Buffett said her life had “been too good to be true” and that she had received “great joy” from helping others.

“Warren is phenomenal, and I felt that the best thing I could give him was unconditional love, and I have.” She said he is the greatest investor ever but portrayed him as also having his head in the clouds. She said people can be with him, but they are not really with him because his mental abilities are so far beyond the norm.

Buffett has said his success would not have been possible without his wife. In the interview, Mrs. Buffett agreed that she was an enabler to her husband and that she felt good about that.

Mrs. Buffett said she believes she awakened Warren to the issues of civil rights, saying she “infiltrated” him. Once he accepted that cause, he fully understood women’s rights and said that women would realize one day that they are the slaves of the world.

She described him as a bit fearful to trust people, cerebral, not into small talk and with a mind on the big picture. She said their daughter, Susie, figured out it is best to deal with Warren in your world very quickly because he’s soon back off to his cerebral world. Despite his talents, he never became pompous; he just simply operates in his own realm.

She said just because you’re in physical proximity with Buffett doesn’t mean he’s with you because he may be reading.

She said Warren really doesn’t care about the money except as a “scorecard,”

but he used to tell her he wanted to be the world’s richest person. She would reply, “Oh, OK.”

As it turned out, Susie wanted her own world also, a private world: “A room of my own,” as she called it. Others in the Buffett family have used exactly the same term for her reason to move to California.

When Rose asked her in this rare interview why she moved away from Omaha, she said she simply wanted a private life. “That’s why I’m on your program,” she joked.

Asked if she introduced Astrid to Warren, Mrs. Buffett said she did because Astrid is a giving person, and she could help Warren. She said Warren needed help as far as his daily life is concerned, joking he can barely find a light switch.

Mrs. Buffett gave an example of once being sick in bed with the flu and asking Warren for a pan because she was nauseous. She said there was a lot of banging around in the kitchen, and he came back with a colander. She told him the colander had holes and wouldn’t do. So he went back in the kitchen, banged around some more, and came back with a cookie sheet under the colander.

“He needed help,” she said. After that, one expects things in the Buffett household gave new meaning to the Irish phrase for a mate who is teed off: “All picture and no sound.”

When she first met him, he made some sarcastic quip and she made one back thinking, “Who’s this jerk?”

He would come over to her house to see her but wound up spending more time with her father, who would say how smart he was and that he had a “heart of gold.”

Still, Buffett did come through when things really mattered. During her recovery from mouth cancer, Susie said Buffett flew out to San Francisco “26 weekends in a row” and that it was wonderful to know he was always there.



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Mrs. Buffett

Mrs. Susan Buffett sports a cheerful smile before Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1997.

The Story of Warren Buffett



A Room of One’s Own

by Virginia Woolf

The book says “A woman must have money and a room of her own if she is to write fiction.” Woolf imagines that if Shakespeare had a sister of equal genius, she would not have been able to express her genius

simply because she was a woman.

(AP Photo)

Of Permanent Value The Charlie Rose Interview



42





“ALL MY CHILDREN”


The Buffetts raised three energetic children: Susan Buffett, born July 30, 1953; Howard Graham Buffett, born December 16, 1954 (named after both Buffett’s father, Howard Buffett, and Ben Graham); and Peter “I-don’t-think-I’ve-ever-bought-a-stock” Buffett, born May 4, 1958.

As with any family with children, things were at times like a soap opera. All of Buffett’s children attended college although none actually graduated. All are healthy, intelligent, and productive.

SUSAN BUFFETT

Susan, sometimes called “Little Miss Muffett” in elementary school, attended Omaha’s Central High School, before going to the University of California at Irvine. She dropped out just short of graduation to become the assistant to the CEO of Century 21 in California. “I was making about $550 a month and thought I was rich,” Susie has said (Vogue, May, 2007). She worked for the New Republic and later as an administrative assistant to the editor at U.S. News and World Report in Washington, D.C., a job that Katharine Graham helped her land. Later, she returned to Omaha, where she now heads the Rose Blumkin Center for Performing Arts Foundation.

Susan tells many stories about her father, perhaps the most amusing one being what her early classmates thought her father did for a living. She told Adam Smith, “For years I didn’t even know what he did. They asked me at school what he did, and I said he was a security analyst, and they thought he checked alarm systems.”

Susan said she never had any idea what stocks her father was buying. “He might ask a consumer question about what kind of candy I liked, or something, and maybe three years later you could see why.” He never walked around the house saying some stock was a great buy.

“What makes my dad happy,” Susan says, “is hanging around the house, reading, playing bridge and talking with us. He’s about as normal as you can get.”

While Susan was in Washington, she and her daughter Emily often visited with the late Katharine Graham, longtime chairman of The Washington Post Co. Howard Buffett recalls, “I remember Mrs. Graham being impressed with Emily because she could eat avocados and caviar. That’s unlike my father and me. All we want is hamburgers.”

HOWARD BUFFETT

A Republican, Howard Buffett served most of one term as chairman of the Douglas County Commission, where he was known as an advocate of programs for the disadvantaged, He has spoken out for years on behalf of the state’s ethanol industry. At one point he drove a 1988 Corvette convertible with “Ethanol” printed on the license plate.

He has also been an avid speaker promoting the benefits of using the corn- and sugar-based fuel additive. He served on the Nebraska Gasohol Committee and served as chairman of the Nebraska Ethanol Authority and Development Board until 1991, when he was named to the International Policy Advisory Committee on International Trade, which advised the Bush administration on trade issues.

Howard was elected to the board of Archer-Daniels-Midland Co., the food processing company, known as “Supermarket to the World,” based in Decatur, Illinois. Howard replaced Robert Strauss after Strauss was named ambassador to the Soviet Union and later to the Commonwealth of Independent States. (Strauss was renamed to the board in 1993.)

In early 1992, Howard resigned his county commission post to take a job under ADM’s Chairman Dwayne Andreas as corporate vice chairman and assistant to the chairman.

“This is a big decision. It’s probably the largest one I’ve ever made in my life,” Howard said. “For someone like me who is interested in agriculture, the opportunity to work under him would be like someone who is interested in investments getting to work under my father.”

Howard turned to his father for advice. Warren called the job, “A once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.” However, in 1995, Howard resigned from ADM, apparently troubled by a price-fixing investigation of the company. He was chairman of the board of the GSI Group—a farm equipment firm in Assumption, Illinois, from 1995 until 2001, when company president, Jorge Andrade, resigned and sold their minority interests to company founder and CEO Craig Sloan. In 2002, Howard Buffett was named to the board of ConAgra, the nation’s second-largest food company.

A lot of people hated to see Howard leave Omaha. “He’s a rare breed of a young politician,” says family friend Michael Yanney. “He has excellent intellect and a high degree of political sensitivity but more importantly, he exhibits his father’s integrity.”

As county commissioner, Howard once backed a project to bring basketball giant Michael Jordan to Omaha for two days of fund-raising events which began on August 23, 1990. Berkshire’s corporate jet picked up Jordan in Lawrence, Kansas. Howard, who had worked for 18 months to organize the event, showed him the long list of activities to which Jordan responded, “Man, I’m not doing all this stuff.”

“I was about to die,” Howard said. Then Jordan winked and after two full days of activities, which raised $47,000 for youth agencies, told Howard, “Howie, I want you to remember one thing. You really owe me one.”

At one of the events, a celebrity basketball game, Jordan ejected Howard for not wearing Nike (a stock tip?) shoes.

“Michael Jordan … did more for Omaha in two days than most people could do in two years,” Howard said.

In addition to his political and agribusiness careers, Howard Buffett is an accomplished photographer who has captured wildlife around the globe. His pictures have been published by The Wildlife Conservation Society, World Wildlife Fund, The Nature Conservancy, The Wilderness Society, National Geographic, and Prairie Farmer and World Book publications. He has also written a number of articles about conservation, which have been published in The Washington Post, Chicago Tribune, and The Wall Street Journal. He also published a brochure of his photos called Buffettimages.

In 2002, he published a book called Tapestry of Life with a foreword by Tom Brokaw. Production costs of the photo book were donated by the Howard G. Buffett Foundation and proceeds were donated to World Vision, one of the largest humanitarian groups in the world.

In 2004, Howard Buffett held an exhibition of his Tapestry of Life photos at the Annenberg School for Communication at the University of Southern California. He also finished a book called Threatened Kingdom about mountain gorilla conservation.

In 2010, he was named to the board of the Coca-Cola Company after serving 12 years on the Coca-Cola Enterprises board. He still operates a 1280-acre farm in Central Illinois and is president of Buffett Farms and the Howard G. Buffett Foundation.

Howard Buffett is the lone Republican of Buffett’s children. Buffett’s daughter, Susan, when asked about her father being a Democrat and her brother being a Republican says that both her father and brother are more concerned with principles than politics. “My father and my brother are very principled. Politics does not come between them.” In fact, she adds, they kid each other about it.

Susan, a delegate for Senator Bill Bradley at the Democratic National Convention in 2000 and a delegate for Senator John Kerry in 2004, says she and brother Peter are Democrats. “I’m working on Howard,” she says.

PETER BUFFETT

Peter Buffett, who studied photography, physics, and music at Stanford University for two years, is a successful musician/businessman in New York. He recorded the sound track for the award-winning, eight-hour mini-series 500 Nations, about the history of Indians, directed by Kevin Costner and aired by CBS. A New Age composer, Peter scored big with the fire-dance scene for Costner’s Oscar-winning movie Dances with Wolves. Peter writes commercials which he says, “Support me and my habit, which is my studio” (Fortune, August 24, 1992).

Most of Peter’s business is creating jingles for companies such as DuPont, Infiniti, CNN, and Levi Strauss.

In 1996, Peter Buffett performed at Omaha’s Rose Blumkin Performing Arts Center at a benefit for the James Redford Institute for Transplant Awareness. Actor Robert Redford’s son underwent two liver surgeries at the University of Nebraska Medical Center in 1993 after being on a national organ transplant list for seven months. Both Redfords attended the benefit.

Peter Buffett’s movie Spirit—A Journey in Dance, Drums and Song grew out of his work on Dances With Wolves and was aired on PBS in 1999 then toured nationally. In 2002, he released his 11th compact disc—Songs from an East Side Attic. The pop offering features music he composed for the Omaha independent movie Full Ride.

Peter once told Linda Grant of the Los Angeles Times (April 7, 1991), “My dad says the money is not important to him, but it is. Not because he wants to spend it, but because it makes him a winner. My dad casts a big shadow. I remember sitting at the dinner table with him, and there was nothing you could tell him that he didn’t already know. But I always got the impression he would support me in whatever I chose.”

Peter has said his father calls and visits frequently and enjoys hearing about the music industry. “It’s neat to be able to talk to him about what’s happening in my life. I read about what’s happening in his,” Peter said (Omaha World-Herald, August 30, 1991).

His childhood was not unusual, Peter told the Lincoln Nebraska Journal (August 8, 1991). “It was incredibly normal, almost to a fault. He [Warren Buffett] really didn’t reach notoriety until the ’80s. When I was a kid, I never thought twice about who he was and what he was doing. We didn’t live in what would be considered a special neighborhood, we didn’t go to a special school, we didn’t have special friends. So I never really noticed anything out of the ordinary.”

Peter Buffett told Worth magazine (April 1996), “For as long as I can remember, he thought all three of us should do what made us happy. He was great that way. He is, essentially, the same way he was 30 years ago. He’ll ask me, ‘What do you get paid for something like The Scarlet Letter?’ ‘Well, I got this or that,’ and he’ll be like, ‘Wow, that’s a lot of money!’”

According to his sister, Susan, Peter picked up music naturally. “This is a kid who can’t read music. He just sat down at the piano at age seven and started playing a lot better than his sister, who had eight years of piano lessons.”

Peter also told Worth magazine he long ago sold his Berkshire stock, which today would be worth about $50 million.

In 2004, Peter Buffett launched a show, Spirit: The Seventh Fire, which toured with truckloads of high-tech gear in an 800-seat, 56-foot-tall custom-made tent. The show about American Indian culture was financed in part by Peter’s father to the tune of 10% of the start-up cost (Business Journal of Milwaukee, May 28, 2004). Warren Buffett put up $300,000 of the $3 million cost.

Warren Buffett, who doesn’t plan to leave much money (relative to his net worth) to his children, said his reasoning is this: “As Jesse Owens’ child, your development would not be facilitated by letting you start 100-yard dashes at the 50-yard line.”

Peter has asked his father for a loan only once—when he was moving to Milwaukee. His father turned him down.

“He just said, ‘Look, I want our relationship to stay clean. Once money gets into it, it will get complicated.’ It was great. It wasn’t great then. I learned a lot more going through the bank and dealing with it than if I had gotten a free ride” (Omaha World-Herald, November 3, 1996).

Peter Buffett moved to Milwaukee in 1989, but now lives in New York where he has a rock band and two albums out: Gold Star and Staring at the Sun.

In 2010, his book Life Is What You Make It was published.

____________________

Buffett’s daughter Susan has told any number of jokes about vague disgruntlement toward her father’s tight-fisted policy about leaving little of his wealth to his children.

“Sometimes it’s frustrating, but unfortunately, I basically agree with him,” Susan says (Omaha World-Herald, May 26, 1996). Susan says she understands his reasoning but indicates that now that his children are grown, he can lighten up on the heavy lessons.

As Howard says, “I still think there is hope for him yet. He has demonstrated a little more flexibility in the last few years.”

Because Buffett is Susan’s father, everyone assumes she is rich. That is not the case, she says. Susan recalls a time she needed cash to pay parking in Washington, D.C. Her father was there, but in order to get the money, Susan had to write him a $20 check. Susan told Linda Grant that people “don’t understand that when I write my dad a check for $20, he cashes it. If I had $2,000 now, I’d pay off my credit card bill.”

Howard says, “I told her I’d loan her the money! Someone in the family has to have deep pockets, even if they have holes in them.”

Back in 1985, Buffett once financed a 30-day shopping spree for his daughter as a bribe for her pledge not to gain weight in the coming year. However, the agreement was canceled because Susan became pregnant (Fortune, August 24, 1992).

In 2005, Susan Buffett was named to the Omaha Airport Authority Board. In 2007 and 2008, she gave about $20 million through her Sherwood Foundation to Omaha schools.

In 2011, University of Nebraska regents approved the creation of the Buffett Early Childhood Institute in honor of Buffett’s daughter, Susie, who has pledged money to the center which is focused on early childhood education.



The 1950s

Buffett and his wife Susie with their first two children, young Susie and Howard, about 1956 at Buffett’s first home at 5202 Underwood in Omaha. It may be that young Susie, a political liberal who was a delegate to the 2004 Democratic Convention in Boston, is trying here to give a dose of her politics to her Republican-in-the-making brother.

(Photo courtesy of Omaha World-Herald)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Howard Buffett: Wild About Wildlife

(Photo

courtesy of Howard Buffett)

Of Permanent Value “All My Children”

Eight ConAgra meatpackers won the $365 million Powerball jackpot in Nebraska in 2006. Among the comments from the winners were: “This is a great country!” and “I’ve been retired about four days now.”



Son of the Trail Boss

In 2010, he was named to the Coca-Cola Company board, a post once held by his father. Previously, Howard had served for 10 years on the board of Coca-Cola Enterprises.



Cover of Howard Buffett’s nature photo book On the Edge



Wild Kingdom

Howard Buffett is the coauthor of Images of the Wild: Africa and North America and is the author of On The Edge: Balancing Earth’s Resources.

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)



Cover of Howard Buffett’s Tapestry of Life

“All My Children” The Story of Warren Buffett



Cover of Howard Buffett’s Spots Before Your Eyes

(Photos by Lisa Nichols)



Home Is Priced Right

Peter Buffett and his wife, Jennifer, from one of Milwaukee’s oldest industrial families, stand outside Warren Buffett’s home, where Peter stayed while preparing for his concert at the Rose Blumkin Performing Arts Center. Sounding like his father, Peter says, “It’s home and it’s cheaper than a motel.”

(Omaha World-Herald)

Of Permanent Value “All My Children”



Peter Buffett in 2010

(Photo

courtesy of Howard Buffett)



Berkshire’s Activewear

Buffett and Buffett’s daughter Susan, right, model Berkshire’s activewear with the company’s fistful-of-dollars logo. Until a Fortune story ran (December 8, 1997), Berkshire had sold only 2,300 shirts. The reporter did a “test-drive” of the activewear at bars in New York City’s financial district. One Lehman trader was quoted as saying, “Oh, Warren Buffett—he sings that Margaritaville song!” Proceeds from the sales of T-shirts, sweatshirts and golf shirts go to Berkshire’s bottom line. The fine print under Buffett says: “Currency not included.” Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1998 Annual Report, “Our 1999 apparel line will be unveiled at the meeting, so please defer your designer purchases until you view our collection.”

(Photo handout at Berkshire Annual Meeting in 1998)



One Investor, Two Musicians

Buffett, Peter Buffett, and Mrs. Susan Buffett at Berkshire’s 1999 Annual Meeting



Peter Buffett’s book published in 2010

(Photo

courtesy of Howard Buffett)

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacos)

“All My Children” The Story of Warren Buffett

PETER BUFFETT’S FOUNDATION

Peter, wife Jennifer, and a staffer run the NoVo Foundation, which is ramping up to give to projects revolving around women and girls, education, and community building. One project helps educate women in Liberia.

Peter’s parents gave his foundation $50 million at Christmas of 2003. Peter Buffett was quoted as saying the assets would increase in all to about $140 million. “I look at it as a responsibility—something that is a wonderful gift from my mother. I’d like to use it in a way she’d be proud of” (Business Journal of Milwaukee, September 3, 2004).

In 2008, the NoVo Foundation and Nike announced a joint $100 million grant to improve the plight of adolescent girls in developing countries such as Bangladesh, Zambia, and Liberia.

Of Permanent Value “All My Children”



43





CHAIRMANSHIP MAY PASS TO HIS SON


Warren Buffett has said that if he became unable to perform his duties as chairman of Berkshire, the job may be passed to his son Howard.

“I couldn’t feel better,” Buffett told The New York Times (September 3, 2000), but he said if he were hit by a car, his chairmanship would go Howard who would become a non-executive chairman.

Howard has been quoted as saying he doesn’t expect a third generation to lead Berkshire and that his father has said Howard’s job would be to safeguard Berkshire from change. “Howie would rather spend an evening on a tractor in the field than have a date with Angelina Jolie, which is not true of all members of the family, but that’s true of Howie,” said Warren Buffett (Bloomberg, October 14, 2010).

The Times quoted Warren Buffett as saying that although his son would not run the company, he would provide crucial oversight. “I want Berkshire and the culture to continue, and he would be there to ensure that happens, and he has my ideas about who I think should be running it.”

Buffett, at a press conference the day after the 2006 Annual Meeting, said if he were to die, say, “at 112,” it would be up to the board but his hope was that the board would name Howard as a non-executive, non-paid chairman as a “double protection of the culture.” He said he really wanted Howard to be there simply to guard against a wrong decision being made.

In Berkshire’s 2009 Annual Report, Buffett wrote, “I believe it would be wise when I am no longer CEO to have a member of the Buffett family serve as the non-paid, non-executive Chairman of the Board. That decision, however, will be the responsibility of the then Board of Directors.”

____________________

Buffett’s son Howard Graham Buffett met Ben Graham during his father’s New York days. Howard was just a toddler then and has but one recollection of him.

“He gave me a stuffed animal … a stuffed dog,” recalled Howard. “Obviously, he had a lot more impact on my father than he did on me.”

Howard Buffett’s wife, Devon, came into their marriage with four children from a prior marriage, and they have one child together, Howie Buffett. Howie Buffett’s middle name is Warren and may have inherited the family’s financial genes. Howard and Devon have 9 grandchildren.

“He owns 10 shares of Coke, it may be more now, and he’s always asking his grandfather for advice about Coke stock,” said Howard. “He called my dad the other day to ask him about it.

“I sometimes talk to him about investments ... I do take his advice. We have some Coca-Cola stock,” said Howard.

Howard says of his father with a laugh, “He learned it all from me.” Howard didn’t regard his father as unusual. “I never thought of him as any different, just as my dad, just as anyone else would.” Howard Buffett does, however, admit that there were a few puzzling things went on even in his youth.

“I remember him up in his office [at the house] reading Moody’s or something. He worked really hard. He could work 18 hours a day,” says Howard.

“I do remember once when we were on vacation in California and he was constantly on the phone with Stan Lipsey of The Buffalo News for about three days straight. There was a strike at the paper, and my father was going through every business calculation,” he says. His father was nearing the conclusion that it was going to be more economical to close the paper than to keep publishing, Howard recalls.

It never came to that, but those on the other side of the controversy underestimated how seriously his father was thinking of closing it because reason dictated such. “I’ve watched him go through the process,” says Howard. “He takes all the emotion out of a decision. He just goes through the fundamental reasons when he makes a decision. He doesn’t deviate.”

Buffett is a compassionate person, but when it comes to business decisions, he boils it all down to hard facts and reason.

“My father couldn’t run a lawnmower ... I never saw him cut the grass, trim a hedge or wash a car,” Howard says. “I remember that used to be irritating and only when I got older and understood the value of time did I realize why he did things the way he did. His time is so valuable.”

In his own life, Howard tries to save time for different interests. “I want time to farm and do other things,” he says.

The younger Buffett says his father cares nothing for comfort or style. “He had an old Volkswagen for years and only gave it up when he thought it was unsafe. He’s had other cars, but he doesn’t care a thing about them … It could be a car or a horse. All he cares about is getting there.”

Once Buffett was returning from an East Coast trip on the company jet when it developed hydraulic problems and landed in Indianapolis, leaving him temporarily stranded. So how did he get back to Omaha?

“He flew coach,” his son says. “He was proud he flew coach and I’m not sure he may not have wanted to go first class, but I’m sure he couldn’t have stood it if he had been spotted on first class.”

Howard once told Forbes (October 12, 1998): “When I graduated from high school in 1973, all I wanted in the world was a new Corvette.

“Dad didn’t just say no. Neither did he reach for his checkbook. He offered a deal.”

Warren would pay $5,000 toward the car, but it counted for three years of birthday presents; three years of Christmas presents; and his entire graduation gift. Not only that, but Howard would have to come up with the $2,500 balance on his own.

Howard got the car. Then somebody backed into it.

Howard overheard a bystander exclaim: “No big deal! That’s the Buffett kid, there’s lots more where that came from.” Fat chance. Howard paid for the repairs himself.

He attended Augustana College in 1974, Chapman College in 1975, and the University of California at Irvine in 1976.

After a few jobs—operating a bulldozer; working for See’s Candies, one of his dad’s companies; and farming—Howard thought he’d take a stab at politics. In 1988, he ran for commissioner of the Douglas County board, which oversees the Omaha district. During the campaign, he joked that he wanted to “restore the family name.”

Howard said, “I asked my dad one question that, if he had answered differently, I might not have run for office. I asked him if he thought voters would think less of you if you ran for political office and lost. Dad instantly responded: ‘Not at all. People will respect you if you are willing to participate and put yourself on the line’” (Forbes, October 12, 1998).

During the campaign, a community meeting took place in one of Omaha’s poorer districts. Howard was nervous. “They’re all going to think I’m just some rich kid from West Omaha,” he confided to his dad, again asking for advice. “Just go down there, shake hands, be friendly,” Warren responded. “They’re all going to think you’re going to be a jerk, and so long as you’re not a jerk, you win.”

Howard Buffett says his father often offered guideposts for life. “I remember once, we were on Dodge Street near a McDonald’s that’s no longer there, and my father told me, ‘It takes a lifetime to build a reputation and five minutes to ruin it.’”

“He’s so basic and so very fast-paced,” he said, adding, “All the stories about him sticking to basics are true. A lot of CEOs are flamboyant—not all, but many are. He’s not. He’s not phony. He’s totally sincere.”

Howard says he experiences just one real problem being around his father. “He’s so smart, it’s frustrating.

“He’s a walking Almanac … When I was a kid, it was discouraging. In fact, it was overwhelming,” said Howard. Like his brother Peter, he found it was almost impossible to tell his father anything he didn’t already know or to achieve success that ever compared with that of his father.

Howard told Fortune magazine (September 10, 1990) how he farmed 406 acres and loved the work: “I’ve been farming nine years. It’s a very independent type of activity—everything’s up to you. It teaches you a value system and gives you the instrument to achieve that.” Now he farms 1280 acres in central Illinois and his son Howard Warren Buffett, farms a 406-acre family farm in Nebraska.

Maybe Howard hasn’t heard the adage, “There are three easy ways of losing money—racing being the quickest, women the most pleasant, and farming the most certain.”

Regarding the 406-acre farm, Howard said long ago when he ran it, “Dad owns the land. I pay him a percentage of the gross income as rent. The rent was based upon my weight. I’m 5 foot 8, and I weigh around 200 pounds. He thinks I weigh too much—that I should weigh 182.5. If I’m over, my rent is 26% of gross income. If I’m under, 22%. It’s the Buffett family version of going to Weight Watchers. I don’t mind it, really. He’s showing he’s concerned about my health. Even at 22%, he’s getting a bigger payback than almost anybody around.”

Howard said later that although his father is receiving the high end of a normal return on farm ground rental, that’s OK. After all, said the younger Buffett, “I feel very fortunate that my dad has enough interest in my farming activity that he was willing to purchase a farm. It’s my dream, but it’s his farm, and it’s his privilege to determine how he wants to rent it to me.”

As things turned out, when Howard moved to Decatur, Illinois, he sub-leased the land at a good profit above what he pays his father. He did miss the tractor and the plowing, however. One winter, after he moved to Decatur, Howard’s neighbors found their driveways had been cleared on some snowy days. One neighbor discovered Howard snow plowing one day and asked him why he was doing it. Howard said he missed being on his tractor so much that he got one out and was happy to play snow remover.

Before Howard’s move to Illinois, he had lunch with his father every Tuesday. “We have a great relationship. He has been a great instructor, a great teacher. I never look at my dad as the Warren Buffett that you see in Forbes magazine. All I see him as is my dad. But at the same time, I realize he has so much experience and knowledge to offer,” he told the Omaha World-Herald (October 31, 1993).

According to his son, what is it that makes Warren Buffett tick?

“I think it stems from his basic philosophy that you ought to want to give back to society and not just be a consumer of it. That’s totally consistent with what he does,” says Howard. “He does want to be a success and he likes to be creative. He’s extra creative and intelligent … He has all the tools and all that’s combined with a drive and determination … There’s an inside drive. He wants to do good things. He wants respect and to be in a position to have a positive influence.”

Several months before the Salomon scandal occurred, he said in an interview, “What he really likes is a challenge. What he’s really about is finding a better way to do it.”

In June 1993, Berkshire expanded its board from five to six members and Howard Buffett was added. Howard is a director of Lindsay Manufacturing Co., an irrigation equipment maker in Lindsay, Nebraska. He has been with Lindsay for the past 16 years. He is a director of the Coca-Cola Company.

Howard also advises environmental groups. He purchased 10,000 acres of rangeland near the border of Botswana and Zimbabwe. He is an ally of Ann Van Dyk, known as guardian of the world’s fastest land animal, the African cheetah. Howard Buffett’s fourth book, Spots Before Your Eyes: Cheetahs of Africa, is a compilation of photographs shot by him and Ann Van Dyk.

Howard also runs his foundation that consists mainly of Berkshire stock from his mother and has $220 million in assets. More than 80% of the foundation’s grants go outside the U.S. In 2008, a group of business leaders, including Howard Buffett and Mexico’s Carlos Slim Helú, joined in an effort to address the needs of impoverished children in Latin America.

His foundation also owns two research farms, a 2,500-acre farm in Decatur, Illinois, and a 9,200-acre farm in South Africa at which he spends much of his time. He has traveled to more than 100 countries.

He bought a $300,000 home in the Dundee section near his father’s home when his mother died, but the couple still lives in Illinois.

In 2009, another of Howard’s books called Fragile: The Human Condition, was published by National Geographic. The 320-page hardcover book has 440 color photographs documenting the lives of the poor around the world. The book has a foreward by Shakira Mebarak, the singer known by her first name.

OCCUPY WALL STREET

Howard Buffett said in October 2011, that he understood the motivations behind the Occupy Wall Street protest movement against corporate abuses. “I think it takes that to make things happen,” he reportedly said.

GUARDIAN OF THE CULTURE

CBS’s 60 Minutes on December 11, 2011 said that Howard Buffett was Warren Buffett’s choice to succeed him as Berkshire’s chairman. Buffett has long said he hopes Howard will serve as a “non-paid, non-executive Chairman of the Board” who would assure Berkshire’s culture would not change. Howard would not be the CEO. Buffett said if Howard were chairman that would give Berkshire an extra layer of protection against the remote possibility of someone using Berkshire “as their own sandbox in some way.” Howard said he was happy to have the job “as long as I can keep farming.”

Perhaps the real news was that Howard Buffett said he has a different view about how to help foreign countries than the Gates Foundation which he said was focusing on high-tech farming, including hybrid seeds and synthetic fertilizers that are not sustainable. He suggested more localized efforts were the answer to help with farming in poor nations. “We need to quit thinking about trying to do it like we do in America,” he said.

The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo cortesy of Howard Buffett)

Berkshire’s Future Chairman

Howard Buffett was once named by the United Nations as a goodwill ambassador, joining actress Drew Barrymore and retired U.S. Senator George McGovern as envoys for the World Food Program.



The Three Musketeers of Sun Valley

Warren Buffett, Howard Buffett, and former Capital Cities Chairman Tom Murphy team up in Sun Valley.

(Photo courtesy of Howard Buffett)

Of Permanent Value Chairmanship May Pass to His Son

Chairmanship May Pass to His Son The Story of Warren Buffett



Three Generations

Three generations of Buffetts: Howard Buffett, Warren Buffett, and young Howie (Howard Warren) Buffett in July 1990. Howard Warren grew up in Omaha, graduated from Northwestern University, studied public administration at Columbia University, and worked at the White House on the Domestic Policy Council.

(Photo by Michael O’Brien)



Howard Warren Buffett and Lili Thomas

At last report, young Howard Warren Buffett was planning to return from a White House job to Omaha to marry Lili Thomas, a Columbia University student. The couple plans to live in Omaha. In 2011, Howard took a job as executive director of his father’s foundation.

(Photo courtesy of the Omaha World-Herald)

Of Permanent Value Chairmanship May Pass to His Son



Howard Buffett’s Photos at Berkshire Headquarters

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Filming in Guatemala

Howard says, “I love helicopters. I came home from Sierra Leone a few years ago and told Devon I wanted to be buried in an MI-8 helicopter, the ones the UN use. I thought she would say don’t worry it will be many years before that happens. Instead she said, ‘Wow, that will be a BIG hole!’”

(Photo courtesy of Howard Buffett)

Fragile: The Human Condition



(Photo by Mary Porter)



44





SUSIE IN VOGUE/BUFFETT IN VANITY FAIR


Vogue magazine featured Susie Buffett’s emergence as a philanthropist and political sponsor in its May 2007 issue.

The article was liberally sprinkled with quotes from Bill Clinton and Bono. At one point during the interview, Barack Obama himself rang her cell phone.

“He was just about to announce his candidacy and was in a neck-and-neck race with Hillary to line up early supporters; we [the reporter and Susie] drove to lunch with Warren in her four-wheel-drive Porsche Cayenne. When told Obama was on the line, Susie didn’t miss a beat: ‘Well, hello, Senator, how are you?’ After the obligatory small talk … it was clear he’d gotten to his pitch. ‘I absolutely love you both,’ she responded, referring to Obama and his chief rival, of which she had no intention of choosing between in a primary. ‘Whichever one of you wins, I’ll back you 100 percent. If you’re the guy, you’ll be my guy.’”

The story reported Susie serves on Bono’s board of DATA (Debt, AIDS, Trade in Africa). Bono called her “the calmest storm that ever blew into town. There is an upfrontness about her that makes things very easy.”

The story tells of her strong belief that all students should attend public school. “My father has always said if there was one new amendment to the Constitution, it should be that every student in the country be required to attend public schools because then they would be good. I grew up with that mentality embedded in my brain.”

Buffett himself is quoted as saying, “Her mother really felt that every human being had equal value. A lot of people say that, but she delivered the lesson non-verbally every day of her life. Equally important,” Buffett added, “was Susie’s upbringing. According to Susie, ‘The smartest thing we did was not putting our children in a world that 99.9 percent of the world does not live in. They went to public schools; they had friends who were their friends because of what they were and not who they were.’”

Susie has backed Educares across America and other efforts to help pre-schoolers get a head start on education.

Toward the end of the story, Bill Clinton is quoted as saying, “She’s a piece of work, isn’t she?” Susie Buffett had contributed to Bill Clinton’s Foundation and Clinton once spoke in Omaha at a fundraiser for Girls Inc. where Susie served on the national board. Said Clinton, “Thanks in no small measure to her, that has become one of the best social-service organizations in the country. Once she gets on something, she doesn’t let go. She is so interested and has such a lively mind.’ He [Clinton] stayed in her new house and reports that they ‘sat up all night talking’—what little sleep he did get was in ‘the Plaza Suite,’ a guest room decorated with everything she could find on eBay from the Manhattan hotel (now being made over into a largely residential property), where her family always booked the same suite. ‘I told her as a young man I used to go there to the Oak Room, but that I couldn’t afford to stay there,’ Clinton tells me. ‘So she sent me a Plaza bottle opener.’”

BUFFETT IN VANITY FAIR

In January 2011, Vanity Fair weighed in with a much-promoted feature article about Buffett and his succession plans, saying its reporter had spent 11 hours with Buffett in Omaha. So what did Vanity Fair learn?

Although the story was interesting from other points of view, it did not live up to the succession insights.

A Bloomberg reporter wrote: “I’ve successfully struggled my way through the 140 pages of perfume swatches, Prada, Louis Vitton and luxury watch ads ... it was worth it for the long-anticipated Berkshire Hathaway succession secrets provided to the publication.

“For all the 11 hours that Vanity Fair was granted by arguably the most media-savvy CEO in the land, VF couldn’t really shed any new light on life for Berkshire Hathaway after Warren Buffett. All we could find were:

• VF trotted out the names of the top candidates to replace Buffett—four Berkshire Hathaway operating chiefs: David Sokol, Ajit Jain, Matthew Rose, and Gregory Abel.

• Buffett repeated his stock quote about succession planning, that it’s always a top issue at every Berkshire Hathaway board meeting.

• Additionally VF reports—as has been reported many times before—that the CEO slot will be divided into more than one position.”

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Susie in Vogue



45





WARREN BUFFETT, JIMMY BUFFETT


Warren Buffett’s name—that’s double f and double t—is often misspelled with one t, as in breakfast buffet. The “Buffet” misspelling has occurred in such prominent places as the 1992 Nike Annual Report, the 2000 Coca-Cola Annual Report, and proxies of both Moody’s and Dun & Bradstreet as well as by major newspapers and stock jock comments. CNBC used the one t when interviewing him December 20, 2001. The Random House press release touting the Alice Schroeder biography in 2008 misspelled Buffett’s name with one t.

The following is a news item from Bloomberg News Service, October 11, 1995:

DETROIT—Chrysler Corp. made a meal [sic] out of billionaire investor Warren Buffet’s [sic] name when it tried to take a slap at Kirk Kerkorian, its largest shareholder.



Jerome York, vice chairman of Tracinda Corp., said in a speech in New York that his company, of which Kerkorian is chairman, follows the same tight staffing regimen that Buffett imposes in his investment firm, Berkshire Hathaway.



The Detroit auto maker sent out a press release objecting to any comparison between Buffett and Kerkorian, who launched an abortive $21-billion bid for Chrysler in April.

“We know Warren Buffett,” the Chrysler release said, “and believe us, Kirk Kerkorian is no Warren Buffet [sic].”

The line, which mirrored former Senator Lloyd Bentsen’s famous put-down of former Vice President Dan Quayle, had a typographicalerror.

“Ooh, we do have a typo there, don’t we?” Chrysler spokesman Harris said.

Oddly, even after correctly spelling the first two instances, the Old Gray Lady misspelled Buffett’s name the third time—Buffet (The New York Times, March 9, 2007).

Once again, it’s Buffett—double f and double t—as in singer/

songwriter and author Jimmy Buffett. A strong business gene must run in the family.

Jimmy Buffett is the author of Tales from Margaritaville, Where is Joe Merchant?, A Pirate Looks at Fifty, A Salty Piece of Land and Swine Not?, as well as many hit songs, such as “Come Monday,” “Cheeseburger in Paradise,” “Margaritaville,” and Grammy Award-winning “It’s Five O’Clock Somewhere.” In a style similar to his “Uncle” Warren, he has created his own brand recognition and built a successful string of restaurants and retail outlets by selling the kicked-back image.

Jimmy Buffett, who calls himself a mediocre musician, said he picked up the guitar to meet women. Margaritaville is not a real place, only one that exists in the beachcomber imagination. In a small way, it shares the attributes of any other brand name. Walt Disney built a powerful brand by harnessing the power of imagination, yet ironically Jimmy Buffett has spurned offers from Disney to open Margaritavilles in their theme parks (Forbes, January 16, 1995).

Jimmy Buffett’s fans, who often wear aloha shirts and parrot headdresses, are known as Parrotheads. Warren Buffett’s fans, who sometimes wear yellow hats, are known as “Berk” heads. Both groups are devoted fans and some fans are in both camps. Both groups could be busted for lack of taste.

When President Clinton was having knee surgery, he chose to listen to Jimmy Buffett’s music. So does that make even the former President of the United States a Parrothead?

Jimmy Buffett’s image of Margaritaville was largely shaped during his time in Key West, Florida, where he lived for many years as a struggling musician. No longer struggling, the successful entertainer now owns two houses, a recording studio, a chain of Margaritaville and Cheeseburger in Paradise restaurants, and even a couple of Krispy Kreme doughnut shops.

In 1997, Jimmy Buffett sued two restaurant owners for naming their restaurants “Cheeseburger in Paradise,” which is the title of his 1978 hit song (People, April 14, 1997).

On February 6, 1996, while eating a “cheeseburger in paradise” at the Key West Margaritaville Cafe, Parrotheads and Berkshire shareholders Ken Monroe and Linda Hannett met Jimmy Buffett, who was in town recording his album, Banana Wind. “Since I am a fan of both Buffetts, I asked Jimmy if he was related to Warren,” said Monroe. “He said he thought he was but wasn’t sure of the exact genealogy. Although Jimmy Buffett continues to make millions in Margaritaville, I think the real test of the business gene would be whether Jimmy has been smart enough to invest in Berkshire Hathaway.”

The answer is that Jimmy Buffett has long been a Berkshire shareholder.

Fortune (June 21, 1999) concluded Warren and Jimmy probably were thought to be related but cannot prove beyond a doubt, possibly from an inbred family in an old penal colony.

BUFFETTS NOT RELATED

DNA tests found that the Buffetts were not even distantly related unless it was about 10,000 years ago. Anne Wojcicki, cofounder of 23andME, a DNA test firm, and also wife of Google cofounder Sergey Brin, made the discovery through her start-up company. The DNA test revealed that Warren Buffett’s paternal ancestors hail from northern Scandinavia, whereas his mother’s side likely has roots in Iberia or Estonia. Wojcicki, a former professor of anthropological genetics at Stanford, broke the news to Buffett, telling him, “I’m as closely related to you as Jimmy is” (Fortune, May 28, 2007).

Some territorial crossing over occurs: the business Buffett can sing a little, and the singing Buffett has done some investing.

Don Bohmont of Omaha, a math professor at the University of Nebraska, says as famous as Buffett is, he still gets confused with Jimmy Buffett, even by some people who work in the securities business.

Bohmont often calls his daughter Amy Scott, a stockbroker in St. Petersburg, Florida, sometimes leaving messages for her to call some famous person: “I’ve left messages to call Ted Turner or Larry Tisch in Omaha. This time I left her a message to call Warren Buffett in Omaha. If I say Omaha she knows I’m calling.”

When his daughter returned to her office and got the message from “Warren Buffett,” an awed coworker said, “You mean you know him?”

“Of course, he lives in my hometown of Omaha,” Bohmont’s daughter replied.

It turned out, however, her brokerage house colleague still thought the caller was Jimmy Buffett, not Warren Buffett—note again the double t.

Jimmy, with all his flourishing book, movie, and retailing interests, occasionally calls Warren. “He calls from time to time for advice, but I should be calling him,” says Warren Buffett (Forbes, January, 16, 1995).

Forbes reported July 31, 1995, that Warren, Jimmy, and Peter Buffett were planning an album. It quoted Peter Buffett, saying, “My dad will play the ukulele and sing a bit, too.”

Both Warren and Jimmy Buffett showed up at the opening of a Cheeseburger in Paradise restaurant in Village Pointe, Nebraska, in May 2004. Jimmy welcomed Warren on stage, saying “Ladies and gentlemen, the Buffett Boys.” They performed for about 300 surprised people. Warren Buffett joked that he’d been hanging out at the airport wearing a sign that said, “Will Sing for Food” (One magazine, June 2004).

PRESIDENTIAL CONNECTION

Reuters (December 15, 2009) reported that Barack Obama and Warren Buffett may be seventh cousins. “Genealogists at ancestry.com announced that Obama and Buffett are related through a seventeenth century Frenchman named Mareen Duvall.” Duvall immigrated to Maryland from France in the 1650s. He is Obama’s ninth great-grandfather and Buffett’s 6th great-grandfather. Therefore, Obama and Buffett are seventh cousins three times removed.

WHEN SPELLING BUFFETT WITH TWO T’S REALLY MATTERS

An investment group claiming that Buffett was its honorary chairman spelled his name with one t. International Realty Holdings of Palmerdale, California, drew a lawsuit from the SEC for a number of reasons.

First, Buffett was quoted in the lawsuit as saying, “I am not, nor have I ever been, the ‘Honorary Chairman of the Board of Directors of IRH.’ I have never had any personal or business relationship with IRH” (Omaha World-Herald, March 29, 2009).

A court order froze the assets of its operators, Ottoniel Medrano, a guard at a federal prison, and Leticia Isabel Medrano. Another red flag was a photo in an IRH brochure: A group of persons identified as IRH employees were actually a group of University of Michigan students.

GULF COAST CONCERT

Jimmy Buffett rallied the spirits of BP oil spill-weary Gulf Coast residents with a free Sunday concert in Gulf Shores, Alabama, on July 11, 2010.

With 35,000 fans enjoying the moment of reprieve, Buffett yelled out, “If you didn’t go to church today, this counts!”

Parrothead and Berkhead

Jimmy “It’s Five O’Clock Somewhere” Buffett in coat and tie and Warren “the Oracle of Omaha” Buffett in tropical attire share musical talent, business instincts, and possibly ancestors from the same penal colony. This photo was taken in Warren Buffett’s Plaza hotel room in New York on May 10, 1999.

(Photo by George Lange)



Of Permanent Value Warren Buffett, Jimmy Buffett



(Omaha

World-Herald)

Parrot Head in Action

Jimmy Buffett is the top Parrothead and a businessman in his own right.



Buffett Book

A Salty Piece of Land by Jimmy Buffett became quite a seller.

(Photo by Mary Porter)



Margaritaville

Jimmy Buffett’s Margaritaville Cafe in Key West

That lost shaker of salt may be here.



“It’s Five O’Clock Somewhere.”

Jimmy Buffett, left, and Berkshire shareholder Ken Monroe meet up at the Margaritaville Cafe in Key West in 1996.

(Photo courtesy of Ken Monroe)

Warren Buffett, Jimmy Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett



Will Sing for Food

Jimmy Buffett serves the first fully-laden cheeseburger with a silo of French fries to Warren at the Cheeseburger in Paradise restaurant in Omaha in 2004.

Of Permanent Value Warren Buffett, Jimmy Buffett



46





HEADWATERS


The heart turns to travel so that he then thinks

On flood-ways to be far departing . . .

So that but now my heart burst from my breastlock

My mood ‘mid the mere-flood,

Over the whale’s acre, would wander wide.

—Ezra Pound, “The Seafarer”

If The Forbes 400 had been published 150 years ago, it would have been peppered with names like Rotch, Howland, Rodman, and Allen. They were all from New Bedford, Massachusetts. With a population of 20,000 in the 1850s, it was home to perhaps the greatest concentration of wealth in America, and the money came from whale oil (Forbes, October 11, 2004).

To find out where Buffett’s billions came from, let’s start at Berkshire’s early location in the textile town of New Bedford, Massachusetts, 50 miles south of Boston. Back in the 19th century, New Bedford was a whaling city. Data from the time says that of the 1,000 whaling ships worldwide, two-thirds were American. Of those, 249 vessels sailed out of New Bedford (Andrew Delbanco, Melville, p. 40). Whalers, boat builders, riggers, caulkers, and blacksmiths once lived in the bustling city where men went “down to the sea in ships.”

Seamen’s Bethel in New Bedford has been a mariner’s church for nearly 200 years. It was here that Herman Melville, a whaleman before he was a writer, worshipped before he set sail on a whaler on January 3, 1841, on a long voyage that inspired him to write his classic, Moby-Dick. In Moby-Dick, published in 1851, Melville wrote about the chapel’s marbled memorials to lost seamen.

At noon on January 3 every year, devotees at the Whaling Museum in New Bedford begin a 25-hour reading aloud of Moby-Dick. Melville’s descendants are among the readers (The New York Times, November 10, 2006).

The seafaring world of Moby-Dick, later made even more famous by John Huston’s film starring Gregory Peck as Captain Ahab, widely regarded as the greatest character in American novels, begins as follows:

Call me Ishmael. Some years ago—never mind how long precisely—having little or no money in my purse, and nothing particular to interest me on shore, I thought I would sail about a little and see the watery part of the world. It is a way I have of driving off the spleen, and regulating the circulation. Whenever I find myself growing grim about the mouth; whenever it is a damp, drizzly November in my soul; whenever I find myself involuntarily pausing before coffin warehouses, and bringing up the rear of every funeral I meet; and especially whenever my hypos get such an upper hand of me, that it requires a strong moral principle to prevent me from deliberately stepping into the street, and methodically knocking people’s hats off—then, I account it high time to get to sea as soon as I can. This is my substitute for pistol and ball. With a philosophical flourish Cato throws himself upon his sword; I quietly take to the ship. There is nothing surprising in this. If they but knew it, almost all men in their degree, some time or other, cherish very nearly the same feelings towards the ocean with me.



The book sets the scene in New Bedford as Ishmael, Captain Ahab, and the rest of the crew prepare to go to sea in the Pequod:

But think not that this famous town has only harpooneers, cannibals, and bumpkins to show her visitors. Not at all. Still New Bedford is a queer place. Had it not been for us whalemen, that tract of land would this day perhaps have been in as howling condition as the coast of Labrador. As it is, parts of her back country are enough to frighten one, they look so bony. The town itself is perhaps the dearest place to live in, in all New England. It is a land of oil, true enough: but not like Canaan; a land, also, of corn and wine. The streets do not run with milk; nor in the spring-time do they pave them with fresh eggs. Yet, in spite of this, nowhere in all America will you find more patrician-like houses; parks and gardens more opulent, than in New Bedford. Whence came they? How planted upon this once scraggy scoria of a country?



Melville describes the Bethel (another name for chapel), which was built about 1830. Using artistic license, Melville gave the sparse interior of the chapel a pulpit in the shape of a ship’s prow—an architectural flourish that was actually added after Moby-Dick was published (Providence Journal, March 8–11, 2001).



The Chapel:



In this same New Bedford there stands a Whaleman’s Chapel, and few are the moody fishermen, shortly bound for the Indian Ocean or Pacific, who fail to make a Sunday visit to the spot. I am sure that I did not.



Returning from my first morning stroll, I again sallied out upon this special errand. The sky had changed from clear, sunny cold, to driving sleet and mist. Wrapping myself in my shaggy jacket of the cloth called bearskin, I fought my way against the stubborn storm. Entering, I found a small scattered congregation of sailors, and sailors’ wives and widows. A muffled silence reigned, only broken at times by the shrieks of the storm. Each silent worshipper seemed purposely sitting apart from the other, as if each silent grief were insular and incommunicable. The chaplain had not yet arrived; and there these silent islands of men and women sat steadfastly eyeing several marble tablets, with black borders, masoned into the wall on either side the pulpit. Three of them ran something like the following, but I do not pretend to quote:



SACRED

TO THE MEMORY

OF

JOHN TALBOT,

Who, at the age of eighteen, was lost overboard,

Near the Isle of Desolation, off Patagonia,

November 1st, 1836.

THIS TABLET

Is erected to his Memory

BY HIS SISTER.…

In the body of Moby-Dick (p. 110), Melville wrote: “If, at my death, my executors, or more properly my creditors, find any precious MSS in my desk, then here I prospectively ascribe all the honor and the glory to whaling; for a whale-ship was my Yale College and my Harvard.”

Moby-Dick famously ends with a tribute to the passing and the eternal:

Now small fowls flew screaming over the yet yawning gulf; a sullen white surf beat against its steep sides; then all collapsed, and the great shroud of the sea rolled on as it rolled five thousand years ago.



The story itself survived only because Ishmael survived the wreck of the Pequod.

The golden era of whaling, which lasted from 1820 to 1860, was spurred on by a surging demand for oil produced from whale blubber to fuel the industrial revolution; the oil was used for everything from streetlights to locomotive headlights. In general, returns on whaling were about 15%, although a handful of merchants did 25% in an age of 6% bonds (Forbes, October 11, 2004).

The discovery of oil in Titusville, Pennsylvania, in 1859 made the whaling industry obsolete. Many New Bedford capitalists switched their money to other ventures, such as textiles.

The latter half of Berkshire Hathaway’s name derives from Hathaway Manufacturing, a New Bedford textile mill, which was founded with whaling money in 1888 (Forbes, October 11, 2004). By then, New Bedford was New England’s fourth-largest producer of cloth. As whaling died out in New Bedford, a new livelihood emerged from King Cotton.



(Photo by Mary Porter)

Cover of Moby-Dick

“Thar She Blows.”

Going A-Whaling in the Deep Blue

Cover of Wilson Heflin’s Whaling Years



(Photo by Mary Porter)



“Call Me Ishmael”

Herman Melville’s Moby-Dick was not regarded as a masterpiece until after the author’s death. As the story goes, an editor once said, “Whales, Mr. Melville?”

(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Headwaterse

Seamen’s Bethel

Above, left: This is Seamen’s Bethel near the waterfront in New Bedford. Author Herman Melville worshipped here and wrote about this chapel in Moby-Dick.



(Photos by Andrew Kilpatrick)



Left: Inside Seamen’s Bethel, the pulpit is shaped like a whaler’s ship, just as described in Moby-Dick, but the pulpit was added after the publication of that book.



New Bedford Sign

Above: This sign to the left of the chapel’s entrance is a slightly misquoted line from Moby-Dick: “In the same New Bedford there stands a whaleman’s chapel and few are the moody fishermen, shortly bound for the Indian or Pacific Ocean; who failed to make a Sunday visit to this spot.” The sign to the right says, “The Whaleman’s Chapel of Melville’s Moby-Dick/Office Manager’s Home.”

Headwaters The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Headwaterse



47





BERKSHIRE’S HISTORY


Berkshire’s roots can be traced to Samuel Slater, the man who built the first U.S. textile mill circa 1790 in Rhode Island.

The earliest of the Berkshire corporations was founded by Oliver Chace, a carpenter who worked for Slater and an ancestor of current Berkshire Hathaway board member Malcolm G. (Kim) Chace III. The doors opened for business in 1806 in Providence, Rhode Island. The operation grew into a textile giant that at one time spun a quarter of the nation’s fine cotton.

As the years rolled by, several textile operations with common ownership were joined together with Berkshire Cotton Manufacturing Co. (incorporated in 1889), and by 1929, they became known as Berkshire Fine Spinning Associates.

Meanwhile, a cotton mill called Hathaway Manufacturing Co. was founded by Horatio Hathaway in 1868. Berkshire and Hathaway merged much later in 1955.

As for the original Hathaway firm, the infamous Hetty Green was one of the start-up investors in 1887, making her one of its earliest shareholders.

Henrietta Howland Robinson (Hetty) Green (1834–1916), of Quaker stock, grew up in New Bedford, Massachusetts. While in her 20s, she inherited a fortune in trading and shipping interests. Eccentric as she was, she became a successful operator in the stock markets causing bull movements when word got out of her investments, most notably in railroads. At her death in 1916, she left a fortune of $3.5 billion in today’s terms (Forbes, October 11, 2004).

Despite what Guinness Book of World Records says, Hetty Green did not get rich by saving. She got rich by investing. She owned railroads, banks, stocks and bonds, and real estate all across the country; however, the greatest source of her income was money lending (The New Yorker, April 23 & 30, 2001).

She loaned money and amassed large land interests mainly in the Chicago area. Rich and cheap, she died in New York leaving her children an estate of more than $100 million, which she had accumulated through “investing, forgery, and lending to speculators” (Fortune, July 5, 1999). This financier avoided the outstretched hands of strangers by living a simple and obscure life. Known for wearing a black, unwashed mourning dress and living like a transient to avoid residency taxes, she became known as the “richest and most detested woman in America.” For her unparalleled stinginess, she earned the title of “The Witch of Wall Street” (Michael Klepper and Robert Gunther, The Wealthy 100, p. 139).

Once when asked why she had taken out a license to carry a revolver, she replied, “Mostly to protect myself against lawyers; I’m not much afraid of burglars or highwaymen.”

By the 1930s, Berkshire’s many mills used about 1% of the electric output in the New England states. To say Berkshire was big is an understatement. However, the company was not a moneymaker; therefore, preferred dividends were omitted in late 1930 and for the next six years. World War II and the immediate postwar years, however, brought a return of profits.

In an address to the Newcomen Society in 1961, Berkshire President Seabury Stanton said that World War II was a turning point for the company:

When the war came, we were equipped to do well, and did. Production was shifted over to powder bags, camouflage cloths, ponchos, mosquito netting, and many other military items—but for us, the big chance to serve came through parachute fabric.



The Quartermaster Corps called textile manufacturers from all parts of the country for a meeting. They wanted us to develop and manufacture nylon parachute fabric. Since none of us had much experience with nylon fabrics, there was marked hesitancy about accepting such a commitment.



The Government official in charge of the meeting read off the list of companies represented there, one by one, and, in turn, each agreed to produce so many yards of the fabric. Because they were reluctant to plunge into this new field, most of the offers were relatively small, perhaps 25,000 yards or something of the sort. When they came to us, we said firmly, “Three million yards” and you could have heard a pin drop in that room.



After that, a good many of those present agreed to take more and we increased our initial commitment to five million yards at the Quartermaster’s request.



Hathaway Manufacturing opened as part of the local economy was shifting from low-profit whaling to higher-profit textiles. “Capital heeded the call of King Cotton and prospered in New Bedford. From 1881 to the beginning of the First World War, 32 cotton manufacturing companies were incorporated” (Spinner, Volume IV, p. 185). In World War II, the company, following the lead of Berkshire, specialized in producing parachute material. After the war, Hathaway became the largest maker of rayon suit linings.

In 1948, following WWII, Berkshire Fine Spinning Associates and the Hathaway Manufacturing Company had profits of $18 million and employed 10,000 workers at over a dozen large mills throughout New England. By comparison, IBM reported earnings of $28 million that same year.

“After the destruction of one of its mills and severe damage to its largest building complex from the hurricane {Hurricane Carol flooded the property on Cove Street.} of 1954, Hathaway was merged with Berkshire Fine Spinning” (ibid., 186).

Berkshire Fine Spinning Associates of Providence, Rhode Island, was run by Malcolm Chace.

In 1955, the two businesses were thus merged and the name of the combined company was changed to Berkshire Hathaway. Malcolm Chace, father of today’s board member Kim Chace, oversaw the consolidation of the Berkshire mills in Rhode Island and Western Massachusetts with those of the Hathaway Manufacturing Company in New Bedford. The combined company reported a stockholders’ equity of $55,448,000. It had 12,000 employees and 15 plants.

The textile business was tough at that time, and over the next nine years, stockholders’ equity continued to fall to as low as $22,139,000. Even so, as late as 1961, its managers were still calling it a strong company with a bright future. In President Stanton’s 1961 address to the Newcomen Society, he reported on Berkshire’s production and employment:

Today [1961], Berkshire Hathaway is the largest textile manufacturer of cotton and synthetic fabrics in New England. A total of about a million spindles and approximately 12,000 looms each year produce 225,000,000 yards of fabrics, consisting of fancy colored dress goods, handkerchief fabrics, voiles, dimities, combed and carded sateens, rayon linings, dacron marquisette curtain fabrics, and dacron cotton blends.



The total employment numbers approximately 5,800 people. All seven plants operate on a three-shift basis and Berkshire Hathaway does an average annual business of better than $60 million.



Berkshire Hathaway’s statistics were not much different in 1962, but the company had something that got Buffett’s attention:

In 1962, the Berkshire Hathaway Company operated seven plants, employed 6,000 people, annually produced one quarter of a billion yards of material that sold for more than $60 million, but most importantly had money in the bank. The company, and especially the money in the bank, caught the eye of Warren Buffett, an up-and-coming stock market wizard from Omaha, Nebraska. (ibid., 186)



By 1964, the company had shrunk to 2 mills and a net worth of $22 million.

Kim Chace has recalled a summer he spent working at the mill as “absolutely

terrible … I think they call it character-building” (Forbes, October 11, 1999).

Although Berkshire has no relation to Hathaway shirts made famous by ads featuring a man with a patch over his eye, Buffett said when he first bought Berkshire Hathaway, “I must have had seven calls in Omaha asking if I had to wear an eye patch.”

Buffett has told students he started buying Berkshire at $7 or $8 because he heard the mill planned to sell off one of its mills every year or so and use the money to buy back its stock for $10 or $11 a share.

Once Barron’s editor Alan Abelson described Berkshire this way: “Warren Buffett, for recent émigrés from Minsk and Pinsk, is the investor who runs a funny company called Berkshire Hathaway, which everyone thinks makes shirts but really makes money.”

The way Buffett came into the position of running Berkshire Hathaway is an interesting story in itself:

It was in 1962 that Buffett first started acquiring for BPL [Buffett Partnership Limited] Berkshire Hathaway stock at seven dollars per share. After a few years, Seabury Stanton, then president of Berkshire, promised Buffett that he would tender the remaining Berkshire Hathaway shares at 111/2. Three weeks later the shares were tendered but at 113/8. This was one time that a Buffett “handshake and trust” deal did not materialize. Annoyed at Stanton for not keeping his word, Buffett began buying up Berkshire stock from Stanton’s brother-in-law, and from Malcolm Chace, then chairman of the board of Hathaway. Chace, who was also apparently annoyed with Stanton, sold Buffett a large chunk of his Berkshire Hathaway issues. It was at this time in 1965 that Buffett was able to acquire control of Berkshire Hathaway (Anagnos’ thesis, quoting information provided by Buffett).



Buffett described this moment to a group of students from Georgia’s Terry School of Business:

We bought 100,000 shares out of a million in 1962 at $73/8 and the company had $10–$11 a share in working capital. I owned 10%. It was a good investment. I knew I wouldn’t lose money because of the working capital. It was losing money but it was liquifying assets by closing mills. Seabury Stanton was running Berkshire at the time and I went to go visit him. We had an agreement that Berkshire would tender $111/2 for my shares of the company. At this point, I could not buy any stock and had inside information. A few weeks later I received a letter from Old Colony Trust containing a tender offer of $113/8. Early the following week, Seabury tendered the stock at $113/8. As a result, I began buying more Berkshire. Other family members of Seabury Stanton tendered the stock at $113/8, and other family members of Seabury Stanton sold their shares to me and I gained controlling interest in Berkshire. The family members weren’t very happy with Seabury Stanton either really. I got rid of him. We ran the mills until 1985. We lost money every year in textiles except the first and second years (Sham Gad’s notes).



By 1964, the business was reduced to near rubble—two mills and a net worth of about $22 million. That year Berkshire earned a nominal $175,586, or 15 cents a share.

The stock price had dropped below book value. “Berkshire had no net cash at the time we bought control,” recalls Buffett. “All of the net worth was tied up in the textile business at the time.”

“In 1965, with the help of Chace and Otis Stanton, Buffett bought control of the company; Seabury Stanton, president, and his son Jack, treasurer and heir apparent, were out. With the sale of [Berkshire Hathaway] to a stock market speculator the company was following the road, trodden by many other old line manufacturing companies: from merchant trading in primary commodities to investment manufacturing, and finally, to pure finance. The company’s main product became money for speculation. After 80 years in the textile business, the textile division wasn’t doing very well” (Spinner, 1988, p. 188).

A business downturn continued, and Berkshire’s balance sheet on October 3, 1964, showed assets of $27,887,000 and stockholders’ equity of $22 million. Berkshire’s shares outstanding then were 1,137,778. Today there are about 1.5 million equivalent Class A shares.

Buffett kept buying and by 1965, his partnership had a 70% interest in the company, whose textile operations included about 4,700 looms. Buffett’s total stake in Berkshire was acquired for about $14 million (Forbes, October 21, 1991). Buffett took control of Berkshire on May 10, 1965, when Berkshire had a market value of about $18 million. In the late 1960s, Berkshire had about 1,200 shareholders. Today there are about 565,000.

Buffett became chairman of the board in 1970, but the economic characteristics of the textile business began to fade by the late 1970s.

Still, Buffett was interested in the textile business as a bargain. In the 1979 Annual Report he admitted it was not as good as it looked: “Your chairman made the decision a few years ago to purchase Waumbec Mills in Manchester, New Hampshire, thereby expanding our textile commitment. By any statistical test, the purchase price was an extraordinary bargain; we bought well below the working capital of the business and, in effect, got very substantial amounts of machinery and real estate for less than nothing. But the purchase was a mistake. While we labored mightily, new problems arose as fast as old problems were tamed.”

In his 1980 letter, Buffett wrote of cutbacks in the area of textiles: “During the past year we have cut back the scope of our textile business. Operations at Waumbec Mills have been terminated, reluctantly but necessarily. Some equipment was transferred to New Bedford but most has been sold, or will be, along with real estate. Your Chairman made a costly mistake in not facing the realities of this situation sooner.”

Waumbec Mills was located at 250 Commercial Street. As an aside, just down the street today is a renovated mill building along the Merrimack River where inventor Dean Kamen’s empire is based. Kamen’s tech company, DEKA, has been the subject of much speculation. Kamen is renowned as the inventor of the first wearable infusion pump, including the first insulin pump for diabetics. He also invented a robotic stair-climbing wheelchair. Kamen was the subject of enormous publicity when he invented the fuel-saving transportation device called “Ginger” or “IT” or “Segway.” It is a battery-powered, two-wheeled, self-propelled scooter, in short, a people mover.

“Berkshire’s textile division lost money throughout the recession of the early 1980s. There was a modest recovery in 1983, but the losses in 1984 totalled $2 million. The cycle was repeating” (Spinner, 1988, p. 188).

Late in 1984, Gary Morrison, president of the Textile Division, sent a detailed plan to Buffett, asking for a small investment in new machinery. Without it, he said, the mill couldn’t be profitable. When Buffett didn’t respond, he knew the end was near. On May 1, 1985, Morrison told local management that the mill was closing. In order to keep up morale, the employees weren’t told while they ran out the mill. On August 12, the workers were informed and shutdown began by departments. Just before Christmas, the mill ceased operations, having used up all raw materials, satisfied all orders, and sold or salvaged the equipment.

On that day, Berkshire stock stood at $2,600 per share, up from $11, the average price Buffett had paid 20 years before (Spinner, 1988, p. 189).

He kept the textile business until 1985. At one point, Berkshire made half the suit linings in the U.S. Buffett has said that all the work that went into operating the spindles and looms and being “supplier of the year” amounted to little, that only a valuable allocation of rayon helped distinguish the business.

By the time Berkshire gave up the textile business in 1985, Buffett had wrung cash out of the period of brief prosperity and out of working capital downsizings. This cash was invested in better businesses. At last, he sold the more than 100-year old business for a pittance. It turned out to be one of the few business quagmires into which Buffett ever sank money. As Yogi Berra has said, “A nickel isn’t worth a dime today.”

Buffett would explain at the Berkshire 1991 Annual Meeting that the textile business was a commodity business, and although a large number of men’s suits had Hathaway linings in World War II, it all came to mean nothing when a foreign business could make the linings more cheaply. So Berkshire was not a howling success. Now he knows to go with the low-cost producer.

“I knew it was a tough business … I was either more arrogant or innocent then,” he said. “We learned a lot of lessons, but I wish we could have learned them somewhere else.” He has been quoted as saying, “Never is there just one cockroach in the kitchen.”

Cotton production ended in 1969. Rayon Linings and synthetic curtains continued to be made until 1986.

Buffett later said, “We went into a terrible business because it was cheap” (Fortune, July 20, 1998). Although Buffett paid less than working capital for Berkshire, he later said that the working capital turned out to be a “mirage,” and that Berkshire was not only a “cigar butt” but a “soggy cigar butt” at that.

At Berkshire’s 1998 Annual Meeting, Buffett discussed the negative impact of this soggy cigar butt: “Berkshire itself was a mistake, believe it or not. We went into Berkshire because it was cheap statistically just as a general investment back in the early ’60s. In the previous 10 years, it had earned less than nothing. It had accrued a significant net loss over the previous 10 years. [But] it was selling well below working capital. So Berkshire itself was a cigar butt.

“And had we been able to do the things we’ve done since from a neutral base rather than a negative base, it would have worked out better. But it’s been a lot of fun.”

Jerry Zucker of Encino, California, once wrote: “A Cigar Butt Investment.” It was signed: Jerry Zucker, Retired, West Coast Sales Manager, Berkshire Hathaway Textiles.

When Buffett closed the declining business in 1985, machinery that had cost $12 million was sold for less than $200,000. Buffett didn’t sell the two million square feet of space; he rented out the space for $2 to $5 per square foot (Spinner, 1988, p. 189).

He got $163,000 for machinery with a book value of $866,000. Looms that were bought a few years earlier for $5,000 were sold as scrap for $26 each, less than the cost of taking them away (John Train, The Midas Touch, p. 67). But long before then, Berkshire’s other businesses, financed by textile mill cash, had begun flourishing.

Today the sites of the Berkshire mills in New Bedford are relics, part of a scene of economic devastation. A surviving complex of 31 buildings, just inland from the harbor-side hurricane wall, is home to 28 tenants who occupy about 35% of the business incubator space (Business Journal, June 1996). “Berkshire Hathaway rents to all types of businesses, especially since Stride Rite Shoes moved out in 1992, after 11 years. It had grown to occupy 800,000 of the million square feet, and employed up to 500 of the local work force.” Stride Rite was lured by an attractive incentive package to relocate in Kentucky.

The old red buildings are about worthless. But under the management of Bill Betts, who leased parts of them as office space and warehouse storage, they provided Berkshire a small stream of income until the office complex was sold in early 2000 at a fire-sale price.

From tiny beginnings, however, great things followed. Buffett, in 1986, calculated that 52 people in the Omaha area owned enough Berkshire stock to be millionaires. Berkshire stock has soared since then (Omaha World-Herald, August 17, 1991). It’s now thought Omaha is home for about 200 Buffett millionaires.

New Jersey’s Paul Laplante was an unwitting albeit very lucky shareholder. He once got a letter from a finder’s service saying it had found his deceased father’s account—with 66 shares of Berkshire in it. It turned out Laplante’s father had once done some legal work for Parker Mills, which paid him in warrants. Parker Mills was acquired by Berkshire Fine Spinning, later Berkshire Hathaway. “Those once nearly worthless warrants had blossomed into 66 shares of what had become Warren Buffett’s investment company” (Forbes, May 6, 1996).

Although the textile business—with headquarters in New Bedford, and offices in Los Angeles and New York City—didn’t last, the Berkshire Hathaway name did. Omaha stockbroker George Morgan, whose motto is “Money doesn’t come with instructions,” says, “He named the company after his biggest mistake.”

Buffett bought his first shares of Berkshire Hathaway in 1962. His first order, executed by the Tweedy, Browne firm, was for 2,000 shares at $7.50. Berkshire Vice Chairman Charles Munger has described the Tweedy, Browne firm, known for its strict approach to value investing, as a place where Buffett “used to hang out when he was young and poor” (Worth, April 1997).

Berkshire, once described by Munger as “a small, doomed New England textile enterprise,” was unable to distinguish itself from its competitors. Its products became commodities easily bought elsewhere. But from such ashes, a phoenix arose.

Even Buffett, in looking back over what he said were the mistakes of the first 25 years, said his first mistake was buying Berkshire. Although he recognized it as an unpromising business, he bought in because of the low price, figuring that, at worst, he could wring out more cash than he paid and use it to buy other businesses.

Failure though it was, Berkshire was the mulch for Buffett’s future undertakings.

BERKSHIRE UNDER BUFFETT

In 1965, Buffett Partnership informed Berkshire it held 500,975 shares, or about 49% of Berkshire’s stock. Buffett’s partnership had become Berkshire’s largest shareholder, and it kept right on buying. By January 1967, it owned 59.5% and as of April 1968, it owned almost 70% of Berkshire, according to documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.

Meanwhile Berkshire, now under Buffett’s management, was making acquisitions, and ventured into the insurance business for the first time on February 23, 1967, with a tender offer for National Indemnity Co.

In early 1969, Berkshire bought 97% of The Illinois National Bank and Trust Co., Sun Newspapers Inc., and Blacker Printer Inc., the latter two being Berkshire’s first entry into the publishing business. Sun Newspapers published five weekly newspapers in Omaha with a circulation of about 50,000. The related printing businesses were run by Stanford Lipsey.

In 1970, Buffett Partnership ceased to be a stockholder and parent of Berkshire and distributed, pro rata to its partners, 691,441 Berkshire shares. After the liquidation, Buffett quietly bought Berkshire shares for himself.

An SEC document tells of the transfer of parentship from Buffett Partnership to Buffett himself:

Subsequent to the above liquidating distribution, Warren E. Buffett purchased during January 1970, an additional 87,591 shares of common stock of the registrant from other partners of Buffett Partnership Ltd. who had received these shares on the liquidating distribution. Also, during January, Mr. Buffett purchased in the open market an additional 2,100 shares of common stock of the registrant. Warren Buffett himself on January 31, 1970, owned beneficially a total of 245,129, or approximately 25%, of the registrant’s 979,582 shares of presently outstanding common stock. As a result of these transactions, Warren E. Buffett may be regarded as the parent of the registrant (Berkshire).



When Buffett was 40 years old, he controlled Berkshire from his office in Omaha.

In the early 1970s, Robert Cope, a bond underwriter from Montgomery, Alabama, called Berkshire in New Bedford, Massachusetts, trying to sell some industrial revenue bonds. He was told to call Buffett in Omaha.

“I called and got Bill Scott who told me he wasn’t buying anything except industrial revenue bonds, and I told him that was the only thing I was selling,” Cope said. “He gave me to Buffett and I explained what I had. He understood corporate credits. He didn’t have to go look anything up in Moody’s or S&P. He said he was interested in the tax-exempt bonds I had.”

When Cope asked how much he could take, Buffett replied, “Well, all of it.” Cope said, “I was used to selling 100 bonds,” but exclaimed, “He took three or four million!”

Cope continued to sell bonds to Berkshire. “I’d call and either Scott or Buffett would answer. Frankly, I always was relieved when I got Buffett. Scott was tough and would ask ‘Whatcha got?’

“Buffett was always a prince of a guy. He was cordial. He said, ‘Good morning, tell me what you’re working on.’ Then he’d say he liked the company or that he didn’t and would say he’d pass on it or he would take it.”

Cope continued, “I went out to Kiewit Plaza a few times, and I’d go up to his little office. He’d stick his head out and say, ‘Come in and let’s talk a while.’”

There was a time when Buffett couldn’t even get Berkshire’s earnings listed in The Wall Street Journal. Buffett wrote the Journal about it but was rejected (Omaha World-Herald, July 9, 1998).

“In 1973 and 1977, the Journal sent polite turn-downs to Buffett. At the start of ’77, his holding company Berkshire Hathaway had a net worth of about $100 million when compared to today’s [1998] net worth of $100 billion.

“Buffett, in pleading his case, had written that the Journal was printing the earnings of several companies whose annual sales are less than Berkshire Hathaway’s annual earnings.” Yes, the editor replied, “but noted that Berkshire wasn’t listed by NASDAQ, the quotations of the National Association of Securities Dealers. And NASDAQ was the standard.”

Today Berkshire is a far-reaching investment holding company ranked number one in shareholders’ equity of all insurance companies in the world, and it has the fourth highest book value of the Fortune 500 companies. It is an insurance empire with large stock, bond, cash, and currency holdings. It also has a number of operating businesses.

Berkshire fits no category—in corporate listings it variously is lumped with insurance, candy, media, diversified, nonbank financial, investment, miscellaneous, or conglomerate firms. Berkshire is a hybrid company: It is all of the above. Here’s a typical description of Berkshire: “Berkshire is an investment holding company that offers property and casualty insurance, publishes magazines and provides other services.” Plus candy!

A DESCRIPTION THAT BEATS A SLEEPING PILL

Here’s one business description of Berkshire:

Berkshire Hathaway Inc. The group’s principal activities are to provide insurance and reinsurance of property also casualty risks and reinsure life, accident, and health risks world-wide. The group also manufactures and distributes a variety of clothing and footwear. It also manufactures and distributes clay brick, concrete blocks, and cut limestone. It produces water and solvent-thinnable general purpose architectural coatings; fiber glass wool insulation products for walls and floors, and pipe, duct, and equipment insulation products; nonwoven mats, fabrics, and fibers used as reinforcements in building and industrial applications; and roofing systems and components. The group also provides rental furniture and accessories and wholesale distribution and logistics services.



Practically no analysts tracked it until 1998, when analyst Alice Schroeder started following it. Until then, if you punched up Berkshire in the Bloomberg newswire and went to recommendations, you found, “No recommendations available for this company.”

To find out about the company, you have to do your own research. Several times a year, the company will issue one-sentence announcements of a new investment. About the only way to get a picture of how Berkshire stands is to ask the company for an annual report.

Beyond its apparent simplicity—largely hidden-from-view chairman, tiny headquarters in Omaha at Kiewit Plaza at 36th and Farnam streets, plain-bound annual report, mostly no-comment policy—lies a constellation of beautiful businesses.

They’re not sexy businesses: uniforms, shoes, vacuum cleaners—that sort of ordinary thing. Retraction. They are sexy businesses, if you’re talking profitability. Some of the businesses earn a return on capital of 20%; that’s outstanding by any measure. Sometimes they earn 30% to 40%.

Buffett’s prosaic businesses in bad years sometimes rang up a 50% return on equity on operations alone; and in 1989, they reached an astronomical 67% return based on historical cost, a figure almost no one in the business world has ever heard about or seen! Most businessmen talk happily in terms of a 10% to 15% return on equity. The number is so far beyond the range of most business numbers that generally it would be deemed a misprint.

In addition to Berkshire’s dozens of operating businesses, a large, separate insurance group of businesses exists. It is the property and casualty insurance business—Berkshire’s largest operating business—that is the vehicle through which Buffett usually makes his investments.

It’s the money from Berkshire’s businesses, particularly from the insurance operations, as well as the income from Berkshire’s stock and bond investments, that gives Buffett the ready cash for new investments to bring in more money

Berkshire has more than 257,113 full-time employees, making it one of the largest private employers in the U.S. The company is now listed on the New York Stock Exchange, trades under the symbols BRK.A and BRK.B, and is listed as BerkHaA and BerkHaB in newspaper listings.

With Berkshire’s acquisition in early 1996 of the remaining half of GEICO that it did not already own, the huge purchase of General Re in 1998, and a string of smaller but important acquisitions, such as MidAmerican Energy and Shaw Industries, Berkshire transformed itself into a giant.

Often thought of as a bunch of stocks, Berkshire is also a collection of wholly owned operating businesses of real size.

Berkshire now walks on three very long but stable legs: a large insurance business, a large stock and bond portfolio, and a large collection of fully-owned operating businesses—all throwing off cash, cash, and more cash.

BERKSHIRE’S OWNERS

After completing his charitable contributions in 2010, Buffett held 350,000 Class A shares and 750,063,363 Class B shares (about 33% of the total voting rights of Berkshire). Most top officers have a substantial portion of their net worth in Berkshire. Buffett’s description is apt when he tells people, “We eat our own cooking.”

It is a happy, wealthy group that has known the feeling expressed in the Josh Billings quote, “The happiest time in a man’s life is when he is in the red-hot pursuit of a dollar with a reasonable prospect of overtaking it.”

About 15% of Berkshire’s stock is held by institutions.

The rest of the stock is in the hands of about 400,000 individual shareholders who don’t trade the stock often. Berkshire has less turnover than any stock on the New York Stock Exchange.

About 80% of Berkshire’s shares were bought at $100 or less, giving the company an old wealthy family air.

“There are 125 shareholders in my zip code in Omaha, so I can go out and trick-or-treat on Halloween and be assured of good treatment,” Buffett said on Adam Smith’s Money World show October 21, 1993.

By one estimate, 300 to 400 Omahans each have more than $1 million in Berkshire stock (Omaha World-Herald, July 12, 1998).

Berkshire shareholders are mainly from the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, India, and Canada. Many shareholders own 10 shares or less. Some consider it an honor to own one.

Berkshire Vice Chairman Charles Munger; Buffett’s friend Sandy Gottesman, who heads the First Manhattan investment firm in New York; and Dr. William Angle of Omaha—until his death—have been among the major shareholders. Gottesman is known for a demanding, skeptical “Who says?” approach to investing. Malcolm Chace, a private investor and former chairman of Berkshire who died in 1996 at age 92, was a large stockholder whose cost basis for some of his Berkshire shares was about 25 cents.



Business Story of the Century?

Hathaway Manufacturing Company circa 1925

(Photo courtesy of the Old Dartmouth Historical Society—

New Bedford Whaling Museum/Joseph S. Martin)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Hathaway Mill circa 1912



Hathaway Manufacturing Company circa 1920



Roving Frame Machines for Yarn Manufacturing at Hathaway Manufacturing Company

(Photos courtesy of the

American Textile History Museum

in Lowell, Massachusetts)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire History



The Witch of Wall Street

This book, published in 1930, is an account of the only child to inherit four whaling fortunes and who wound up being worth $100 million at her death in 1916.

v



Green Money

Hetty Green was known for her simple (and singular) Quaker dress, frugal lifestyle and immense wealth. She was known for her stinginess not only toward

others but toward herself. She used neither heat nor hot water. She reused envelopes and always ate oatmeal for lunch.



Not a Great Business, but the Name Lived On

(Ad courtesy of Alan Sears)

Berkshire History The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Berkshire History



Imagine This!

Dean Kamen, inventor of the Segway, demonstrates one of his other creations.

(AP/Wide World Photos)

Berkshire History The Story of Warren Buffett



James Bond’s Latest Flying Machine

Buffett tries out one of Dean Kamen’s Segways when Kamen spoke at the 2002 National Business Aviation Association Convention in Orlando, Florida. Looking on is Dassault Aviation CEO Charles Edelstenne.

(Photo by Roger Ritchie/FlightSafety)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire History

Buffett once joked of Berkshire’s textile business that the assets weren’t worth what he thought they were, “but the liabilities were solid.”

Buffett said Berkshire Hathaway was the “dumbest” stock he ever bought. It was a $200-billion blunder, he told CNBC’s Becky Quick (October 18, 2010).

Buying Berkshire was sparked in part by wanting to retaliate against the CEO who tried to “chisel” Buffett out of an eighth of a point on a tender offer.

Buffett said had he put the money elsewhere, say, in an insurance company, instead of a declining textile, Berkshire may have been worth twice as much today as it is.

Buffett recalled his plan of wanting to buy the stock and tendering it for a profit: “In 1964, we had quite a bit of stock. And I went back to management [Seabury Stanton was the CEO], and he looked at me and said, ‘Mr. Buffett... We’ve got some excess money. We’re going to have a tender offer. At what price will you tender your stock?’ And I said ‘$11.50.’”

When the tender offer came out officially at 11 and 3/8ths, it made Buffett mad. “So I went out and started buying the stock, and I bought control of the company, and fired Mr. Stanton.

“Now that sounds like a great little morality tale ... but the truth is I had now committed a major amount of money to a terrible business ... In 1967, when a good insurance company came along, I bought it for Berkshire Hathaway. I really should have bought it for a new entity ...”

So as of 2010, Buffett considered his Berkshire purchase to be his greatest mistake but acknowledged the possibility worse could happen yet:

“If you come back in ten years, I may have one that’s even worse.”

Berkshire History The Story of Warren Buffett



Looking Prosperous

Kiewit’s Walter Scott Jr., left, and former Cap Cities Chairman Tom Murphy are close friends with Buffett and are Berkshire board members.

(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire History

Berkshire History The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Berkshire History



48





BERKSHIRE’S BOARD


Run simply by Buffett and a handful of others, Berkshire operates in such a lean manner it makes a mockery of other firms. Buffett, chairman of the board, CEO, and Berkshire’s heart and soul and maximum leader, and Charlie Munger, chairman of Berkshire’s Wesco unit and vice chairman of Berkshire, are the chieftains.

Munger said at Berkshire’s 1991 Annual Meeting, that long ago Berkshire was subpoenaed for its staffing papers in connection with one of its acquisitions. “There were no papers. There was no staff.”

Carefully devised by Buffett, the bare-bones structure had only seven directors on the board, no standing committees, and little in the way of outside advice even as late as 2002.

Buffett began the Berkshire annual meeting in 1998 with reference to four of the close-knit directors: “The meeting will now come to order. I’m Warren Buffett, chairman of Berkshire Hathaway, and this hyperactive fellow is Berkshire’s vice chairman, Charlie Munger. Incidentally, one of our directors is one of the singers during the [company] movie. (We keep costs down here at Berkshire.) ... Susan T. Buffett, the vocalist, Howard G. Buffett, the nonvocalist.”

Berkshire was so short on outside directors that it drew criticism from several quarters: Chief Executive magazine called Berkshire’s board the “worst” board in corporate America; and USA Today (May 6, 1994) reported their list of the best and worst boards with Berkshire at the bottom. Apparently that conclusion was reached because Berkshire’s board was small, family-oriented, and had no real outside directors.

Investor Giri Bogavelli offered this rebuttal:

Two of the more important factors in evaluating any board of directors are corporate governance and enhancement of shareholders’ value. Berkshire’s record on the issue of corporate governance is unblemished. Few philosophers in the arena of corporate governance ever get a chance to translate their well-articulated theories into practice. Mr. Buffett has done just that at Berkshire.



As to the enhancement of shareholders’ value, Berkshire’s record

is matched by very few in corporate America. What is more important is that this was achieved with clearly enunciated principles and the highest ethical standards.



More criticism came in 2001: “Institutional Shareholders Services, which advises pension and mutual funds on how to vote their shares, analyzed Berkshire Hathaway’s proxy and concluded solemnly that shareholders should withhold their votes from two very naughty directors: CEO Warren Buffett and vice chairman Charles Munger.” Their sin was noted to be “not putting enough independent outsiders on Berkshire’s board” (Fortune, May 28, 2001).

At that time, directors other than Buffett and Munger were Buffett’s wife, Susan, and son Howard, as mentioned previously, plus three others: Malcolm G. Chace, chairman of the board for Bank RI; Ronald L. Olson, partner of the firm Munger, Tolles & Olson, LLP, in Los Angeles, California; and Walter Scott Jr., chairman of Level 3 Communications and chairman emeritus of Peter Kiewit Sons’ Inc., a privately held construction conglomerate firm in Omaha. At that point, all of the directors owned Berkshire stock.

Yale educated, Malcolm Chace became a Berkshire director in 1992, replacing his father on the board. Chace played the roles of founder, chairman, and 10% owner of Bank Rhode Island. In the late 1970s, he helped negotiate Buffett’s buyout of Diversified Retailing Co., a chain of 80 stores based in Baltimore. In 2003, Forbes ranked Chace as No. 289 of the richest Americans, with a net worth of $935 million, largely in Berkshire stock. Chace had been noted at one point to have held Berkshire stock longer than any other living person. A leading businessman and philanthropist in Rhode Island, Chace, over the years, sold large amounts of Berkshire

to spread money throughout his family and to give to charity.

Credentials for Ronald Olson, named to the board in 1997, include University of Michigan Law School, Diploma of Law from Oxford University, Ford Foundation recipient, and boards of City National Corp. in Los Angeles (bank of Hollywood stars), Edison International, California Institute of Technology, RAND Corp., USC Annenberg School of Communication, and Southern California Public Radio.

Further, Olson chaired the Litigation Section and Committee on the Federal Judiciary for the American Bar Association. His fields of specialization are commercial litigation and corporate governance counseling.

Walter Scott, a Berkshire board member since 1988, has been a friend of Buffett’s since childhood. In addition to Scott’s current position serving as chairman of Level 3 Communications, a fiber optics network that is a successor to some of Kiewit’s businesses, he serves on many corporate boards. Buffett has said that Scott’s record is so good that he [Buffett himself] would not recount it for fear of making Berkshire shareholders restive.

In 2003, new rules were established that required the board to name more outside directors. In light of the SEC rule changes to expand the independence of corporate boards, Berkshire named four new directors to its board that same year. The first two directors to be added were Tom Murphy, former CEO of Capital Cities/ABC, and Don Keough, Coca-Cola’s former president and current chairman of investment company DMK International and investment banking firm Allen & Company.

In November 2003, the board added Charlotte Guyman, director at University of Washington Medical School and associated hospitals, and David S. “Sandy” Gottesman, a managing partner of First Manhattan Co.

Ms. Guyman was previously the general manager of Microsoft’s online sales and marketing.

Gottesman, a Harvard MBA, became friends with Buffett in 1962, founded First Manhattan in 1964, and is a Berkshire billionaire. A listing about Gottesman in the Forbes 400 (October 9, 2006) said his 19,000 Berkshire shares [at that time] were worth about $1.8 billion and his net worth was $2.5 billion. Berkshire’s 2010 proxy listed him as owning 17,044 A shares and 2,604,439 B shares. Gottesman, who is said to shun the billionaire’s lifestyle, is also on the board of the American Museum of Natural History in New York City and has donated millions to the Gottesman Hall of Planet Earth exhibit (Forbes, October 10, 2005).

When Susan T. Buffett passed away on July 29, 2004, a vacancy was created on the board. On December 14, 2004, Microsoft founder Bill Gates was named to Berkshire’s board to fill that vacancy.

Another vacancy was created when Chace retired from the Berkshire board in 2007 at age 72. He died four years later, June 23, 2011, at age 76.

The latter vacancy on Berkshire’s board was filled by the then president of Yahoo, Susan Decker, 45. Decker, who also serves on the boards of Intel and Costco, received a double major in computer science and economics from Tufts University and an MBA from Harvard Business School. Before joining Yahoo, she held a number of positions at Donaldson, Lufkin, and Jenrette where she was a noted analyst during her 14-year career with the investment banking firm. After her career at Yahoo, she returned to Harvard Business School as an Entrepreneur-in-Residence and received the school’s Alumni Achievement Award in 2010.

Stephen Burke, president of Comcast Cable Communications, was named to the board on December 22, 2009, bringing the board to 12 members.

“Steve, at 51, is business-savvy, owner-oriented and keenly interested in Berkshire, the three ingredients we look for in directors. Having him join us is a home run for Berkshire,” Buffett said in a statement.

One week after Burke was named to the board, he bought five Class A Berkshire shares, reportedly at $98,779.80. He did not own any other Berkshire shares at that time.

Burke joined Comcast Corporation in 1988 from Walt Disney Co. where he had been president of ABC Broadcasting.

Burke’s father, Daniel, helped to turn Capital Cities/ABC (when Tom Murphy was CEO) into one of Berkshire’s most successful investments in the 1990s.

Stephen Burke came to the board very soon after Comcast Cable Communications announced a joint venture with General Electric to spin off NBC Universal as a separate company controlled by the cable company. Berkshire had made a $3-billion investment in GE the previous year, 2008. Burke is now CEO of NBCUniversal and Executive Vice President of Comcast.

So who would be the big players on the board if Buffett should step up, down, or aside? Bill Gates and Buffett’s son Howard, having been on the board for some time, would likely play major roles. Because of Gates’s close friendship with Buffett, his pledge to help Berkshire during his lifetime, his Berkshire stock stake, and his foundation’s stock stake, Gates has to be regarded as a key board member. And Howard Buffett likely would be named chairman of the board, a nonexecutive figure there as a guardian of Berkshire’s culture.

Early on, serving on Berkshire’s board was like taking a vow of poverty. Directors were paid a whopping $900 a year. The board carried no officers’ and directors’ liability insurance. Although yearly compensation for Berkshire directors has tripled, the financial benefits of being a Berkshire director today are a pittance, relative to being a director for other wonderful companies.



Warren Buffett



Charles Munger

The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Charles Page)

Malcolm Chace



Ronald L. Olson

t

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Board



Walter Scott

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Tom Murphy



Charlotte Guyman



Don Keough



Sandy Gottesman



Susan Decker



Stephen Burke



Bill Gates

(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)

Berkshire’s Board The Story of Warren Buffett



Howard Buffett

(Photo courtesy of Howard Buffett

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Board



49





WHO’S BILL GATES?


Who’s Bill Gates? Is he the guy who fixes any computer for $19.95?

Most know him as the wild computer prodigy who made vast technological leaps.

Some know the young genius for some speeding episodes in his youth. But everyone can agree that Bill Gates has come a long way fast.

In an effort to bring Berkshire into the 21st century, Berkshire named Microsoft founder Bill Gates to its board. Buffett and Gates have been friends a long time. They have visited each other’s homes, have traveled together, and often play bridge on the Internet. Gates has been a longtime Berkshire shareholder.

It just seemed like a good fit when the world’s wealthiest person joined the board of Berkshire, run by the world’s second wealthiest person.

Except for a boilerplate paragraph, here’s Berkshire’s press release about Gate’s election: “On December 14, 2004, Berkshire Hathaway Inc.’s Board of Directors voted to elect William H. Gates, III, to serve as a director to fill the current vacancy on the Board of Directors. Mr. Gates has long been a shareholder of Berkshire Hathaway and is the founder of Microsoft Corporation and has served as Chairman of Microsoft since the Company’s incorporation in 1981. Mr. Gates served as Microsoft’s CEO from 1981 until January 2000 when he resigned as CEO and assumed the position of Chief Software Architect.”

Gates had to reveal his holdings after being named a Berkshire director. His filing disclosed that he owns 3,580 Berkshire Class A shares.

Gates now owns 8% of Berkshire’s Class B stock through his foundation

and investment firm. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation owned 975,000 B shares after it received 475,000 B shares in July 2007 from Buffett. Cascade Investment, Gates’s own personal investment vehicle, owns 4,050 A shares, which are convertible into 121,000 B shares. Gates also owns 300 A shares directly.

Over the years, Gates has steadily sold Microsoft stock to give money to charities and diversify his holdings. Gates, who still owns about one billion Microsoft shares, has funneled some proceeds to his Cascade Investment, which has reported holding $3 billion of stock in 14 companies, including cable company Cox Communications and Canadian National Railway Co. Gates has an investment in and for years served on the board of drug maker ICOS, which codeveloped erectile dysfunction treatment Cialis.

Gates left the ICOS board in early 2005 saying in a statement that he wanted to focus his attention on his board seat at Berkshire. “Given my friendship with Warren and my interest in helping out in any way he ever asks, Berkshire is now my highest priority for board membership.”

Being an author of two books and a collector of rare books, Gates is the owner of Leonardo da Vinci’s Codex Leicester, an historic manuscript of scientific observations and illustrations on such natural phenomena as water, light, and gravity.

The Italian Renaissance genius wrote the manuscript nearly 500 years ago, shortly after painting the Mona Lisa. Gates bought the 72-page manuscript for $30.8 million at a Christie’s auction in 1994 from Armand Hammer, the oil magnate.

Da Vinci’s notebook, containing more than 300 illustrations and scientific writings compiled from 1506 to 1510, predicts the invention of the submarine and the steam engine. “I have always had a tremendous respect for Leonardo da Vinci’s intellectual coupling of science and art.” Gates, who allowed the work to be displayed for a time in Italy, was quoted at the time of the purchase as saying, “It’s very gratifying to share an intellectual treasure of this magnitude with the world.”

In 1995, Gates bought the Bettmann Archive, a collection of 16 million historic photos. It was part of a series of moves to buy the electronic rights to a vast number of photos now owned by a Gates company called Corbis.

Bill and Melinda Gates flew to Omaha on December 16, 2005, to pose with rock star Bono for Time magazine’s “Persons of the Year” cover. The three were photographed at the Omaha Hilton. Bono and his band, U2, had performed the night before in Omaha.

Referring to the photo shoot, Buffett said that for a few hours, “The center of the universe was Omaha.” After the shoot, the Persons of the Year retired to Buffett’s daughter’s house to break bread with the Oracle of Omaha.

Gates, who famously dropped out of Harvard, was invited back in 2007 to deliver a speech at Harvard’s commencement. He spoke about the use of philanthropy to lower global inequities in health, wealth, and education. Gates prepared for the talk for months and had help from many quarters, including Buffett, who offered advice about delivery and tone. “Warren is the best at kind of inspiring people to do something without preaching,” said Gates. “Warren helped me feel like really telling the students to do something was OK if you did it the right way.”

In his talk, Gates said, “Humanity’s greatest advances are not in its discoveries—but in how those discoveries are applied to reduce inequity. Whether through democracy, strong public education, quality health care, or broad economic opportunity—reducing inequity is the highest human achievement” (The Wall Street Journal, June 8, 2007).

Gates and his wife Melinda married in 1994, and now run the world’s largest charity, the Gates Foundation.

“Bill is an awkward guy,” Buffett has said. “He’s lopsided, but less lopsided since he’s with Melinda. Susie made me less lopsided, too.”

“Warren knows how lucky I am to have Melinda,” Gates has been quoted as saying. “It makes him look back at his time with Susie and wonder what it would have been like to be doing the giving with Susie” (Fortune, January 20, 2008).

When Gates retired from Microsoft in 2008 to devote more time to philanthropy and study, Buffett became an eager observer: “He doesn’t know for sure where his mind is going to go. Not only will it be fascinating, but I think it’s going to be, for me, very satisfying to watch” (Fortune, June 20, 2008).

In addition to philanthropy, Gates has made a lifelong pledge to Berkshire. Gates and fellow board member Don Keough both told Bloomberg News that they see their role as protecting Berkshire’s culture and values after Buffett steps down. “I’ve got a commitment to stay involved with Berkshire as a lifelong thing,” Gates was quoted as saying. “We always have to think about what might happen and make sure Berkshire is not just great now, but forever.” One shareholder said following word of the commitment, “I consider this the single, most important statement as to Berkshire’s intrinsic value.”

Bill Gates apparently has one more important role at Berkshire: Gates is the one to whom Buffett has given the task of monitoring his performance and of letting him know if it becomes necessary for him to step down (The Wall Street Journal, August 30, 2010).



Speeder

“I was out driving Paul [Allen]’s car. They pulled me over, and I didn’t have my license, and they put me in with all the drunks all night long. And that’s why the rest of my life, I’ve always tried to have a fair amount of cash with me. I like the idea of being able to bail myself out” (Time, June 18, 2007).

The Story of Warren Buffett



The Road Ahead by Bill Gates

A signed copy goes for about $250. Gates has a “massive private library of rare books” in his Seattle home (Nicholas A. Basbanes, Patience and Fortitude, p. 263).

(Photos by Mary Porter)





Business @ the Speed of Thought

by Bill Gates

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

Of Permanent Value Who’s Bill Gates?



Philanthropy Trio

Time magazine’s cover featuring Bill Gates, Bono, and Melinda Gates. In 2006, Gates said he planned to move out of his day-to-day role at Microsoft to spend more time on global health and education work at the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.

(Photo by Mary Porter)



Mister Softie

Bill Gates at the Berkshire annual meeting in 2008

(Photo by

John Gass)





Rosetta Stone

These are some notes for the ’06 edition. Actually, this is the Rosetta Stone which gave back to the world the long-forgotten language of ancient Egypt, which had been a riddle to scholars for hundreds of years. A French officer in Napolean’s engineering corps discovered the stone in 1799, half buried in mud near the Rosetta mouth of the Nile River. The first inscription is in ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics and the second is in the popular language of Egypt at the time of the stone’s discovery. The bottom inscription is in Greek. A scholar translated the Greek portion first and compared words to the other inscriptions; and thus, was able to decode the meaning of the early Egyptian hieroglyphic characters.

Proofer Karen Salerno thinks she found a typo here.

50





ADVENTURE: THE BIG BANG


The Rosetta Stone of modern investing may arguably be found in the 1962 year-end statement for the Buffett Partnership on the right. It is signed by William Scott. The sixth item down on the left side is Buffett’s first purchase of Berkshire. He bought 30,952 shares at 79/16 for a total of $234,074.50.

The rest, as they say, is history.

The Big Bang Occurs Here



1962 Year-End Statement for Buffett Partnership

Arrow indicates the moment of the Big Bang.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Big Bang



51





TIME CAPSULE


NOTHING TRAVELS FASTER THAN LIGHT

Nothing travels faster than light, but Berkshire’s progress has been close.

To glimpse a snapshot from 1970, take a look at information provided by a Standard & Poor’s sheet about Berkshire—before Watergate and Woodward and Bernstein and long before the blogosphere:

Position: The company produces fine cotton materials and has increased its emphasis on synthetic blends and finished fabrics and, through acquisitions in 1967 writes insurance with major emphasis on automobile lines. Subsequent diversification moves include the purchase of a group of newspapers and an Illinois bank.



Berkshire Hathaway produces fine cotton fabrics, including organdies, handkerchief cloth, shirtings, and sateens; box loom fabrics; and rayon, nylon, dacron, and other synthetic fabrics. Diversification into insurance underwriting was accomplished in 1967 through the acquisition of National Indemnity and National Fire & Marine Insurance of Omaha. In early 1969, Sun Newspapers and Blacker Printing were purchased; and Illinois National Bank & Trust Company of Rockford, Illinois, was acquired.



Because of industry-wide overproduction, the company phased out production of cotton staple grey goods in 1969. At the same time, it was substantially increasing output of synthetic blend fabrics in which it had, or could develop, a semiproprietary interest. Also, new marketing programs were developed, including that of the Home Fabrics division, which sells finished fabrics for home sewing.



National Indemnity and National Fire & Marine derive over 80% of their premium volume from automobile lines of insurance.



Sun Newspapers publishes five weekly newspapers in the Omaha, Nebraska area, with paid circulation of about 50,000. A related printing business is conducted by Blacker Printing Company.



As of December 31, 1969, Illinois National Bank had total deposits of $99,554,818, up from $99,085,440 a year earlier.



As of January 3, 1970, the company’s portfolio consisted of U.S. Treasury bills carried at a cost of $294,165, with a market value of $297,120. As of December 28, 1968, the portfolio consisted primarily of marketable common stocks carried at a cost of $5,421,384 and having a market value at that time of $11,824,000.



Earnings-Dividend Forecast



Yr. End. Dec. 31 Net Sales Per Earns Share Divs Data Range ($)



1970 ... ... ... 45 32



1969 40.43 4.32 Nil 42 31



1968 46.00 3.41 Nil 37 20 1/2



1967 39.06 1.02 0.10 20 3/4 16



1966 49.37 2.71 Nil 27 17



1965 49.30 2.24 Nil 21 5/8 13 1/8



1964 49.98 0.15 Nil 13 1/2 8 7/8



1963 50.59 0.43 Nil 10 1/2 6 1/4



1962 53.26 1.34 0.10 9 3/8 6



Recent Developments: Net sales from textile operations for the 52 weeks ended January 3, 1970, declined 12% from those for 1968 (52 weeks). Margins widened on cost-reduction efforts, and the decline in operating income was pared to 6.6%. Lower other income and substantially increased interest charges more than offset reduced depreciation, and pretax income dropped 43%. After taxes at 40.7%, versus 45.7%, and the equity in the after-tax earnings and investment gains or losses of unconsolidated subsidiaries, net income was up 27%. For the six months ended July 4, 1970, sales fell some 41%, year to year, but net income advanced 2.7%. Earnings on fewer shares outstanding were $1.89 a share, up from $1.81. Results were before nonrecurring credits of $0.14 and $4.08 a share, respectively.



Stock Data: The company was formed in 1889 as Berkshire Cotton Manufacturing; the present title was adopted in 1955 on merger with Hathaway Manufacturing, also founded in 1889. In 1947, authorized common was raised to 3,000,000 shares for a three-for-one split. In 1952, par value of the common was changed from no par to $5. In the 1955 merger, four common shares were issued for each of the 100,000 Hathaway shares outstanding.



Authorized stock was reduced to 2,312,816 shares in December 1962, when 687,184 treasury shares were canceled and retired; and to 1,843,214 in December 1964, when 469,602 shares were repurchased during the year, mainly under tenders at $11.37-1/2, were canceled and retired. Another 120,231 shares were repurchased in 1965, and authorized stock was cut to 1,722,983 shares. W. E. Buffett owns 70% of the stock.



Finances: On September 24, 1969, the company reported that it had signed a three-year term loan agreement with four banks for $7.5 million. Proceeds would refinance short-term debt, which, along with liquidation of its securities portfolio was used to purchase the stock of Illinois National Bank & Trust Co.



On January 3, 1970, the combined adjusted investment in unconsolidated insurance subsidiaries was $15,314,965, and the investment in the unconsolidated bank subsidiary was $18,868,404.



Dividend Data: No dividend action has been taken since the resumption of cash payments on January 3, 1967, following omission after 1961–62. Previously, distributions had been made from 1929 in all years except 1931–36, 1938–40 and 1957–58.



Capitalization: Long Term Debt: $5,891,300.



Common Stock: 979,582 shs. ($5 par)



[Not very interesting, but true.]

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Time Capsule



52





BERKSHIRE SOLD


Berkshire Hathaway was sold in February 2000. That’s right, the original complex of buildings in New Bedford, Massachusetts, was finally sold years after the sale of the textile machinery in 1985. In its final years, the old complex served as home to several dozen tenants. Niche Corp., a leather goods manufacturer, became one of the complex’s major tenants in 1999. Berkshire sold its large, historic South End complex to Niche Corp., according to Berkshire’s William Betts, the former chief operating officer of Berkshire Hathaway Realty Corp. (New Bedford Standard-Times, February 6, 2000).

The price wasn’t disclosed, but it wasn’t much. Betts said, “What Niche paid is what it cost us to close the deal.” That was fine with Berkshire which for a long time had sought to get the 112-year-old buildings off its books.

The actual headquarters at 97 Cove Street in New Bedford was listed on eBay in 2006 for $1.2 million.

New England Demolition and Salvage came to the old Berkshire mill location in 2007.

For Betts (in recent years the caretaker of the complex before he died in early 2007), the sale was the final chapter on the life of a textile company that began in 1888. It was purchased by Buffett in 1965. As imports and cheap labor in the South made the mills less profitable, the machinery was sold, about 400 employees were laid off, and the mill closed in 1985 after circling the drain for years. At peak production in the 1960s, the Berkshire textile mill employed 2,200 workers.

Berkshire was stuck with either paying for the demolion of the complex or selling it off. In the end, it was glad to find a buyer.

Winston Churchill once said, “Success is going from failure to failure without loss of enthusiasm.” Buffett continued on with the same enthusiasm to other failures and successes, but mostly successes, saying, “You don’t have to make it back the same way you lose it.”

HOW FAR WILL BERKSHIRE GO?

Buffett showed up at Borsheims after the Berkshire 1989 Annual Meeting where he attracted a small band of shareholders. He went through his often-repeated litany about how Berkshire’s increasing size was forging its own anchor on growth, but added as Berkshire continues to grow, the pace of growth is bound to slow.

Then Buffett said, with a twinkle in his eye, “Well, it will be fun to see how far we can take it.”

Soon thereafter, Berkshire’s stock price took one of its biggest leaps ever, moving in a few months from $5,900 a share to more than $8,000 a share. Over the years, Berkshire’s 22% average annual return on book value and nearly 30% average annual advance in stock price have put it near the top of the investment charts.

Berkshire, like any other stock, takes its lickings; but, unlike some, it keeps on ticking. As with Virgil, so goes Berkshire: “Through chances various, through all vicissitudes, we make our way.”

Can Berkshire keep such a pace? Buffett is the first to say Berkshire can’t maintain its growth rate. Since the 1960s, Buffett has been saying that size is its own drag. In 1963 he wrote, “A considerably more moderate annual edge over the Dow will be satisfactory.” In 1964, he said, “I believe our margin over the Dow cannot be maintained.”

After all, should Berkshire keep up its annual 30% pace in stock price rise, the per-share price would be in the hundreds of millions of dollars over the next 35 years. Berkshire’s stock market worth would be hundreds of trillions of dollars—many times larger than today’s U.S. gross national product (GNP). Berkshire would own the planet.

In 1996, Newsweek’s Wall Street editor Allan Sloan showed his skepticism about that possibility:

Anyone who buys Berkshire at today’s price expecting the next 31 years to match the past 31 is betting on a miracle. Buffett is still brilliant; it’s a question of math. Berkshire’s stock is valued at more than $40 billion in the market, up from around $18 million when Buffett took control on May 10, 1965. To match that rate of increase, Berkshire’s stock … would have to be worth $75 trillion by the fall of 2027. That’s trillion, with a ‘T’. Some 10 times the current GNP of the U.S. Ain’t gonna happen.



At the 1995 Annual Meeting, Buffett put it this way: If Berkshire could grow at 23% of its book value annually, “it could gobble up the GDP. We think about it occasionally, but it won’t happen.”

Buffett doesn’t care to own some parts of the world; but he clearly has set out to own some of the best parts, and he may see Berkshire having some role in the world. However, many investors simply do not believe the stock can go higher.

In my early days as a stockbroker, I tried to sell a share of Berkshire to a potential buyer. After much back and forth, I received this note from him: “When I get some mad money, I’d like to buy a share or two. It’s hard to justify $12,000 for a share that pays no dividend. How high can it go? We will do some business together.” I never heard from him again.

Berkshire does not have a company logo (unless you count the fistful of dollars insignia on some items Berkshire sells), however, it may have a secret symbol. Buffett wrote to shareholders on September 13, 1991, explaining that year’s shareholder designated contribution plan. if one were to hold this letter to a light, a large circle surrounding the letters BH would be revealed. Hmmm....

Berkshire actually has no secret symbol. Still, it’s curious.

“I don’t think it means anything,” says one skeptical Berkshire shareholder. “It’d be unlike him to go to the expense.”

Is Buffett having some fun? Is he trying to tell us something about where Berkshire is going? In a circle? From zero to zero in stock price? Wait. Maybe that’s it. Zero to zero. Circle to circle. YES. The symbol for infinity!

Skipping the occult, the facts about how far Berkshire has come in terms of its stock price speak volumes: from $12 in 1965, rising Phoenix-like to $80,000 in 1998; then sinking much of 1999 and early 2000, but recovering to $75,600 by the end of 2001; then slipping to $72,750 by the end of 2002, but recovering to $84,250 by the end of 2003. And it rose to $88,620 at the end of 2005.

On October 5, 2006, the stock pierced $100,000. After three wild years, with a high near $150,000 and low descending to about $70,000 along with the 2008 crash, it again pierced $100,000 on December 18, 2009, and has largely stayed in this upper eschelon since then.

ARSON

Arson was suspected as the cause of a fire that destroyed one of the old Berkshire buildings on January 3, 2012. The office and color proofing building of the King Phillip Mills building, formerly a Berkshire mill site, on Kilburn Street in Fall River, was burned down, according to The Herald News (January 3, 2012).

Original Berkshire

Original imperial headquarters of Berkshire in New Bedford is shown in this photo.



The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Andrew Kilpatrick)

Berkshire’s Big Ben

Here’s the old Berkshire textile mill, with its clock tower, today in New Bedford’s South End.

Betts on Berkshire

Bill Betts, who went to work for Berkshire in 1966, stands in front of the original Berkshire textile mill complex in New Bedford, Massachusetts.



Of Permanent Value Berkshire Sold



(Photo by Mark Terrell)

The Original Berkshire

These photos show the old Berkshire Hathaway buildings that are now used for commercial space.



(Photo by Andrew Kilpatrick)



(Photo by

Andrew Kilpatrick)



Berkshire’s Old Textile Mill Site

Berkshire’s old textile mill complex, which was sold in 2000, can be seen from this aerial photo. Berkshire’s textile mill operations took place in the long, large buildings at the lower right in the picture.

Berkshire Sold The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Berkshire Sold



53





THE BIZARRO SIX-FIGURE STOCK PRICE


A share of Berkshire (Class A) will not buy a mansion, but it might make a down payment on one. Heck, it might make a down payment on a castle!

Through the years, Berkshire’s stock price has been a topic of much discussion and the provider of innumerable surprises and quandaries. The stock hit four digits in 1983. In late 1992, it made the jump from four to five digits. In 2006, it hit six digits and, after recovery from the 2008–2009 demise, has seemed to settle comfortably into that six-digit range. Recalling some of the surprises and quandaries caused by this climb, which at times has been volatile, can be entertaining.

In the mid-1990s, a woman called her broker and said she had $2,500 in her checking account and would like to buy a share of Berkshire. “Honey, you’re missing a zero,” the broker replied.

Another time at a party, a stockbroker asked a Berkshire shareholder the price of Berkshire. The reply was “33.” The broker leaned over to his wife and exclaimed, “He means 3,300!” Yet another zero was omitted.

When Berkshire stock price begins to move, it often does it in a big way, both up and down. When it hit six-digits in 2006, it began a Mount McKinley climb with nothing much but sunshine for that whole year, as it peaked at $114,500 per A share. A few years prior to that, it had dipped more than $10,000 in the first month-and-a-half of 2003, causing one shareholder to say, “It’s been like 45 days of rain.” Imagine that same shareholder’s response to the $79K price drop that characterized the last quarter of 2008 and first of 2009! Neither monsoon nor blizzard could describe that [XX%] drop. But for the long term, Berkshire’s stock price has managed a sunny, generally uphill climb that has kept it out of sight relative to stock prices of other beautiful businesses.

“I never bought Berkshire because I always thought it was too high,” said the late Ed Conine, who headed J Braggs, a women’s clothing chain in Omaha. Surprisingly, Conine actually knew Buffett and was familiar with his record.

One man, sporting a Harvard MBA and holding one of the top jobs at one of the largest securities firms on Wall Street, was well aware of Berkshire and had met Buffett. This man said, “I just couldn’t buy the stock because of the price… . I realize it’s what’s behind the price, but I just can’t think in terms other than round lots.” The man said he looked at the stock once, and it was $1,000 a share. Is it time for a second look?

A number of stockbrokers have said, “I couldn’t recommend it.”

Many reasons have been offered by investors for not buying Berkshire, even before it hit six digits:

It’s too rich for my blood.



That’s the one that doesn’t pay a dividend.



That’s the one where he doesn’t split the stock.



It doesn’t make any sense to me.



That’s the craziest thing I’ve ever heard of.



I plan to wait and buy it the day he dies. (Now, that one’s really crazy!)



On the New York Stock Exchange list, a few stock prices are noted to be in the one-full-digit range; many, in the two-digit range, say, $30 to $40 per share; several these days have climbed to the three-digit range; even a few, to the four-digit range; then in the midst of the Bs, a six-digit stock price jumps out: Berkshire Hathaway, Class A (BRK.A).

Maria Anagnos, in her thesis, reported an anecdote related to Berkshire’s unusual stock price: “When Berkshire Hathaway’s stock was first to be listed in The Wall Street Journal, Buffett received a call and was asked if there were any plans for a stock split in the near future, and if such plans did exist would he please let the WSJ know now. Apparently in order to list the stock, the OTC section of the paper had to be reprogrammed to handle the four-digit numeric value of the shares. Buffett promised that no stock split would occur and advised The Wall Street Journal to go ahead and reprogram the columns. Still concerned, the Journal programmer told Buffett that Berkshire’s stock was growing too fast, and he planned to reprogram the section for five digits, just in case.”

The price itself has left many an investor and stockbroker aghast. “What the hell is that?” and “There’s some mistake” are refrains from many brokers over the years after getting the Wall Street inquiry of “How’s Berkshire?”

The reply quite possibly could be, “There’s something wrong with my machine.”

Rich Rockwood, one Berkshire shareholder, shared his unhappy story: “When I went to work at a major (?) brokerage firm as an intern, I was asked to conduct research for two weeks and to recommend a stock purchase to my boss when finished. I conducted my research and recommended BRK.B. My broker told me that Berkshire was a horrible company with an inflated value due to Warren Buffett. He further added he didn’t trust Mr. Buffett and related him to Al Dunlap. So he decided to position himself (and his clients) in a steel stock, LTV Corp. at approximately 12. Then he made a bet with me that LTV would outperform BRK.B. BRK.B went up approximately 20% and LTV went down 55%. I won the bet but lost a job because he wasn’t getting any new orders coming in.”

No other stock is like Berkshire. Many brokers just don’t know the stock. Most brokerage firms don’t follow the stock, have no opinion about it; and thus, its brokers can’t solicit orders for Berkshire unless they convince their firms they have researched it. It would not be unusual for a broker to hear: “ERROR-BRK. INVALID INPUT—NO REPORT” from his quote machine regarding Berkshire.

Commissions on the stock are unusually low and trying to convince someone to buy a stock trading in five or six digits isn’t worth the trouble for most brokers.

Berkshire is the highest-priced and one of the least-traded issues on the New York Stock Exchange. Because of its high price, a few shares make a big trade. A quirk in brokerage commission schedules, which usually doesn’t go above $100 a share and involves the combination of the price and number of shares, creates only a tiny commission on trades of Berkshire stock.

At some discount brokerages, one can buy 100 shares of Berkshire for a $38.50 commission or even half that. Trades of that dollar volume for lower-priced shares of another stock would be in the hundreds of dollars, thousands at a full-service brokerage. Trades for one to 100 or more shares of Berkshire at full-service firms carry a commission of about $100.

“He [Buffett] likes to point out that any broker who recommended buying and holding Berkshire Hathaway stock from 1965 to now would have made his clients fabulously wealthy. A single share of Berkshire Hathaway purchased for $12 in 1965 would be worth $71,000 as of April 2002. But any broker who did so would have starved to death. While working in the early 1950s for his father’s brokerage firm in Omaha, Nebraska, Buffett says he learned that ‘the broker is not your friend. He’s more like a doctor who charges patients on how often they change medicines. And he gets paid far more for the stuff the house is promoting than the stuff that will make you better’” (Arthur Levitt, Take on the Street, pp 17–18).

Tim Callahan, a stockbroker in Birmingham, Alabama, says, “Berkshire is mutual fund-like, and (because of its low commission structure) it’s basically no load [no fees].” In fact, Berkshire is really a no-load fund with low expenses.

Once investors are in Berkshire, most don’t sell; therefore, a broker is less likely to enjoy a round trip on commissions. Berkshire stock just does not fit into the scheme of things for stockbrokers.

“I began buying Berkshire in the early 1980s; I bought from 1981 until 1987,” said Chad Brenner, a lawyer in Cleveland, Ohio, who said Buffett’s insistence on quality management and long-term outlook appealed to him. “I’m not a smart seller. I’ve never sold any shares.… My kids will inherit my stock, and I’m 37.”

Buffett said in 1984 that more than 90% of Berkshire shares were held by the same people who were shareholders five years before that and that 95% of the shares were held by investors for whom the next largest investment was less than half the size of their Berkshire holdings. Thus, Berkshire has a loyal group of shareholders with a big percentage of their net worth riding on Berkshire’s fortunes.

The float is so thin and shares are traded so infrequently that one can stand with Jim MaGuire at his post on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange where Berkshire and more than 80 other companies trade and find an hour or two may pass between Berkshire trades. Years ago, that interval might have been an entire day.

Buffett once recalled that on the day Berkshire was listed on the New York Stock Exchange in 1988, he told MaGuire: “I will consider you an enormous success if the next trade in this stock is about two years from now.” Buffett joked that MaGuire wasn’t too enthusiastic about his comment (Lawrence A. Cunningham, The Essays of Warren Buffett: Lessons for Corporate America, Cardozo Law Review, pp. 17–18).

On July 25 and 26, 1991, no Berkshire trades took place. The streak was broken the following day when 10 shares changed hands, giving new meaning to the Wall Street term “trades by appointment.” Buffett likes that.

“Our goal is to attract long-term owners who, at the time of purchase, have no timetable or price target for sale but plan instead to stay with us indefinitely,” Buffett wrote in the 1988 letter to Berkshire shareholders.

Brokers and journalists often are embarrassed by their lack of knowledge about Berkshire’s high stock price.

One day in 1989 when Berkshire was up $100 to $8,550, an office worker at one brokerage firm said, “Something’s wrong here. I need to get you a broker. … Boy, I was about to blow my mind!”

Frequently, the first digit of the stock price gets left off and any number purporting to be the actual price can be suspect. For example, the Associated Press on November 18, 1989, listed the price-earnings ratio as 11,100. Ouch! On September 2, 1990, the P/E, actually about 17, was listed still higher at 11,636. That was nothing compared to the listing March 22, 1991, which carried the P/E (which actually is the percentage of investors wetting their pants when the market crashes) at 112,857, hardly in range for value investors.

The high P/E business never seems to get fixed. On July 1, 1991, the P/E was listed as 248,525; and on July 14, 1991, Barron’s carried the P/E as 258,625!

The price of Berkshire shares is so high, many newspapers have trouble squeezing the full price into their listings. In December 1989, at the Associated Press, a computer program that processes stock prices had to be modified when it was discovered the share price exceeded the program’s previous per-share ceiling of $8,192. The P/E of the A share has been 649 the same day it’s been 11 for the B share, so you can’t always trust the computer P/E number.

In September 1990, when the early trading volume was 10 shares, Berkshire was listed as trading 6,000 shares. It would be a rare day indeed if Berkshire were to trade 6,000 shares because the stock has a very low turnover rate of about 4% a year. It trades on average about 250 shares a day.

A Berkshire stock quote one morning in 1995 on the Bloomberg wire read: “37,000 + 15,000”! One day in 1998, the Class B shares were listed at 254, down 2294.

All the volatility reminds one of a Barron’s cartoon (February 5, 1990): “The stock market rocketed up a big four-thousand points today, and then zoomed back down a hefty fifty-six hundred points, before rebounding in the final two minutes of trading to close up one-point-three-two points.”

The Journal also said Berkshire’s 1993 operating earnings were $413,000 a share when they were actually $413 a share.

The numbers are so outsized at Berkshire, wire services sometimes make corrections like: “Berkshire’s assets 172.9 billion, not million.”

One time during a nasty spill in the market, Berkshire shareholder George Eyraud of Birmingham, Alabama, called a broker for a quote and was told that Berkshire was down $700, trading at $200 a share. Eyraud’s next stop, he figured, would be debtor’s prison.

“I went and got a bowl of soup and tried to pull myself together, but I couldn’t eat anything,” he said hoping that once again the quotes were awry, which they were.

Another time he called a discount brokerage in Birmingham and asked to transfer $3,000 to his bank account.

“Sir, you only have $2,400 and you owe us $45,000. You’ll be getting a big bill from us,” the person at the other end of the line said.



“How can that be when I have 32 shares of Berkshire in the account?” he asked.



“Well, your Berkshire stock is selling at $77.50,” the broker replied.



“Ma’am, that stock is selling for seven thousand seven hundred and fifty dollars,” Eyraud said.



Once Eyraud, who calls Buffett the Bear Bryant of investing, proposed Berkshire to a stockbroker. Her reply was “$8,000! I could get a full-length mink coat for that. You’ve got to get your priorities straight.”

Eyraud recalled another time he suggested Berkshire as a good investment:

“I would never invest in that,” the client replied.



“Why not?” Eyraud asked.



“Well, it’s just the principle.”



“What principle is that?” inquired Eyraud.



“Well, it’s just too high,” the fellow explained.



Once a young stockbroker, seeing Berkshire’s high stock price for the first time said, “Boy, am I going to short [a bet on a downdraft of the price] that thing!”

Investors entering the land of Berkshire simply cannot get over the stock price. Once Berkshire shareholder Joanne Englebert of Birmingham, Alabama, suggested to a friend, Dr. Martha Wingfield of Chapel Hill, North Carolina, that she buy a share of Berkshire, then trading at about $7,000. That way, Englebert reasoned, she too could go to the Berkshire annual meeting in Omaha.

“I think $7,000 is a little much for a weekend in Omaha, don’t you?” Wingfield replied.

One shareholder tells of a time he called a stockbroker and asked him to punch up a Berkshire quote. The broker, named Irv, took a hard look at the four-digit figure, then suddenly began apologizing, saying he couldn’t read his screen. “I recently had an eye operation,” Irv explained.

On June 7, 2004, some quote services showed that on a volume of 10 shares, the price had dropped 89%.

“ALL THE GRAVY’S BEEN TAKEN OUT OF THAT THING”

The price has thrown off investors, even experienced ones. One lifelong lawyer/investor, took a look at a Berkshire report in 1988 after hearing about the stock price and pronounced: “All the gravy’s been taken out of that thing.” The price was then $4,200. Years later that same person bought a share for $16,000.

In Wyomissing, Pennsylvania, money manager Tom Weik recalled that in 1985 a young accountant came to him (when Weik was a stockbroker in Reading, Pennsylvania) with $2,500 just as Berkshire was trading at about that price. “It took me several days to convince him to invest it all in one share, but we bought the one share,” Weik said.

Weik, who has written articles about Berkshire for local publications since the stock traded at $200 a share back in the 1970s, showed up at the Rotary Club soon after the purchase. He was accosted by a fellow who had read one of his columns about Berkshire and said, “God, I sure wouldn’t buy something at that price.”

“I looked around and saw the accountant I had sold the share of Berkshire to standing next to him,” Weik said. “I did not blanch because I was that confident about Berkshire, but the accountant looked like he might have difficulty digesting his dinner.”

A similar incident occurred in 1988 when Berkshire was trading at about $4,800. “But who would buy it now?” a woman asked Weik. He replied, “Well, I just bought it for your retirement plan.”

Berkshire has its slow periods and its down periods. Occasionally long-time shareholders who know better wind up selling. Charles Akre, managing partner of Braddock Capital Partners in Arlington, Virginia, wrote the following to his partners on September 20, 1995:

Back in 1977, when I was a young retail broker, I came across Berkshire Hathaway in the course of my research and I bought one share for $120. Over the next four years I accumulated a total of 40 shares, buying them a few at a time. Also during the late 1970s I tried my hand at real estate development. By 1981 I was in the midst of a “condo conversion” project which, owing to the 21% prime rate level, needed to have the construction loan refinanced. The lenders were aware, of course, that I had some liquidity away from the project, and the rest is history; I sold 39 shares for $500 per share. The single original share I still have sells today at an astounding 241 times the purchase price.



Akre corrected his mistake when he loaded up on Berkshire and International Speedway shares in Braddock Capital Partners.

An investor taking a first look at Berkshire usually is floored by the price and then put off again because it pays no dividend. The price is high, of course, because the underlying value is high. But another reason is because Buffett has never split the class A stock, reasoning that such actions are cosmetic, involve paperwork, and attract the kind of investor interested in meaningless stock splits rather than those concerned about what the company is really worth. Buffett wants investors, not speculators.

Although it’s fun when dividends arrive, dividends are after-tax money from the corporation, which is taxed again when an individual pays taxes. Dividends may look good and they definitely feel good, but Buffett’s not about looking or feeling good. It makes more sense—and that is what Buffett is about—not to have dividends, particularly if Buffett is your money manager and is reinvesting wisely.

With Berkshire, the investor is leaving his share of the retained earnings within the company for Buffett to reinvest which he has compounded at an average of 20.2% a year. Would anyone prefer, say, a 3% or so paid-out dividend that would be taxed?

Investor John Slater of New York says he first bought a share of Berkshire at $425. “I had sent away for the annual report, and I thought that was a good price for a lifetime subscription to the annual report.”

About the same time, he gave a share of Berkshire to Gil Gunn, the newborn son of his friend, Gilman Gunn.

“By the time his second child came along, Berkshire was at $1,000; and I said that it was too much for me, that he ought to buy a share for the second child.” Gunn, a widely recognized international investor, never did; although, he later became a Berkshire shareholder himself.

In the mid-1990s, the following conversation about Berkshire’s stock price took place between a stockbroker and his sales assistant.

Stockbroker: “How about calling up a quote on BRK.” [Now BRK.A]

Sales assistant: “It’s trading at $15.”

Stockbroker: “Are you sure?”

Sales assistant: “Well, there are some extra zeros.”

Stockbroker: “Check again. Isn’t it $15,000 a share?”

Sales assistant: “No, there’s no stock that trades at $15,000.”

At that time, a customer calling Merrill Lynch for a quote was given a quote and a query: “Could that be right?”

A fellow called in early 1998 and asked if Berkshire’s price was about $36,000. He was given a quote of more than $50,000. About three seconds later the phone went dead.

After Berkshire soared in early 1998, the stock price hit a pinnacle for the year on June 22. It opened at $83,000, had an intraday high of $84,000, and closed at $77,500, with 2,000 shares changing hands. It would be 5½ years before Berkshire’s stock got comfortable with and settled into a price above $80,000. It closed 2003 at $84,250 and soared to $90,000 less than a month later.

Of course, most Berkshire shareholders eagerly awaited Berkshire breaking the $100,000 mark.

In the spring of 2004, anticipating Berkshire’s hitting the $100,000 mark, the New York Stock Exchange got an SEC ruling to let Berkshire trade in dimes rather than pennies to avoid having to add a digit to its computer program (Newsweek, April 26, 2004). Associated Press market-tables editor Marty Rosen was quoted in the story as saying newspapers were preparing to squeeze six-digit Berkshire figures into the same space in which the five-digit quotes appeared.

On October 5, 2006, when Berkshire did hit $100,000 a share, the computers swung into action and flashed six digits.

Closing 2007 at $141,600, the stock price went bipolar. In 2008, it dropped to around $116,000 in August; skyrocketed to $147,000 in September; and plummeted to $93,400 by the end of the year.

After continuing its dip to as low as $77,000 in February 2009, Berkshire’s stock price began to wiggle its way back up, and it spent near all of 2010 and 2011 in the six-digit arena again.

A seven-digit stock price for Berkshire, it appears, may be quite a while away.



A Lot of Bull (Consider 2008)

An unusual amount of bull is seen (or heard) on Wall Street near

the New York Stock Exchange.

(Photo by Beverly Marquis)

The Story of Warren Buffett



(With permission of Historic Images)

Early Wall Street

This is “The Financial Center of the World” at Broad and Wall streets in New York photographed in the early 1900s by E. J. Meeker.



The Wall Street Journal Headquarters Sign

Headquarters of The Wall Street Journal in New York City is marked by this structure.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value The Bizarro Six-Figure Stock Price

The Bizarro Six-Figure Stock Price The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Bizarro Six-Figure Stock Price

The Bizarro Six-Figure Stock Price The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Bizarro Six-Figure Stock Price



54





AMERICAN EXPRESS


One of Warren Buffett’s great decisions of the early 1960s was to make a big investment in American Express.

The company, an offshoot of Wells Fargo, had come to prominence with the introduction of its credit card in 1958.

A lesser known [and less profitable] division of American Express was its field warehousing. Late in 1963, the so-called Anthony De Angelis Great Salad-Oil Scandal occurred when this American Express subsidiary mistakenly issued warehouse receipts for salad oil fraudulently certified to exist in storage tanks in Bayonne, New Jersey. It turned out the tanks were mostly water-filled with only a thin layer of salad oil on top as a disguise.

White-collar crook De Angelis came up with the scam to fake the salad oil holding, then borrow money, then bet on vegetable oil futures. But in the end, he lost. American Express had been storing the containers and issuing receipts which could be traded as financial instruments. American Express had been defrauded but, at great cost, made sure no innocent third party suffered a loss. American Express found itself possibly liable for hundreds of millions of dollars.

A crisis brewed, had the potential to wipe out shareholder equity and leave the company with negative net worth. Buffett viewed the incident as a one-time loss of a shareholders dividend but saw the company itself as remaining sound.

“A great investment opportunity occurs when a marvelous business encounters a one-time huge, but solvable problem,” Buffett says. The ultimate advocate of franchises, Buffett liked the American Express charge card and traveler’s check businesses; and he concluded their strengths were unassailable and powerful enough to carry the company through troubled times. Buffett already understood the principle of benefiting from “other people’s money.” He knew American Express was a good business because of the huge cash “float” generated by American Express traveler’s checks.

Buffett knew the float, like a low-cost loan, was valuable; so he went about making sure the underlying business was not hurt by the cloud overhanging American Express. In Ross’s Steakhouse in Omaha—one of his favorite haunts—as well as in other establishments, Buffett stood behind the cashier and peeked into the cash register to see if people were still using American Express cards and checks. He found that merchants were still accepting the cards.

Berkshire owned about 13% in 2011.

Because the cards were still being honored and the American Express empire remained intact, Buffett bought the battered stock. In 1964, so convinced of the merits of the investment, Buffett got partners to agree to change the partnership rules so that he could invest 40% of the net worth of the Buffett Partnership, or roughly $13-million. Buffett bought 5% of American Express stock, which had collapsed from $65 to $35 a share.

He wrote a new personal business rule: Buy great companies when they temporarily stumble.

In the next two years, American Express stock tripled; and the Buffett Partnership reportedly sold out with a $20-million profit. Apparently his partnership made even more because Buffett told the Omaha World-Herald (August 2, 1991) he held the stock for four years; although, published reports indicated he sold out after two years. Buffett had invested in a prize. Over a five-year period the stock quintupled from $35 to $189.

Buffett’s investment lesson: When a great company falters, take a look, then have your wallet handy.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Rejected for Limit: Too Many “Shoegasms”

This is the book widow’s credit card. For years she’s been in retail therapy. On this issue, she gets an F in Wife.

PATRICIA KILPATRICK

Of Permanent Value American Express



55





GRINNELL COLLEGE


In 1968, not many years after the American Express investment, Buffett became a trustee of Grinnell College in Grinnell, Iowa. At the time, the school’s liquid endowment was about $12 million. Buffett was ready with some good investment advice. Rule No. 1: Act fast. Rule No. 2: If someone else owns what you want, then buy a piece of their company.

Buffett’s connection with Grinnell College, which celebrated its 150th anniversary in 1996, developed through his friendship with Joseph F. Rosenfield of Des Moines. Rosenfield is a lawyer, investor, retired chairman of Younkers Brothers, and a member of Grinnell’s investment committee. He recalled that he got to know Buffett through some mutual friends in Des Moines.

Another story has it that Buffett met Rosenfield and bonded with him after a speech the Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr., gave at Grinnell in 1967. Regardless of how and where they met, the two developed a close relationship. Buffett has been quoted as saying, “If after my dad’s death I could have adopted Joe as my father, I would have” (Money, June 2000).

It was through the urging of Rosenfield that Buffett joined the Grinnell board, and it was Rosenfield that recruited Buffett to Grinnell’s endowment fund committee in 1968.

In 1967, in obvious respect for Buffett’s business mind, Rosenfield, through his role on Grinnell’s investment committee, suggested the endowment fund buy 300 shares of Berkshire at $17.50. That $5,250 investment would now be worth millions.

“We bought 300 shares, and we sold 100 shares of it at $5,500,” Rosenfield said. “We have since bought back more shares, but I can’t disclose how much. Of course, we bought them back at higher prices.”

From 1968 until his death in 2000, Rosenfield turned $11 million into $1 billion—an average annual return of about 15%. Most of that money was made for Grinnell College (Money, June 2000). By 1999, Grinnell, with 1,300 students and its 108-acre campus, had the largest endowment ($1.02 billion) of any private liberal arts college in the U.S. Its endowment per student at that time was $762,000. Grinnell now has 1,600 students representing all 50 states and 55 countries. SAT scores run remarkably high, averaging 1,350. Rosenfield himself graduated from Grinnell College in 1925, one year ahead of actor Gary Cooper. Jazz great Herbie Hancock also went to Grinnell.

Rosenfield was involved with other endeavors as well. He owned 3% of the Chicago Cubs and vowed to stay alive until the Cubs won another World Series. According to that vow, his death on June 7, 2000, at age 96 was premature.

A 1928 graduate of the University of Iowa College of Law, Rosenfield left an estate gift of $900,000 to the Iowa Law School Foundation to set up the Joseph F. Rosenfield Collegiate Advancement Fund for the College of Law.

Buffett’s input at Grinnell proved Rosenfield’s confidence in him to be well placed.

Buffett, while attending a 1976 conference in New Orleans about the economics of newspapers, discovered that AVCO Corp. had decided to sell its television stations. Under Federal Communication Commission (FCC) rules, Buffett couldn’t buy the stations for Berkshire because of the number of television holdings already held by The Washington Post Co., so he proposed to Rosenfield that Grinnell College try to buy one of the stations. Buffett called Rosenfield, and made his suggestion. “It was his idea,” Rosenfield said.

Buffett’s first choice was to buy a television station in Cincinnati, but the Grinnell board spent so much time discussing the financing that Multimedia, bought the station for $16 million. Under Buffett’s guidance, Grinnell did end up buying $315,000 of Multimedia stock. The stock soared.

Buffett’s second investment choice for the college was AVCO’s television station WDTN in Dayton. Without waiting for financing, he bid $12.9 million, two-and-a-half times the station’s sales. He got it for Grinnell in the late 1970s. In late 1984, Grinnell sold the station to Hearst Corp. for $49 million. The transaction doubled Grinnell’s endowment, which rose to about $120 million in 1984. “It turned out very well,” Rosenfield said.

If Buffett had some financial advice for Grinnell’s board, he usually just called Rosenfield. “I see him every so often. He’s still on the Grinnell board. He came to the board meetings for a while but then stopped,” Rosenfield said. “He really doesn’t like meetings. Long-winded meetings are not his forte.” Grinnell’s trustees have done very well with another Buffett connection, Bill Ruane’s Sequoia Fund. From 1978 through 1981, Rosenfield put $10 million, or a third of Grinnell’s endowment, in the Sequoia Fund (Money, June 2000).

Grinnell is Sequoia’s largest shareholder, with about 14% of its stock, in turn, has about 29% of its money in Berkshire.

The trustees could consider a name change to Grinnell College and Bank.

Another interesting Grinnell investment was described by Buffett during the Berkshire 1997 Annual Meeting:

Bob Noyce, one of the two primary founders of Intel, grew up in Grinnell, Iowa. I think he was the son of a minister in Grinnell, went to Grinnell College, and was Chairman of the Board of Trustees at Grinnell when I went on their board back in the late 1960s. And when Noyce left Fairchild to form Intel with Gordon Moore, Grinnell bought 10% of the private placement that … was actually the initial funding for Intel. [Inside Intel]



So we did buy 10% of the original issue [for Grinnell]. But the genius who ran Grinnell’s investment committee managed to sell those shares a few years later—although I won’t give you his name. And there’s no prize for anybody who calculates the value of those shares today.



Buffett was made a life trustee of Grinnell College in 1968. He is also a life trustee of the Urban Institute; trustee of the Wellness Council of the Midlands, Omaha, Nebraska; and a member of the American Academy of Arts and Science.



Go Long on Grinnell

Actor John Davidson, made up as Teddy Roosevelt, poses with Joe Rosenfield at Rosenfield’s home in Des Moines, October 23, 1998.

(Photo courtesy of the Des Moines Register

and Tribune Company/Doug Wells)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Grinnell College



56





TERROR IN AMERICA


When the terrorist attacked the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on September 11, 2001, Buffett was “watching the giant TV screen in the reading room of his Omaha home” (The Wall Street Journal, September 24, 2001).

Later in the day, he hosted his charity golf event and told his celebrity guests to either go ahead and play or feel free to watch TV. Some played a little, but nobody’s heart was in it; many simply wound up watching TV.

One event guest was Anne Tatlock, CEO of Fiduciary Trust Company International. The second plane hit the South Tower of the World Trade Center right where her 650 employees worked. Grounded at the Omaha Marriott, she worked the phones trying to learn the fate of her employees, sometimes getting good news, sometimes bad.

Buffett willingly took questions from his guests about the day’s events. He said everyone would be affected, and the American psyche would never be the same.

Buffett appeared on CBS’s 60 Minutes program September 16, the day before the markets reopened and, in a patriotic note, said he would not sell any stocks the next day and might, if prices dropped enough, buy. “And certainly if you owned a piece of an American business that you felt good about a week ago, it would be crazy, in my view, to be selling it at 9:30 tomorrow morning,” he said.

The attacks had far-reaching effects on most everyone, including Berkshire. For example, American Express offices near the World Trade Center were severely damaged.

Alice Schroeder, insurance analyst for Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, was among those affected by the attacks. Her former firm housed 3,500 employees in the World Trade Center; fortunately, most escaped. Schroeder, working in an office away from the World Trade Center, had an anguishing day, filled with hours of uncertainty and the loss of friends. Two days later, she dashed off an e-mail saying that buildings near her office had received bomb threats and apologized that the phone couldn’t be answered.

Berkshire shareholder Dr. Sam Park of Tulsa was at Boston’s Logan International Airport when the attacks occurred. His flight was canceled. He spent two days in a hotel watching TV before renting a car and driving 25 hours back to Tulsa.

THE LOSS OF HUMAN LIVES AND

THE TRAGEDY FOR BERKSHIRE

The worst Berkshire-related blow was suffered by American Express, which lost 11 employees at the World Trade Center. After nearly nine months, about 3,500 employees returned to the American Express building in May 2002, after being scattered to seven locations in three states. The company’s travel and entertainment business was crushed.

Citigroup, with which Berkshire has long had connections, lost six people in the attack. The third building to collapse on September 11 was 7 World Trade Center, home to 2,500 Citigroup employees.

Employees of Berkshire-investee Moody’s had to evacuate their headquarters at 99 Church Street in New York and operate from 17 different locations.

Several Washington Post Company employees lost family members in the World Trade Center. Fortunately, Kaplan employees there escaped.

White Mountains Insurance Group, a Berkshire investee, was affected. Offices for its largest reinsurance unit were located at One Liberty Plaza, a building which suffered damage and was in danger of collapse. All White Mountains employees were safely evacuated. They were relocated to various temporary offices while repairs were made. They were able to return to the building in early 2002.

A story in The Wall Street Journal (September 24, 2001) said the economic aftershocks of the attacks slammed Berkshire on a broad range of fronts, not even counting the huge insurance loss:

• Delivery of Canadian-made cake inserts for some Dairy Queen products were delayed because of increased security at the border.

• The Buffalo News reported a drop in advertising, particularly from travel businesses.

• Helzberg’s CEO Jeffrey Comment predicted a decrease in Christmas sales.

• Nebraska Furniture Mart, which had previously saved on direct purchases of goods by sending employees to foreign countries to do the buying, stopped the practice and more expensive orders had to be given to middlemen.

• Brown Shoe executives cut back on travel and operations.

• NetJets reported flights were off 40% after the attack. (They quickly recovered.)

• Scott Fetzer CEO Ken Semelsberger spent time sending patriotic letters to his 7,500 employees in 22 countries.

Buffett took a stand on America’s future when he made the statement: “There is nothing dumber than betting against America. It hasn’t worked since 1776.”

Regarding Berkshire’s loss due to the terrorist attacks and the resulting rise in insurance premiums, Buffett said: “People forget that, though there is an upside in terms of our competitive position, it may not compensate for the $2.2 billion we lost. It came at a huge cost” (The Wall Street Journal, October 23, 2001).

“The events of September 11 will cost us about $2.2 billion–lost in an instant,” said Buffett. “Much of it will be paid out over time, but we’ll pay about $1.5 billion next year,” Buffett said (The Augusta Chronicle, November 8, 2001).

In the third quarter 2001 report to Berkshire shareholders, Buffett revised the loss estimate and accepted personal responsibility for pricing errors:

We initially reported an estimate of $2.2 billion for our pre-tax insurance loss from the terrorist attack of September 11th. We labeled that amount a “guess” and the earnings reported above include a charge of $2.275 billion from the attack. This revised number remains a guess. Important questions of liability will likely remain unresolved for years. Consequently, neither we nor other industry participants can be reasonably precise now as to final losses. We estimate that about $1.7 billion of our loss occurred at General Re and $.575 billion at Berkshire Hathaway’s Reinsurance Group. [Berkshire reported an after-tax loss of $1.45 billion during the first nine months of 2002 due to the terrorist attack.]



A mega-catastrophe is no surprise. One will occur from time to time, and this will not be our last. We did not, however, price for manmade mega-cats, and we were foolish in not doing so. In effect, we and the rest of the industry, included coverage for terrorist acts in policies covering other risks—and received no additional premium for doing so. That was a huge mistake and one that I myself allowed.



I’m in the insurance business—an expensive place to be in the past couple of months. It was made costly for Berkshire Hathaway, the company I run, because I did something very dumb: allowed Berkshire to provide insurance coverage for a huge catastrophe loss without its getting a premium for doing so. The risk we unthinkingly assumed was a loss from terrorism.



In an article in The Washington Post (November 19, 2001), Buffett proposed a plan similar to banking’s Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. for the insurance industry:

A potential loss of almost infinite magnitude [for example, a nuclear attack]can be assumed only by an entity of almost-infinite resources. That economic species doesn’t exist in the private sector. Only the U.S. government fits the bill …



In my opinion, we would arrive at a solution for this societal problem if we were to adopt the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. as a model for where we want to head in the insurance industry. The rationale for the FDIC, formed 68 years ago, was clear-cut: The United States sorely needed to eliminate bank runs and the financial panics they caused. Prior to the FDIC, the risk from bank failures resided with depositors, who had no way to shed it. Neither they nor their banks could lay that risk off on private insurers for two reasons: First, the dollar amounts involved were simply too large; second, losses were co-related, in the sense that the failure of a few banks frequently caused a chain reaction, in which good banks toppled with bad, leaving a mountain of economic damage. Fortunately for the country, these punishing disruptions to our economy were ended by the advent of FDIC insurance.



Still, said analyst Alice Schroeder, “Insurance buyers want to buy from the most secure companies.” She continued, “Berkshire is arguably the most secure insurer on earth” (The Wall Street Journal, October 23, 2001).

Buffett has constantly warned that the nation faces the threat of nuclear, biological, or chemical attack. We’re going to have something in the way of a major nuclear event in this country,” he has said. “It will happen in 10 years or 10 minutes or 50 years … it’s virtually a certainty.”

After 9/11, insurers began excluding terrorism from policies; but a few companies, such as Berkshire, AIG, and Lloyd’s of London, began offering stand-alone coverage—at a steep price.

For example, one policy written the weekend after 9/11 involved selling $750 million in coverage to protect one international airline company (not identified) against deaths, injuries, and property losses on the ground should one of its airlines be crashed by terrorists (The New York Times, October 21, 2006).

Despite Berkshire’s large loss, it was the only sizeable insurer, because of its fortress-like balance, that didn’t need to raise new money after 9/11.



Old Glory

New York City firemen raise Old Glory after the 9/11 terrorist attack.

The Story of Warren Buffett



9/11 Destruction at New York’s

World Trade Center

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

Of Permanent Value Terror in America



57





BERKSHIRE’S INSURANCE GROUP


National Indemnity, Berkshire’s main non-GEICO direct insurance operation, was underwriting a television contest that offered contestants a chance to win $1 million for predicting the station’s secret Grand Slam Inning.

Even Don Wurster, the company president, admitted running a nervous finger down the columns of fine print in the morning newspapers until he found a particular team,” wrote Melinda Norris in a May 13, 1990, story for the Omaha World-Herald.

“He’d pore over the inning-by-inning scores to make sure the team didn’t score four runs or more in a single inning. National Indemnity was betting $1 million that no one on the team would hit a grand slam home run.”

“If the guy hits a grand slam (during that inning), we write a check and some fan is rich,” Wurster said. “Fortunately, they never hit a grand slam.”

This willingness to write unusual business at the right price still exists at Berkshire—whether it’s for prize indemnification, inland marine cargo policies, or protecting against the cancellation of a sports event. For example, Berkshire quickly stepped in to insure soccer’s World Cup against cancellation in 2002, just two weeks after AXA SA demanded more money to provide the coverage.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1995 Annual Report: “We insured (1) the life of Mike Tyson for a sum that is large initially and that fight-by-fight, gradually declines to zero over the next few years; (2) Lloyd’s against more than 225 of its ‘names’ dying during the year, and (3) the launch, and a year in orbit, of two Chinese satellites. Happily, both satellites are orbiting, the Lloyd’s folk avoided abnormal mortality, and if Mike Tyson looked any healthier, no one would get into the ring with him.” Buffett personally priced the policy for Tyson (The Wall Street Journal, October 17, 2000).

In the 2001 Berkshire Annual Report, Buffett said: “Among the policies we have written and retained entirely for our own account are (1) $578 million of property coverage for a South American refinery once a loss there exceeds $1 billion; (2) $1 billion of non-cancelable third-party liability coverage for losses arising from acts of terrorism at several large international airlines; (3) £500 million of property coverage on a large North Sea oil platform, covering losses from terrorism and sabotage, above £600 million that the insured retained or reinsured elsewhere; and (4) significant coverage on the Sears Tower, including losses caused by terrorism, above a $500 million threshold. We have written many other jumbo risks as well, such as protection for the World Cup Soccer Tournament and the 2002 Winter Olympics.”

In addition to Sears, Berkshire has written policies on the Rockefeller Center and Chrysler Buildings in New York.

In 1996, Berkshire, in a joint venture with the huge American International Group, entered another insurance area: Writing policies for product liability coverage for pharmaceutical companies. The coverage, called “PharmaCat,” is offered through Johnson and Higgins, an international insurance broker.

Berkshire has written policies to protect a large airport, agreed to pay $75 million if the NCAA Final Four basketball tournament was canceled, and insured the Grammy Awards show against cancellation.

Back in early 1967, Berkshire paid about $8.6 million for two small Omaha insurance companies, National Indemnity and National Fire & Marine. “The two tiny underwriters had $17.3 million in so-called float—or double the companies’ acquisition cost” (Forbes, January 22, 1996).

Berkshire entered the reinsurance business in the 1960s because the rate on line (price per dollar of coverage provided) for aviation hull risk was 3%. Doing some simple math in his head, Buffett concluded that 3%—or even 1%—of the world’s aircraft were not going to crash and the insurance product was offering big margins (PaineWebber report, September 22, 1998).

Today Berkshire’s largest business is insurance—property and casualty—conducted nationwide by dozens of insurance companies that operate with tiny organizational resources but with huge financial strengths. HUGE. In 1998, Berkshire overtook State Farm’s leading position as the largest property/casualty insurer in terms of surplus.

In 1997, Capital expenditures for all Berkshire’s insurance businesses in 1997 were about $29 million. Identifiable assets for 1997 were almost $50 billion. For all of Berkshire, identifiable assets were about $56 billion. In 2006, capital expenditures for the insurance segment were $65 million. Identifiable assets for the insurance group were $135 billion and assets for all of Berkshire were $248 billion.

National Indemnity alone ranks among the top 10 U.S. reinsurers, based on net premiums written, and is among the most highly-capitalized insurers in the world.

At the Wesco annual meeting in 1993, Charles Munger talked about Berkshire’s low expenses: “I’m sure we have the lowest ratio of headquarters’ cost to stockholders’ capital of any insurance operation in the country, if not the world.

“In fact, Warren once considered buying a building on a distressed basis for about a quarter of what it would have cost to duplicate it. And tempting as it was, he decided that it would give everybody bad ideas to have surroundings so opulent. So we continue to run our insurance operation from very modest quarters.”

In late 1999, the Duff & Phelps Credit Rating Co. gave National Indemnity and its units its highest credit rating saying, “National Indemnity estimates its maximum after-tax exposure to a single event to be $600 million. With about $27 billion in surplus (reduced significantly from the year before by September 11 and accounting changes), National Indemnity could easily absorb such a loss, which might even be a boon to its business if it firms up pricing in this competitive segment or causes a ‘flight to quality’; that would benefit the best capitalized competitors.” This probably is the reason Berkshire’s stock held so well after the terrorist activity of September 11, 2001.

In 2000, Standard & Poor’s listing affirmed Berkshire’s triple-A counterparty credit and financial strengths ratings, saying in part, “Standard & Poor’s capital model shows Berkshire’s capital adequacy to be a multiple of that required for a triple-A-level rating … the statutory interest coverage is a phenomenal 30x.”

Berkshire routinely writes insurance for commercial vehicles and workers’ compensation, but it has insured carnivals, free-throw contests, basketball and hockey games. It offers coverage for commercial trucks and truckers, autos, garages, dealers, price information, general liability, inland marine cargo, and reinsurance.

Buffett says Berkshire may be the largest writer of super-catastrophe (super-cat—insurance on big cats and dogs, some say) business in the world. Berkshire writes multi-million dollar policies against earthquakes as well as offering coverage other insurance companies can buy to protect themselves against a catastrophe. Maybe Berkshire should write a policy for its own ultimate super-cat: Buffett’s demise.

National Indemnity got its risk-taking philosophy from founder Jack Ringwalt, who Buffett has said was his kind of guy because he’d look for a parking meter with a few minutes still to run. Ringwalt founded NICO in 1940, for two Omaha cab companies that couldn’t get insurance. In 1967, Buffett bought the company which still had a hefty commercial vehicle business.

Charles Heider, general partner of Heider-Weitz Partners in Omaha, says that Ringwalt called him one day about the possibility of selling NICO for $10 million. Heider called his friend Buffett, who told him he was interested. Heider asked Buffett when he’d like to get together to talk about it; Buffett replied, “What about this afternoon?”

“Warren liked everything about National Indemnity and had followed it with interest for some years,” Heider recalled. “Warren recognized Jack Ringwalt as a very intelligent person, and his respect was confirmed when he learned that Jack made sure all the lights were out before leaving for the day. I also believe Warren was well ahead of his time in recognizing the value of ‘float’, i.e., in the insurance business and specifically at National Indemnity—the opportunity to manage the company’s not insignificant investment account in his own style.”

Ringwalt’s memoir (Tales of National Indemnity Company and Its Founder Jack D. Ringwalt) says At the time, Buffett was about 20 years old when the two first met. Buffett was trying to raise $100,000 to start an investment pool. Ringwalt said he offered to invest $10,000. Buffett, however, said he would accept nothing less than $50,000.

“I remarked, ‘If you think I am going to let a punk kid like you handle $50,000 of my money, you are even nuttier than I thought,’” Ringwalt wrote. Ringwalt took back his offer of the $10,000. “If I had put in $50,000 at the time he so desired, I could have taken out $2 million after taxes 20 years later. I did pretty well with National Indemnity Co., but not that well” (p. 5).

As to his sale of National Indemnity, Ringwalt wrote:

When I first had a call from a local investment house as to the purchase of part of my stock in order to make a public market, I was not particularly interested, but I did think that if I could sell part of the stock, I would be a little more comfortable financially and it would make the settlement of my estate easier if some kind of a market value existed.



The gentleman finally made an offer which was approximately 20% of the liquidating value, and we had some fairly sharp words over what I felt to be a ridiculously low offer. I accordingly had nothing further to do with this firm for several years. At that time, I had a call from their Mr. Charles Heider and I have a great admiration for that gentleman for the way he soothed my hurt feelings. He persuaded his firm to offer a fair price for a substantial block of stock and there was some kind of public market.



A little later, I had a phone call from Mr. Warren Buffett as to whether I would be kind enough to send him the same information I sent stockholders. I was, at that time, conceited enough to think that Mr. Buffett was interested enough in knowing what securities I was buying, not to the extent of following my lead, but perhaps to the extent of making an independent check on a security about which he might not otherwise have thought. I realized later that he was studying my operation and continued to study it for several years before I had any further contact with him.



In January of 1967, he called and asked me to have dinner with him. I told him that I was going to Florida the next day and would see him when I got back. He persuaded me to drop in on the way home stating that it would not take over 15 or 20 minutes to discuss what he had in mind. When I got there, the following conversation took place:



WB: How does it happen you never sold your company?





JR: Because only crooks and bankrupt people have wanted it.





WB: What other reason?





JR: I would not want the other stockholders to take less per share than I would receive myself.





WB: What else?





JR: I wouldn’t want to double cross my agents.





WB: What else?





JR: I don’t want my employees to worry about losing their jobs.





WB: What else?





JR: I am sort of proud of this as an Omaha institution and I would want it to remain in Omaha.





WB: What else





JR: I don’t know – isn’t that enough?





WB: What is your stock worth?





JR: According to the World-Herald, the market value is $33 per share, but the stock is worth $50 per share.





WB: I will take it.





I was somewhat dumbfounded as I did not have the slightest idea that he was interested in purchasing my stock nor was I at all sure that I wanted to sell it. I thought, however, that Mr. Buffett at least had an honest reputation and was financially responsible and that it might not be such a bad idea. I felt in addition that he would probably change his mind while I was in Florida anyhow, but when I came back, his attorney had prepared documents and he had deposited funds with the U.S. National Bank to take care of all stock tendered.



I really do not believe that our conversation took over 15 minutes and no price was mentioned by either of us except the $50. I, of course, wondered what would have happened if I would have mentioned $60 or $75, but I am sure that Mr. Buffett will never tell me.



I really did not anticipate staying with the Company for more than 30 days or so, but I found Mr. Buffett to be a very considerate Chairman of the Board and I did remain with the Company for more than six years, at which time I was well beyond the normal retirement age of 65 (pp. 46–48).



Following Ringwalt at National Indemnity was Phil Liesche, then Rollie Miller, and now Don Wurster.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 2004 Annual Report:

When we purchased the company—a specialist in commercial auto and general liability insurance—it did not appear to have any attributes that would overcome the industry’s chronic troubles. It was not well-known, had no informational advantage (the company has never had an actuary) [*See author’s curio.], was not a low-cost operator, and sold through general agents, a method many people thought outdated. Nevertheless, for almost all of the past 38 years, NICO has been a star performer. Indeed, had we not made this acquisition, Berkshire would be lucky to be worth half of what it is today.



What we’ve had going for us is a managerial mindset that most insurers find impossible to replicate. Take a look at the facing page. Can you imagine any public company embracing a business model that would lead to the decline in revenue that we experienced from 1986 through 1999? That colossal slide, it should be emphasized, did not occur because business was unobtainable. Many billions of premium dollars were readily available to NICO had we only been willing to cut prices. But we instead consistently priced to make a profit, not to match our most optimistic competitor.



Although insurance covers risk, insurance can be a risky business, as even Buffett’s sometimes spotty insurance record can attest. Insurance companies always have a huge potential for liabilities should claims come due. That potential problem exists for Berkshire, too.

Buffett has said insurance is an industry that doesn’t bring particularly good returns because many poor operators and lots of capital are attracted to a business which, essentially, gives someone a piece of paper—a promise in the future—for cash right now.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1988 Annual Report: “The property-casualty insurance industry is not only subnormally profitable, it is subnormally popular. (As Sam Goldwyn philosophized: ‘In life, one must learn to take the bitter with the sour.’)”

Occasionally, Buffett has misjudged the business known for its boom-and-bust cycles, and is the first to admit it. Overall, his predictions about industry trends have been remarkable, often years in advance.

“It’s only when the tide goes out that you learn who’s been swimming naked,” Buffett said at the 1993 Berkshire Annual Meeting.

One wag said, “The tide has gone out and not only is Warren not swimming naked, he is wearing an old-time swimsuit, belt, suspenders, and a large money belt.”

By refusing to write policies unless it can get good prices, Berkshire has shown discipline. When prices are not attractive, Berkshire simply doesn’t write the business. Buffett once said in a talk to Notre Dame students that when prices are unattractive, “We have a lot of people doing crossword puzzles.”

Berkshire could write far more business than it does. The ability to turn bad news into good news exists because Berkshire’s untapped capacity is huge, meaning Berkshire can absorb losses, whereas wobbly insurers can be out of business if they suffer a big loss. For example, about a dozen insurers collapsed in the wake of Hurricane Andrew in 1992.

Berkshire likes to write structured settlement policies which are single-premium annuities often sold as part of a legal settlement in a personal injury case. The proceeds provide regular payments to injured persons over a period of time. For example, Berkshire owes payments to some paraplegics for the next 40 years.

Structured settlement policies are also deemed politically correct because they lessen the chance of the recipient quickly squandering the money. Also importantly, the payments are excluded from taxes. Given the strength of Berkshire’s balance sheet and the dependability that it will be around for years to come, structured settlements are an ideal financial fit for Berkshire.

At the Wesco Annual Meeting in 1993, Munger said he’s often asked why Berkshire doesn’t write more insurance. “People are always saying to Berkshire, ‘Gee, why don’t you write a lot more volume in relation to capital? Everyone else is doing it. The rating agencies say that you can write twice as much in annual volume as you have capital.’ And they look at our $10 billion in insurance capital and say, ‘That’s $20 billion a year. What are you doing writing only $1 billion?’

“But then … somebody else comes in and asks, ‘Why did everybody get killed last year but you?’ Maybe the questions are related.”

In 1996, Berkshire’s net premiums were 16% of the insurance group’s year-end statutory surplus, compared to an industry average premiums-to-surplus ratio of about 130%.

FLOAT: “THAT’S THE WELL”

The appeal of the insurance business is that premiums come up front—cash in the form of other people’s money arriving every day at the office to be invested. Essentially, the insurance business provides “float” (not to be confused with the Southern ice-cream variety) somewhat akin to deposits in a bank that can be invested. It brings Berkshire low-cost money. Basically, it’s a free margin account. Berkshire shareholder Paul Hartman calls float “just leverage in drag.”

Buffett calls it, “Money we have but don’t own.”

“Float, per se, is not a blessing,” says Buffett. But it is a blessing if you can get it in increasing amounts; and above all, he adds, if you can get it cheap. The secret sauce at Berkshire is borrowing big money cheap.

Buffett says, “It has been a big mistake by some analysts to think of the value of the insurance operation as its book value alone, without regard to the value of the float” (1996 Annual Meeting).

“That’s the well” from which Berkshire draws its wealth, said one shareholder.

And you pay no taxes on float.

The returns on float are yours.

Float is a liability deducted from the assets of Berkshire in the calculation for the company’s book value. So float is accrued as a liability and accounted for in Berkshire’s book value, or net worth.

Berkshire’s insurance businesses have offered up the Holy Grail by essentially providing 30 years of free money. But not when Berkshire paid dearly for the money it brought in as it did in 2001 due to terrorists and other losses; and again in 2005 when hurricanes hit the Gulf Coast. Despite its triple-A credit rating, meaning it could borrow money cheaply, it wound up paying the same rates junk bond issuers pay for money.

In Berkshire’s 1997 Annual Report, Buffett, writing about float, said, “Unless you understand this subject, it will be impossible for you to make an informed judgment about Berkshire’s intrinsic value.”

He continued, “Since 1967, when we entered the insurance business, our float has grown at an annual compound rate of 21.7%. Better yet, it has cost us nothing, and in fact, has made us money. Therein lies an accounting irony. Though our float is shown on our balance sheet as a liability, it has had value to Berkshire greater than an equal amount of net worth would have had.”

Buffett told shareholders at the Berkshire 1998 Annual Meeting, “Float comes to us at a negative cost, with a cost less than zero. It comes with a profit attached.” He added, “But the real key is what the float will be in 10 years.”

“We have $7 billion of float presently,” Buffett said at Berkshire’s 1996 Annual Meeting. “And if I were offered $7 billion for that float and did not have to pay tax on the gain, but would thereafter have to stay out of the insurance business forever—a perpetual non-compete in any kind of insurance—would I accept that? The answer is no. That’s not because I’d rather have $7 billion of float than $7 billion of free money. It’s because I expect the $7 billion to grow.”

Berkshire had more than $22 billion in float as a result of its 1998 acquisition of General Re. By mid-2007, Berkshire had $58 billion of float, or about 10% of the domestic property casualty float. When that “float” hits Berkshire’s doorstep, it’s immediately invested in stocks, bonds, and businesses.

Buffett has called the float “largely tantamount to equity.” The growth of float can be roughly regarded as income. No carrying charges and possibly no repayments exist.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1998 Annual Report that float “has had more economic value to us than an equal amount of net worth would have had. As long as we can continue to achieve an underwriting profit, float will continue to outrank net worth in value.”

Some Berkshire observers have concluded that float has economic value equal to equity when the combined underwriting ratio is 100. The float has more economic value than equity when the combined ratio is less than 100 and has less economic value than equity when the float is obtained at a combined ratio of more than 100.

Although in many years Berkshire has had no cost for its float, the cost of float mushroomed in 2001 to 12.8%, mainly because of large losses at General Re but was only 1% in 2002.

In 2003, with float at $44 billion and pre-tax underwriting income of $1.71 billion, the cost of the float was a negative 4%. Float was at $46.1 billion at the end of 2004, still at a negative cost. Buffett said in the 2004 Annual Report, “To summarize, last year we were paid $1.5 billion to hold an average of about $45.2 billion.”

In 2005, Berkshire wound up with $49 billion in float at a cost of slightly less than zero—in spite of more than $3 billion in hurricane losses. Float in late 2007 was $59 billion.

Getting float is no easy game. Munger said at Wesco’s Annual Meeting in 2002, “Growing float at a good clip at a low cost is very difficult—it’s almost impossible. But we intend to do it anyway.”

It’s the dirt-cheap cost of float and its impeccable credit rating that can be used to buy capital intensive businesses and make those businesses look better on the spot. Those are among the many powerful arrows in Berkshire’s quiver.

Berkshire usually writes “long-tail” insurance policies most likely to be paid off in the distant future. Clearly, it’s good to have the policyholder’s money for as long as possible, but Buffett has warned that long-tail policies are tricky because when the time comes to pay policyholders, inflation and regulations may have raised costs so much that profits are elusive.

Insurance profits can also take a hit when courts award judgments far in excess of what was contemplated at the time the policy was written.

Throughout the 1990s, the price of commercial insurance generally fell, whereas claims rose—a deadly combination for insurance companies. Rates began to perk up in 2000.

Insurance is an important business, especially in Nebraska where the business has received favorable treatment by state lawmakers. Mutual of Omaha, one well-known business made better-known by Marlin Perkins’ exploits on Wild Kingdom, is based near Berkshire’s headquarters, its own version of a wild kingdom.

Starting in March 1967, when Berkshire made a tender offer for National Indemnity and National Fire and Marine Insurance managed by Jack Ringwalt, Buffett bought dozens of insurance businesses.

Berkshire entered insurance for diversity and for increased profits. National Indemnity, which even in the late 1980s was still using old IBM card sorters, occupies a six-story, 35,000-square-foot building in Omaha and owns an adjoining 9,600-square-foot building not far from Berkshire’s headquarters.

In addition, the Berkshire insurance empire owns more than 50 foreign and domestic insurance companies, including:

—Aksarben Life Insurance, Omaha, Nebraska

—General Re Corp., Stamford, Connecticut (which has many subsidiaries)

—GEICO, Chevy Chase, Maryland (which has many subsidiaries)

—Berkshire Hathaway International Insurance Limited (BHIIL), United

Kingdom (BHIIL operates as Holdsure Motor Policies and Enterprises Motor Policies, offering car insurance to all drivers, including drivers with previous accidents. It also offers insurance for university students through studentcover.com. Further, it provides insurance for London Black Cab and Provincial Taxi.)

—Berkshire Hathaway Homestate Companies, Omaha, Nebraska

—Berkshire Hathaway Life Insurance Company of Nebraska and

its affiliate IdeaLife Stamford, Connecticut (which has branched into

selling annuities on the Internet, a business developed by Ajit Jain)

—BHG Life Insurance Co., Nebraska

—Brookwood Insurance Co., Coraville, Iowa

—Central States Indemnity, Omaha, Nebraska

—Central States of Omaha Companies, Inc., Omaha, Nebraska

—Cologne Reinsurance Company of America, Connecticut

—Columbia Insurance Co., Omaha, Nebraska

—Continental Divide Insurance, Englewood, Colorado

—Cornhusker Casualty Co., Omaha, Nebraska

—Cypress Insurance Co., San Mateo, California

—Fairfield Insurance Co., Connecticut

—General Star Indemnity Co., Connecticut

—General Star National Insurance Co., Ohio

—Genesis Indemnity Insurance Co., North Dakota

—Genesis Insurance Co., Connecticut

—Genesis Professional Managers, Beachwood, Ohio

—Gateway Underwriters Agency, St. Louis, Missouri

—Idealife Insurance Co., Connecticut

—Kansas Bankers Surety Co., Topeka, Kansas

––Marlborough Underwriting Agency Limited, London

—Mount Vernon Fire Insurance Co., Pennsylvania

—National Fire and Marine Insurance, Omaha, Nebraska

—National Indemnity Co., Omaha, Nebraska

—National Indemnity Company of the South, St. Petersburg, Florida

—National Indemnity Company of Mid-America, Iowa

—National Liability and Fire Insurance, Connecticut

—National Liability and Fire Insurance, Chicago, Illinois

—National Reinsurance Corp., Delaware

—Northern States Agency, St. Paul, Minnesota

—North Star Reinsurance Corp., Delaware

—Oak River Insurance Co., Omaha, Nebraska

—OBH Inc., Delaware

—OCSAP, Ltd., Maine

—Redwood Fire and Casualty Insurance, Omaha, Nebraska

—Republic Insurance Company, Dallas, Texas (sold to Hank Greenberg’s Starr International Co. in 2007)

—Resolute Reinsurance, New York

—Ringwalt and Liesche, Omaha, Nebraska

—United States Liability Insurance Co., Pennsylvania

—U.S. Investment Corp., Wayne, Pennsylvania

—U.S. Underwriters Insurance Co., North Dakota

—Unione Italiana Reinsurance Company of America, New York

—Marlborough Underwriting Agency, London

—Wesco-Financial Insurance, Omaha, Nebraska

An Internet notice at www.berkshirehathaway.com for the Berkshire Hathaway Life Insurance Company of Nebraska, says: “The Berkshire Hathaway group of insurance companies is the most highly capitalized insurance group in the world, in terms of net worth, and utilizes minimal leverage.

“The people who will be most interested will be those who want to set aside a portion of their assets to build a safety net for the future, and who want those assets invested with an institution that can be totally relied upon to fulfill its promises to pay decades in the future.”

The main annuity products are the Single Premium Immediate Annuity (SPIA), which ensures the buyer a guaranteed income for life in exchange for an up-front investment; and the Single Premium Deferred Annuity (SPDA), a wealth-accumulation product that allows one to save in a tax-deferred environment essentially through investing in tax-deferred zero-coupon bonds.

Berkshire’s homestate businesses are based in Colorado, Nebraska, and California, with branch operations in other states. The underwriting activities of these businesses include the handling of almost all forms of property and casualty insurance through agents in the District of Columbia and all U.S. states except Hawaii.

The main business of the insurance group is the sale of auto insurance, which accounts for about half of all the business. The businesses also sell trucking insurance, workers’ compensation, homeowners’, fire, and even insurance policies for those who serve as officers and directors of companies. For many years, Berkshire wrote insurance for taxicabs in Omaha, but it no longer handles that business.

The insurance group also writes insurance for farm owners, business owners, and garage owners. Coverage is also available for luxury cars, marine accidents, earthquakes, cargo damage, and burglaries. It also sells personal and commercial package policies.

Berkshire-owned See’s Candies sometimes buys its workers’ compensation insurance at discount rates through Berkshire.

The Berkshire insurance companies do a hefty reinsurance business, taking on the risk and reward of insurance written by other companies. The reinsurance operations are run from National Indemnity’s offices in Stamford, Connecticut, by Ajit Jain.

Jain, raised in New Delhi, India, earned an undergraduate degree in engineering from the famed Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur in 1972. His first job was with Tata Steel in India. Then he worked for IBM in India from 1973 to 1976, when IBM closed operations there. Later he went to Harvard Business School earning an MBA in 1978. He returned to India for a while and married Tinku Jain who was chosen for him by his parents.

He returned to the U.S. to work for the McKinsey & Co. consulting firm. In 1986, he joined Berkshire after receiving a call from Mike Goldberg with whom he had worked at McKinsey. Goldberg left McKinsey and came to Berkshire in 1981.

Jain said, “When I joined Berkshire, I didn’t know how to spell insurance, or reinsurance, but I was hired to do a job in the reinsurance operations of National Indemnity” (Robert P. Miles, The Warren Buffett CEO, p. 70). Ajit rarely talks to the press but a Bloomberg reporter once wrote that Jain was high on the list as a possible Buffett successor.

When asked for an interview, Jain, ever self-depreciating, replied, “It is undoubtedly the case any disappointment I have caused you by declining the interview is far less than the disappointment I would have caused you by granting it” (Bloomberg, July 11, 2006).

Jain worked in Omaha for one and a half years before moving to the New York area. He now lives in Rye, New York, with his wife Tinku, who hosts her own public television show covering Indian news and entertainment. The couple has college-age twin sons.

“I talk to Ajit Jain about reinsurance deals every night. I do it as much for enjoyment as anything else. He could do it just as well without me,” Buffett says.

Jain says, “Warren and I might have a 30-second conversation or a 30-minute one, but he has been involved in every piece of business I’ve done” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

When folks at Berkshire’s annual meeting once kidded Jain about his brains, he replied, “There is only one brain at this company.”

In Berkshire’s 2000 Annual Report, Buffett wrote: “Our retroactive business is almost single-handedly the work of Ajit Jain, whose praises I sing annually. It is impossible to overstate how valuable Ajit is to Berkshire. Don’t worry about my health; worry about his.

“Last year, Ajit brought home a $2.4 billion reinsurance premium, perhaps the largest in history, from a policy that retroactively covers a major U.K. company. Subsequently, he wrote a large policy protecting the Texas Rangers from the possibility that Alex Rodriguez will become permanently disabled. As sports fans know, A-Rod was signed for $252 million, a record, and we think that our policy probably also set a record for disability insurance.”

When Rodriguez moved to the Yankees, a different policy was put in place. The $260 million permanent disability policy worked for Berkshire since Rodriguez missed only one game while with the Rangers.

In Berkshire’s 2001 Annual Report, Buffett wrote: “At the National Indemnity reinsurance operation, Ajit Jain continues to add enormous value to Berkshire. Working with only 18 associates [now about 30], Ajit manages one of the world’s largest reinsurance operations measured by assets, and the largest, based upon the size of individual risks assumed.”

Jain was at the center of the action when Berkshire bought General Re, which had been his biggest customer for reinsurance.

Reinsurance involves insuring other insurance companies so no single company gets hit with the total cost of a catastrophe, which might bankrupt a primary insurance company with thousands of dependent, individual policyholders.

Reinsurers repackage and then parcel out the really big risks, spreading the risk around as well as taking some of it themselves. To be in reinsurance, one must be able to take a big loss. Berkshire’s unusual financial strength is a good marketing tool for seeking both insurance and reinsurance business. The Berkshire folks write the policies and charge a stiff price for them; but if a catastrophe occurs, Berkshire can take a big hit. “When a major quake occurs in an urban area or a winter storm rages across Europe, light a candle for us,” Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1990 Annual Report.

Bill Bates swears he was unaware of Buffett’s “light a candle” quote when he drew the cartoon shown on the next page.

Still Berkshire is willing to take these big risks for its own account. “One reason we never ‘lay off’ part of the risks we insure is that we have reservations about our ability to collect from others when disaster strikes,” Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1996 Annual Report.

The super-cat policies have caps on the possible losses; although in some cases, Berkshire has an obligation to renew the policy at once. Buffett said Berkshire could be exposed to a $600 million loss (a mere six weeks’ profits at Berkshire) if a hurricane were to slam the East Coast, particularly New York.

Munger said, “So if we have real disaster—if you had Hurricane Andrew followed one week later by another one just like it—Berkshire would have a very unpleasant year.”

Like Jiff moms, Berkshire is choosy, rejecting 98% of the business it’s offered.

Indeed, in the third quarter of 1992, Berkshire had to pay out $125 million in damage claims by Hurricane Andrew in Florida. Buffett wrote a letter to shareholders reminding them of the volatility of the business:

At this point, Berkshire may be the largest writer of super-cat policies in the world, an activity that will continue to make our quarterly earnings volatile. But that is of no concern to us: The gold medal in a marathon is awarded to the runner with the best time for the entire race and not to the one who ran the steadiest pace. Whenever the choice is offered, we welcome the chance to forfeit stability of quarterly or annual earnings in exchange for greater long-term profitability.



Berkshire continues to write a lot of business in Florida. According to a 2002 Fox-Pitt, Kelton report, Florida property coverage, including homeowners, commercial multiperil, private, and auto, accounted for 5% of Berkshire’s total premiums.

In 1994, Berkshire underwrote a $400 million reinsurance policy for 20th Century Industries, a California auto insurer.

Fortunately, Berkshire wasn’t writing hurricane insurance in Florida in 1935, when the worst U.S. hurricane on record occurred. It was one of the true storms of the century with winds of up to 200 miles per hour (Andrew’s were up to 155 miles per hour). The hurricane killed hundreds of people and destroyed the Key West Railroad, which ran from Key West to mainland Florida, crossing 153 miles of open ocean. The dream of industrialist Henry Flagler was obliterated in hours. Another record hurricane which occurred too long ago to affect Berkshire was the Galveston Hurricane of 1900. It was the deadliest in history, causing 8,000 deaths. It packed winds of 150 miles an hour.

Were a Hurricane Andrew to hit a population center such as Miami, it could cause damage in the hundreds of billions of dollars.

“We will quote prices for coverage as great as $500 million on the same day that we are asked to bid. No one else in the industry will do the same,” Buffett said in the 1994 Annual Report.

Buffett has long wanted to expand the insurance business. In 1985, he joined with American Express’ Sanford Weill and some senior Fireman’s Fund executives in a plan to buy Fireman’s Fund from American Express. After meeting in Omaha with Weill and Jamie Dimon, Buffett said, “I’ll take 20 percent and whatever anyone else doesn’t want” (Monica Langley, Tearing Down the Walls, p. 85). But the plan, organized by Weill, was rejected by American Express.

Berkshire’s insurance companies own many of the investments Buffett makes, investments that provide such enormous financial strength that it’s clear Berkshire can pay policyholders. Carrying far more assets than normally required by the insurance regulators, all the Berkshire insurance companies carry an A+ (superior) grade from A.M. Best Co., the highest rating offered by that insurance rating firm.

Buffett wrote in the 1992 Annual Report:

Currently Berkshire is second in the U.S. property-casualty industry in net worth (the leader being State Farm, which neither buys nor sells reinsurance). Therefore, we have the capacity to assume risk on a scale that interests virtually no other company … Charlie and I continue to like the insurance business, which we expect to be our main source of earnings for decades to come. The industry is huge; in certain sectors we can compete worldwide; and Berkshire possesses an important advantage. We will look for ways to expand our participation in the business.



In the early days Buffett himself oversaw the insurance business, but he later turned over operations to Berkshire’s Mike Goldberg.

A story in Business Week (July 5, 1999) reported:

The office next to Buffett’s is occupied by Michael Goldberg. A former McKinsey & Co. consultant, Goldberg was hired in 1981 to bring order to Berkshire’s far-flung insurance interests and essentially functioned as chief operating officer for the next 11 years. The single-minded intensity Goldberg brought to the job created friction in the ranks and gave him a bad case of burnout. In 1993, Buffett reassigned Goldberg to “special projects” and eliminated his old position. The line managers who once reported to Goldberg, now in his mid-50s, have reported directly to Buffett ever since—as do the chiefs of all 22 of Berkshire’s operating companies.



Because the insurance group is not publicly listed, it’s tough to tell exactly what the insurance business is worth. Buffett has never put a figure on it, saying that it’s difficult to do because of the nature of the business.

On October 20, 1992, Berkshire agreed to buy an 82% interest in Central States Indemnity Co. of Omaha for $82 million.

A unit of Central States Health and Life Insurance Co., the main line of the business, which has 240 employees, is credit card insurance distributed through card issuers nationwide. The company pays the scheduled minimum payments on the credit card balance should the policyholder become disabled or lose a job. Its products help customers with monthly payments in the event of death, disability, and involuntary unemployment. For example, for $1.99, per $100 of outstanding monthly balances on one’s credit card, the balance would be paid off if the cardholder becomes unemployed, dies or is disabled.

“It’s a business I like, run by people I like and it’s located in a city I like,” Buffett said at a press conference announcing the deal.

According to the Omaha World-Herald (October 21, 1992), Central States founder William Kizer Sr., said that his negotiations with Buffett were straightforward: “The price he quoted us was that he buys companies for 10 times (annual) earnings. I suggested, ‘Well, last year we made $10 million, so if my multiplication is right, that’s $100 million’, and I gulped. And he said, ‘OK.’ And I said, ‘$125 million?’ He said, ‘You’re too late.’”

At a Berkshire annual meeting, Buffett was asked about the problems at Lloyd’s of London. His response shines light on the solidity of Berkshire:

For a century, syndicates of Lloyd’s have operated in such a way that its members have unlimited liability. They were a center for certain types of insurance—and a very important center.



The liabilities that have accrued to certain members because of things like asbestos—where they had no idea of the huge scale in which the costs would occur—have caused a number of the people who were willing to be Names to dramatically decrease. And Lloyd’s is groping around for some system that handles the problem of the long-tail liability and unlimited liability.



I don’t think that they’ve got any easy answers to that. So I think that they’ll still be groping to some extent a year or two hence. Quite clearly, all of that is a benefit to us.



I’ll tell you what really benefits us … The hurricane in Florida looks like it will ultimately prove to have caused $16 billion or so of damage.… But it’s very easy to visualize a hurricane that comes up and hits Long Island that could triple or quadruple that amount.



Well, when you start talking about $50 or $60 billion of losses and very major companies in this business only have a couple of billion dollars of net worth—Berkshire has a significant advantage to be able to sustain significant losses. We should be able to get the appropriate premium.



I’m not sure what Lloyd’s total capital is, but I don’t think that they have as much capital in aggregate as we do—and most of theirs is psychological, whereas ours is real.



Sequoia Fund’s Bill Ruane said: “That insurance company is really a sleeper. Don’t expect it to wake up. But if we’re ever unfortunate to have true catastrophes that are anything like Andrew, there is one insurance company out there that can write 20 times what it’s writing now very capably. Berkshire’s got $10 billion or so in capital. Currently he’s writing only about $200 million in regular business and about $500 million in reinsurance and catastrophe business” (Outstanding Investor Digest, June 23, 1994).

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1996 Annual Report: “We are currently getting

sizable ‘standby’ fees from reinsurers that are simply nailing down their ability to get coverage from us should the market tighten.”

Financial World (November 9, 1993) reported:

While Berkshire Hathaway has long been active in reinsurance, that part of the company’s business remained fairly small until 1988. That year, Buffett began to expand both the property and the casualty—or liability—side of his reinsurance business very aggressively. Berkshire’s reinsurance premium revenues shot from just $83 million in 1988 to $676 million in 1992. Reinsurance now represents nearly three-quarters of Berkshire’s net written premiums.



But even as reinsurance prices have shot up in recent years, many firms still have been hit.

The report continues:

Since 1988, property insurers have lost 10 cents on every premium dollar, but during the same period, Berkshire Hathaway paid out only $312 million in claims on $379 million in earned premiums. In crude terms that’s a five-year average return, before expenses, of 17.8%.



The Financial World story goes on to say:

But Buffett’s real genius becomes apparent in casualty reinsurance. Unlike property claims, casualty claims often take years to settle. So here Buffett plays a complicated game that employs both a tax shelter and the float on funds before they’re paid to settle claims.



Berkshire’s record in casualty reinsurance may look terrible, but it isn’t. Over the past five years it has incurred losses averaging 138% of premiums earned. Add in 5% or so for expenses, and you wonder why anyone in his right mind would be writing casualty reinsurance like this.



But don’t forget the float. Unlike U.S. property reinsurers, U.S. casualty reinsurers get the use of the money for five or more years, compounding it in a tax-free reserve set up in anticipation of future losses. And here is where Buffett’s stock market genius comes in. By compounding his cash through common stocks, he can increase the money at prodigious rates: 24% per year for the past 28 years. At that rate, $100 million in premiums becomes $288 million in five years’ time, more than enough to pay even large claims with profit to spare.



The article continues to say the average property and casualty insurer keeps 79% of its capital and reserves in high-grade corporate and government bonds in order to liquidate without a loss should a catastrophe hit.

Yet Berkshire Hathaway needs no such cushion, thanks to the rapid rate at which Buffett has been able to build Berkshire’s equity portfolio. So Buffett can maintain, as he does, 85% of Berkshire’s liquid assets in common stocks. In fact, Berkshire’s actuaries may be overestimating their losses, in order to create larger reserves to shelter even more of the compounding assets.



That is why most casualty reinsurers can’t hope to keep up with Berkshire.



The quest for more insurance companies continued.

Bill Lyons, National Indemnity’s retired general counsel, recalls Buffett’s wit: “He once asked me to check out a no-fault insurance business in Florida, and I reported back that the business was in awful shape and that it would be stupid to invest in it. He said, ‘Don’t spare me just because it was my idea.’ ”

In the spring of 2000, Berkshire bought U.S. Investment Corp., an insurance company based in Wayne, Pennsylvania. The price was not disclosed. U.S. Investment owns three insurance companies: United States Liability Insurance Co., Mount Vernon Fire Insurance Co., and U.S. Underwriters Insurance Co.

General Re’s CEO Ron Ferguson mentioned the company to Buffett and put him in touch with Bob Berry, whose family had owned it for 49 years. Berkshire’s purchase of the company was for half-stock, half-cash. Tom Nerney currently runs the company.

In 2001, the New York Insurance Department withdrew a proposed runoff reinsurance deal designed to speed the liquidation of the defunct Midland Insurance Co. Under the deal, National Indemnity would have guaranteed a dividend to creditors of 32% on allowed total claims of up to $2 billion would have received all of Midland’s assets. The payments from National Indemnity would have been the first distribution to Midland creditors since the insurer collapsed in 1986.

Also in 2001, Munich Re, the world’s largest reinsurer, teamed up with Berkshire to cover the risk that an earthquake could cancel the 2002 World Cup soccer tournament in Japan and South Korea.

The year 2001 turned out to be a year the insurance and reinsurance industry would like to forget.

Even before the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, there were severe storms in the Midwest, Hurricane Allison, the sinking of the world’s largest oil rig off the coast of Brazil, the destruction of commercial airplanes at Sri Lanka’s airport as well as a declining stock market. By September, the industry had lost about $20 billion in capital. Then came 9/11, causing an additional loss of more than $30 billion.

The day after the terrorist attacks Berkshire issued the following press release about probable insurance claims:

It will be many years before even a rough range can be established for the losses that the insurance industry will sustain from the terrorist events of yesterday. In addition to the normal problems involved in estimating catastrophe losses from natural events, in this case there will be additional complicated issues in respect to coverage and liability that will take years to fully resolve.



Therefore, Berkshire Hathaway cannot now make an intelligent estimate of industry-wide losses. Historically, Berkshire’s share of catastrophe payments (pro-forma for General Re in the years prior to acquisition) has been in the range of 2-3% of the industry’s total losses. Berkshire’s present guess is that it will incur 3-5% of the industry’s loss in this catastrophe due to a different mix of policy coverages than that which prevails in natural catastrophes.



Berkshire following that press release with another on September 20, 2001, which said, in part:

Berkshire Hathaway Inc. has continued to evaluate the potential impact on its insurance operations from the tragic events of September 11, 2001. Berkshire continues to believe that its guess as reported on September 12, 2001 is still reasonable and that it will incur 3-5% of the industry’s loss from this catastrophe. Berkshire’s present guess as to the impact on its reported result will be the recognition of pre-tax losses of $2.2 billion. Unless further information indicates otherwise, this charge will be incorporated into Berkshire’s third quarter earnings.



Berkshire is a very large U.S. taxpayer having paid about $2.7 billion in U.S. Federal income taxes for the two years ended December 31, 2000. Since a very high percentage of the losses will be borne by U.S. subsidiaries, Berkshire will receive an immediate tax benefit in the form of a reduction of estimated taxes payable during the remainder of 2001 and a prompt refund of estimated payments made earlier in the year.



Berkshire sold its Republic Insurance Co. of Dallas, Texas, in 2007 to a firm run by Maurice “Hank” Greenberg, former CEO of AIG. Greenberg’s privately held investment firm Starr International Co. paid an undisclosed amount for the property and casualty company.

On December 29, 2007, Berkshire agreed to buy the reinsurance unit of ING, the Dutch banking and insurance company, for $440 million. The final sale price was a bit less because of losses that occurred by the time of the closing.

St. George Re, a new Bermuda-based insurer said (Reuters, January 9, 2008) that it would start offering U.S. companies protection against asbestos claims—with backing from Berkshire.

“We are currently in the underwriting process for over $5 billion of coverage,” St. George CEO Colin Barnes was quoted.

Asbestos, a material once widely used in the construction industry, has cost companies an estimated $70 billion and forced more then 70 firms into bankruptcy.

In 2006, Lloyd’s of London transferred billions of dollars of liabilities to Berkshire.

Recently, asbestos claims have started to taper off due to the limit courts have put on the number of filers.

In 2009, XL Insurance entered into an agreement with NICO to insure XL officers and directors with what is called “Side A” coverage. It offers the utmost protection to directors and officers in the event a client’s indemnity coverage fails to pay. The coverage even includes personal asset protection in situations when these sources of insurance are not available.

INSURING HURRICANES IN FLORIDA

“We would love to have a great business in any industry that we would

understand. We would understand insurance.” (Warren Buffett)

In 2008, Berkshire took in $224 million from the state of Florida as part of an agreement to provide massive capital if a major hurricane struck the state that year. Berkshire said it would buy $4 billion tax-free state bonds should the state’s catastrophe program need to raise money after a major hurricane (Bloomberg, July 10, 2008).

The state sells coverage to homeowners and private companies at below-market rates and plans to finance cash shortfalls in the bond market; however, raising the money in the bond markets is a task with an uncertain outcome. Consequently, Berkshire was paid for the right to trigger the purchase of the debt should the state’s hurricane fund, the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund, incur a loss of $25 billion in one hurricane season in 2008. In short, Berkshire would serve as a backstop for the fund.

Reports said that if a category three or higher hurricane hit Tampa, it could cause more than $25 billion in damages. If Berkshire bought the bonds, it would be paid 6.5% annual interest over the 30-year life of the bond. Meanwhile, Florida would charge assessments to policyholders to repay

the debt.

INSURING RISKY HOMES

In 2009, Berkshire added sales of insurance coverage on foreclosed homes and properties occupied by distressed borrowers. The policies are riskier than most because the properties are prone to neglect and vandalism. The number of foreclosed properties has soared with the credit crisis.

VERISK

Verisk, a risk-analysis company, held initial public offering (IPO) in October 2009, and raised $1.9 billion. Berkshire, one of the many owners of the Jersey City, New Jersey firm, did not sell any shares in the offering. Shares were sold by the insurers’ owners who also continued to hold some shares.

The proceeds went to the owners rather than to Verisk itself which provides actuarial and underwriting data.

Verisk stock soared 24% on the day of the offering.

INDIA

Berkshire reportedly made a modest entry into the Indian insurance industry in mid-2010 through a corporate agency.

Berkshire planned to set up a wholly owned unit in India to acquire a corporate agency license to sell auto insurance policies from Bajaj Albanz General Insurance. Berkshire planned on $11 million to support a structure for the business of direct sales of car insurance similar to the way GEICO does in the U.S.

BETTING AGAINST FRANCE

Berkshire won on an insurance bet when France was ousted from World Cup play in 2010. Ajit Jain sold the contract which would have required Berkshire to pay about $30 million had 1998 champion France won against the 32 teams entered.

TAKING ON CNA’S ASBESTOS LIABILITIES

Berkshire agreed to take $1.6 billion of asbestos liabilities, held by commercial insurer CNA Financial Corp. of Chicago which is 90% owned by Loews Corp., a conglomerate owned by New York’s Tisch family.

The deal was retroactive to January 1, 2010, and has a $4 billion limit.

CNA paid Berkshire’s National Indemnity a $2 billion reinsurance premium, but also asked Berkshire to put up $2.2 billion in collateral.

BUYING SUN LIFE’S REINSURANCE BUSINESS

Berkshire agreed to buy Sun Life’s reinsurance business on October 27, 2010. Toronto-based Sun Life Assurance Company of Canada sold its reinsurance business to Berkshire Hathaway Life Co. of Nebraska. The business, which has about 70 people in offices in Canada, the U.S., and Ireland, takes on risk from life insurers and backstops about $110 billion in life insurance policies. Berkshire planned to close the office in Ireland. Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.

2010

Berkshire’s insurance losses in 2010 included $304 million from the Chilean and New Zealand earthquakes and weather-related losses in Europe, Australia, and New England.

2011

Berkshire moved to expand its insurance underwriting of the oil and gas industry with an agreement with Willis Group Holdings.

Willis, a global broker, said Berkshire would provide up to $250 million in coverage on new policies. In the past, Berkshire had provided such coverage through Willis, but the agreement meant an expansion of the coverage at a time when insurance rates were rising for deepwater drilling in the wake of the Deepwater Horizon disaster that left BP on the hook for billions of dollars.

Berkshire began car insurance operations in India as berkshireinsurance.com, selling policies through India’s Bajij Alliance General Insurance. Berkshire started small with a $5 million investment.

AIG SELLS ASBESTOS

In April 2011, AIG transferred its asbestos risk to Berkshire. In the deal, AIG paid Berkshire $1.65 billion to take the risk for a coverage limit of $3.5 billion. Any further exposure beyond that limit would come back to AIG.

Berkshire unit National Indemnity, which did the deal, has become a partner in recent years for insurers looking to limit their asbestos exposure in exchange for large fees up-front.

As mentioned, in 2010, CNA did a similar deal for $2 billion and did a similar but larger deal with Equitas, a company formed by underwirters at Lloyd’s of London in 2006.

LOSSES IN EARLY 2011

Berkshire suffered heavy losses in the first quarter of 2011. Losses included roughly $1 billion for the earthquake and tsunami in Japan, about $400 million from New Zealand’s Christchurch earthquakes which caused as much damage relative to New Zealand’s GDP as 10 Katrinas, according to Buffett (Fortune, August 11, 2011), and add to that about $200 million from Australia’s floods and Cyclone Yasi.

Of the $1.7 billion loss, about $700 million came from Berkshire’s 20% quota share of Swiss Re’s business.

Losses continued in 2011 when April tornadoes ravaged the South and a freak hailstorm pummeled Long Island, New York.

And then there was Hurricane Irene which hit the East coast. Goodnight, Irene.

A BID FOR TRANSATLANTIC

Berkshire’s National Indemnity unit bid $3.25 billion for Transatlantic Holdings of New York, once majority-owned by beleaguered AIG which sold its Transatlantic stake in 2009.

The offer, over the weekend of August 6–7, 2011, came directly from Berkshire’s reinsurance guru Ajit Jain who wrote a letter to Transatlantic CEO Robert Orlich saying, “I have to believe that you will find our offer to buy all of Transatlantic shares outstanding at $52.00 per share to be an attractive offer.” Transatlantic stock had dropped about 12% in the weeks before the Berkshire offer as the federal debt ceiling debate raged.

Reports said the brief letter asked for a breakup fee of $75 million to National Indemnity if the two sides were to make an agreement, but it failed to close before the end of the year.

Buffett generally doesn’t like bidding wars or unsolicited takeovers. Jain’s offer for Transatlantic was unsolicited.

The offer was not subject to due diligence or funding conditions.

Reports said Berkshire’s offer, while 15% higher than the previous day’s closing stock price, was well below Transatlantic’s book value of $4.2 billion.

Berkshire’s bid was well above two other outstanding offers for Transatlantic, which has 640 employees and provides medical malpractice, auto liability, aviation, and directors and officers reinsurance. A stock-and-cash bid from Bermuda-based Validus Holdings was worth $2.9 billion; and a stock merger with Allied World Assurance Co. of Switzerland, which Transatlantic had already agreed to, was worth about $2.76 billion.

Jain asked for an answer by the close of business on Monday, August 8.

Transatlantic came back asking for a higher bid.

In mid-September, Allied canceled its merger bid for Transatlantic amid investor opposition. Afterwards, Berkshire renewed its $5.25 billion offer, but it was rejected by Transatlantic. And so the drama wore on.

Reports said that a group of investors led by former General Re CEO Joe Brandon had become a third party to enter into a confidentiality agreement to begin due diligence on Transatlantic.

Brandon resigned from Gen Re after the Securities and Exchange Commission pursued charges against Gen Re and AIG executives over transactions to hide losses, but Brandon was never personally charged by the SEC.

Brandon and Dan H. Jester, a U.S. Treasury official who worked on the AIG bailout, were reportedly considering a bid for Transatlantic.

In the end Transatlantic was bought by Alleghany Corp. for $3.4 billion in cash and stock. Joe Brandon, formerly CEO of Berkshire’s Gen Re unit, was named chairman of Transatlantic.

The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

World’s Most

Famous Cafeteria

The National Indemnity cafeteria is where the early Berkshire annual meetings were held. Attendees, about a dozen people, had to find the company’s vending machines or face starvation.



Standing Tall

The 110-story former Sears Tower in Chicago is the tallest building in North America.

(AP/Wide World Photos)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Insurance Group



Verne McKenzie

Berkshire’s former Chief Financial Officer Verne McKenzie showed reporters the National Indemnity cafeteria during Berkshire’s 1999 Annual Meeting weekend.

(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)

Fort Knox

The nondescript headquarters of Berkshire’s National Indemnity Co. is in Omaha. Many of Berkshire’s investments are bought by National Indemnity. Technically, this little building houses billions.



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Charles Heider

Berkshire’s Insurance Group The Story of Warren Buffett



Ringwalt’s 50-page Memoir

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Insurance Group

–––––––––––––––––

* Buffett seems to be saying, “Look, Ma—No Hands,” as he continued to knock on consultants and actuaries. Who can blame him? After all, the actuarial tables inventor, Edmond Halley, was a star-gazer who wrote fondly about the effects of opium. This is the selfsame fellow for whom Halley’s comet is named. He didn’t discover the great fire-ball that bears his name but merely recognized that the comet he saw in 1682 was the same that had been seen by others in 1456, 1531, and 1607. It became Halley’s comet 16 years after his death (Bill Bryson, A Short History of Nearly Everything, p. 45).



Swimming Naked

Shortly after World War II, Norman Mailer, in his treatise The Naked and The Dead, addressed the problem of swimming naked in insurance waters. Ha!

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Berkshire’s Insurance Group The Story of Warren Buffett



“Seven Hundred

Pounds of Gold”

In Robert Louis Stevenson’s Treasure Island, the gold is on the island; but there are pirates and dangers on the high seas. Float, like, the “seven hundred pounds of gold” on the island, can be hard to get and hard to keep.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Insurance Group

Berkshire’s Insurance Group The Story of Warren Buffett

The Next Warren Buffett?

Ajit Jain, born in India in 1951, is shown here before the Berkshire 1995 Annual Meeting. He and Buffett are friends and speak on the phone daily discussing Berkshire’s super-catastrophe reinsurance business which Jain heads. Buffett writes often about Jain. In Berkshire’s 1999 Annual Report, he wrote, “It’s simply impossible to evaluate Ajit’s value to Berkshire: he has from scratch built an outstanding reinsurance business, which during his tenure has earned an underwriting profit and now holds $6.3 billion of float.” In Berkshire’s 2002 Annual Report, Buffett wrote: “Ajit Jain’s reinsurance division was the major reason our float cost was so little last year. If we ever put a photo in a Berkshire annual report, it will be of Ajit. In color! Ajit’s operation has amassed $13.4 billion in float, more than all but a handful of insurers have ever built up. He accomplished this from a standing start in 1986, and even now has a workforce numbering only 20. And, most important, he has produced underwriting profits … If you see Ajit at our annual meeting, bow deeply.” In Berkshire’s 2003 Annual Report, Buffett called Jain a “one-of-a-kind manager.” Buffett said, “I still talk to him every day, That’s how I get smarter” (Bloomberg, July 11, 2006). Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 2007 Annual Report: “For one-of-a-kind mammoth transactions, the world now turns to him.” In Berkshire’s 2009 Annual Report, Buffett wrote, “If Charlie, I or Ajit are ever sinking in a boat—and you can only save one of us—swim to Ajit.” Buffett said in Berkshire’s 2010 Annual Report that Jain has created $30 billion in float. Buffett said in an interview (Bloomberg, March 22, 2011) that Berkshire’s board would support Jain as the next CEO, if he decided he wanted the job.



(Photo by

LaVerne Ramsey)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Insurance Group



A-Rod: The Next Mickey Mantle?

Texas Rangers slugger Alex “A-Rod” Rodriguez in a 2000 photo as a Seattle Mariner before the shortstop signed with the Texas Rangers, making him the highest paid athlete in sports history. The Rangers were once owned by former Texas Gov. George W. Bush. In 2004, Rodriguez, the American League’s MVP, was traded to the New York Yankees. After Barry Bonds broke Henry Aaron’s home run record in 2007, Buffett told The New York Times, that Rodriguez would one day break Bonds’s record. “I’m going to be 77 in a few weeks, and I hope I’m here when he breaks it.” Maybe that’s why A-Rod calls Buffett, “the smartest man in the world.” As A-Rod approached 600 home runs, Buffett said, “I plan to be at Yankee Stadium in center field” (New York Post, July 23, 2010).

(Photo courtesy of AP/Wide World Photos)



Berkshire’s Insurance Group The Story of Warren Buffett



(Courtesy of Bill Bates/The Carmel Pine Cone)



Central States Health and Life Conference

Buffett (right), William Kizer Sr. (center) and Kizer’s son Richard of Central States Health and Life, are at a 1991 press conference when Berkshire bought Central States. William Kizer said, “The price he quoted us was that he buys companies for 10 times earnings. I suggested, ‘Well, last year we made $10 million, so … that’s $100 million,’ and I gulped. And he said, ‘OK.’ And I said, ‘$125 million?’ He said, ‘You’re too late.’ ” William Kizer’s son John is now CEO of Central States which in 2009 was selected as the underwriter for Nestle’s PurinaCare’s pet health insurance policies. Only one percent of the 163 million dogs and cats in the U.S. have pet insurance policies, but, hey, the business is growing.

(Photo courtesy of Omaha World-Herald)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Insurance Group



Applications for Harvard Accepted Here

Ajit Jain, who has been described as “the all-world guy in reinsurance,” mans Berkshire’s insurance booth before the Berkshire 2001 Annual Meeting.

(Photo by Andrew Kilpatrick)

Berkshire’s Insurance Group The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Insurance Group

Berkshire’s Insurance Group The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Insurance Group



58





A LOOK AT GEICO


In 1951, Buffett wrote an article about GEICO for “The Security I Like Best” column of a New York publication.

In Berkshire’s 2005 Annual Report, Buffett reprinted this 1951 article and in referring to it said, “And that’s what I still call it [GEICO].”

Reprinted from

The Commercial and Financial Chronicle

Thursday, December 6, 1951

The Security I Like Best

Warren E. Buffett

Buffett-Falk & Co., Omaha, Nebr.

Government Employees Insurance Co.

Full employment, boomtime profits and record dividend payments do not set the stage for depressed security prices. Most industries have been riding this wave of prosperity during the past five years with few ripples to disturb the tide.

The auto insurance business has not shared in the boom. After the staggering losses of the immediate postwar period, the situation began to right itself in 1949. In 1950, stock casualty companies again took it on the chin with underwriting experience the second worst in 15 years. The recent earnings reports of casualty companies, particularly those with the bulk of writings in auto lines, have diverted bull market enthusiasm from their stocks. On the basis of normal earning power and asset factors, many of these stocks appear undervalued.

The nature of the industry is such as to ease cyclical bumps. Auto insurance is regarded as a necessity by the majority of purchasers. Contracts must be renewed yearly at rates based upon experience. The lag of rates behind costs, although detrimental in a period of rising prices as has characterized the 1945–1951 period, should prove beneficial if deflationary forces should be set in action.

Other industry advantages include lack of inventory, collection, labor and raw material problems. The hazard of product obsolescence is also absent.

Government Employees Insurance Corporation was organized in the mid-30’s to provide complete auto insurance on a nation-wide basis to an eligible class including: (1) Federal, State and municipal government employees; (2) active and reserve commissioned officers and the first three pay grades of non-commissioned officers of the Armed Forces; (3) veterans who were eligible when on active duty; (4) former policyholders; (5) faculty members of universities, colleges and schools; (6) government contractor employees engaged in defense work exclusively, and (7) stockholders.

The company has no agents or branch offices. As a result, policyholders receive standard auto insurance policies at premium discounts running as high as 30% off manual rates. Claims are handled promptly through approximately 500 representatives throughout the country.

The term “growth company” has been applied with abandon during the past few years to companies whose sales increases represented little more than inflation of prices and general easing of business competition. GEICO qualifies as a legitimate growth company based upon the following record:

Year Premiums Policy-

Written holders

1936 $ 103,696.31 3,754

1940 768,057.86 25,514

1945 1,638,562.09 51,697

1950 8,016,975.79 143,944

Of course the investor of today does not profit from yesterday’s growth. In GEICO’s case, there is reason to believe the major portion of growth lies ahead. Prior to 1950, the company was only licensed in 15 of 50 jurisdictions including D.C. and Hawaii. At the beginning of the year there were less than 3,000 policyholders in New York State. Yet 25% saved on an insurance bill of $125 in New York should look bigger to the prospect than the 25% saved on the $50 rate in more sparsely settled regions.

As cost competition increases in importance during times of recession, GEICO’s rate attraction should become even more effective in diverting business from the brother-in-law. With insurance rates moving higher due to inflation, the 25% spread in rates becomes wider in terms of dollars and cents.

There is no pressure from agents to accept questionable applicants or renew poor risks. In States where the rate structure is inadequate, new promotion may be halted.

Probably the biggest attraction of GEICO is the profit margin advantage it enjoys. The ratio of underwriting profit to premiums earned in 1949 was 27.5% for GEICO as compared to 6.7% for the 133 stock casualty and surety companies summarized by Best’s. As experience turned for the worse in 1950, Best’s aggregates profit margin dropped to 3.0% and GEICO’s dropped to 18.0%. GEICO does not write all casualty lines; however, bodily injury and property damage, both important lines for GEICO, were among the least profitable lines. GEICO also does a large amount of collision writing, which was a profitable line in 1950.

During the first half of 1951, practically all insurers operated in the red on casualty lines with bodily injury and property damage among the most unprofitable. Whereas GEICO’s profit margin was cut to slightly above 9%, Massachusetts’s Bonding & Insurance showed a 16% loss, New Amsterdam Casualty an 8% loss, Standard Accident Insurance a 9% loss, etc.

Because of the rapid growth of GEICO, cash dividends have had to remain low. Stock dividends and a 25-for-1 split increased the outstanding shares from 3,000 on June 1, 1948, to 250,000 on Nov. 10, 1951. Valuable rights to subscribe to stock of affiliated companies have also been issued.

Benjamin Graham has been Chairman of the Board since his investment trust acquired and distributed a large block of the stock in 1948. Leo Goodwin, who has guided GEICO’s growth since inception, is the able President. At the end of 1950, the 10 members of the Board of Directors owned approximately one-third of the outstanding stock.

Earnings in 1950 amounted to $3.92 as contrasted to $4.71 on the smaller amount of business in 1949. These figures include no allowance for the increase in the unearned premium reserve which was substantial in both years. Earnings in 1951 will be lower than 1950, but the wave of rate increases during the past summer should evidence themselves in 1952 earnings. Investment income quadrupled between 1947 and 1950, reflecting the growth of the company’s assets.

At the present price of about eight times the earnings of 1950, a poor year for the industry, it appears that no price is being paid for the tremendous growth potential of the company.



The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value A Look at GEICO



(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

Workplace of Cavemen and Cavewomen

GEICO operates out of this cavernous headquarters on the Washington DC/Chevy Chase line.



(Photo by Mary Porter)

Caveman Coaster Set: Priceless

Life Lessons in Business: Wisdom from

Warren E. Buffett and L. A. “Davy” Davidson

Written by Davidson’s granddaughter, Gwyn Davidson Larsen, this book recounts when Buffett first met Davidson at the GEICO office in Washington DC, and the friendship the two enjoyed. Buffett wrote in the foreword: “From that day in 1951, my life developed far differently than if I hadn’t met Davy. What I learned in those four hours was more valuable than the knowledge that I had acquired in all my college years. Indeed, Berkshire and I would not even be in the insurance business now if it hadn’t been for Davy’s initial instruction and encouragement.”



(Photo by Mary Porter)



59





GEICO


Always looking for that edge, Buffett took an early fancy to GEICO, the

auto insurance company that sells by mail, telephone and now by Internet also. Berkshire completed its purchase of GEICO in early 1996. “We’ll own GEICO forever,” Buffett said.

“[Ben] Graham paid $720,000 [in 1948] for the same percentage of GEICO for which Buffett in 1995 agreed to pay $2.3 billion” (Janet Lowe, Value Investing Made Easy, p. 170). Years earlier, Buffett bought Berkshire’s first half of GEICO for $40 million.

In a talk to Columbia business students, October 27, 1993, Buffett recounted his introduction to GEICO:

When I first got interested in GEICO, Graham was chairman of Government Employees Insurance Company [GEICO] at the time. I took his class here at Columbia.



I went to the library … and looked it up … and it said it was located in Washington, D.C. So I went down there on a Saturday in January from Columbia. And I got there fairly early, 11 or so o’clock, and the door was locked. And I banged on the door for a while and finally, a janitor came. And I said, “Is there anybody here I could talk to except you?” Well, there was a guy up on the fifth floor, and the janitor said, if you like, go up and see him.



So I went up and met him. He’s 90 or 91 years old now. His name’s Lorimer Davidson. [Born in Canada in 1902, Davidson died in 1999 at the age of 97.] At the time he was the investment officer there. He later became CEO. He spent about five hours with me that day. [Davidson said in a taped presentation at the Berkshire annual meeting in 1998 that he told young Buffett that day, “Next time please make an appointment and don’t come on Saturday morning.” Buffett smoothed the way with Davidson by telling him he was a student of Ben Graham’s.] He explained the whole insurance business to me, how it worked and how GEICO worked. And I became totally enamored of it.



And then I came back to New York, back at school, and I went downtown to talk [to] … big insurance specialists. And every one of them told me that [GEICO] was way overpriced compared to these other companies, for all kinds of reasons. And it didn’t make any sense to me.



From Davidson, Buffett learned the important concept of “float,” making money off other people’s money by investing insurance premiums.

In 1951, Buffett, only 21 years old, invested $10,282 in GEICO. In 1952, he sold out for $15,259 mainly to switch the money into Western Insurance Securities selling at one times earnings.

Buffett told Forbes (October 18, 1993) what he liked about GEICO: “It [GEICO] was a company selling insurance at prices well below all the standard companies, and making 15% profit margins. It had an underwriting cost then of 13% or so, whereas the standard companies had probably 30% to 35% cost. It was a company with a huge competitive advantage, managed by the guy that was my god.”

Eventually Buffett pitched the idea of buying GEICO to stockbrokers but was met with little interest. He sold his first 100 shares to his Aunt Alice. He could not convince investors of the potential of a business that sold directly to customers, bypassing agents and thereby making a 20% profit on its underwriting activities. The average profit was only 5%.

In 1971, Jerome Newman, following Ben Graham into retirement, nominated Buffett to take his place on GEICO’s board. Because Buffett had sizeable insurance investments, the SEC had reservations and the idea was dropped (Janet Lowe, Benjamin Graham on Value Investing, p. 152).

When Buffett first bought in, the entire company had a market value of $7 million.

In 1976, because of a miscalculation of its claims and underpricing of its premiums, GEICO was nearing bankruptcy. The stock had dropped from $61 to a scary $2 a share.

GEICO founder Leo Goodwin left his stock to his son, Leo Jr., who margined his shares. After the hit he took by his stock’s slide, Leo Jr., took his life.

Buffett believed that the company’s competitive advantages were intact. Further, he had great confidence in a newly-named chief executive, John J. Byrne. Byrne was a 43-year-old executive at Travelers when he was lured to GEICO. He entered the insurance industry as an actuary after earning math degrees from Rutgers University and the University of Michigan.

Byrne and Buffett became close friends, and GEICO became a cornerstone of Berkshire’s growth.

Byrne has said, “In a sense, GEICO sort of made Warren’s financial career” (Chicago Tribune, December 8, 1985).

“Charlie and I like, admire, and trust John,” Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1987 Annual Report. “We first got to know him in 1976 when he played a key role in GEICO’s escape from near bankruptcy,”

During its brush with bankruptcy, GEICO needed the help of an investment banker. Salomon Brothers’ John Gutfreund and General Re backed the turnaround.

Beginning in 1976 and continuing for five years, Buffett invested $45.7 million in GEICO with a cost basis of $1.31 per share (adjusted for a 5–1 stock split in 1992).

Buffett has described his thinking on the GEICO purchase this way (Investing in Equity Markets, pp. 11–12):

It wasn’t necessarily bankrupt but it was heading there. It was 1976. It had a great business franchise which had not been destroyed by a lot of errors that had been made in terms of exploiting that franchise. And it had a manager. … I felt he had the ability to get through an extraordinarily tough period there and to re-establish the value of that franchise. They still were a low-cost operator. They made all kinds of mistakes. They still didn’t know their costs because they didn’t know what their loss reserves should be and they got captivated by growth: they did all kinds of things wrong but they still had the franchise.



It was similar to American Express in late 1963 when the salad oil scandal hit it. It did not hurt the franchise of the travelers check or the credit card. It could have ruined the balance sheet of American Express, but the answer of course was that American Express with no net worth was worth a tremendous amount of money.



And GEICO with no net worth was worth a tremendous amount of money, too, except it might get closed up the next day because it had no net worth; but I was satisfied that the net worth would be there. The truth is, a lot of insurance companies for the ownership of it would have put up the net worth. We would have put it up. But they were trying to save it for the shareholders, which is what they should have done. It had a very valuable franchise. Take away all the net worth. Let’s just say that if GEICO paid out a $500 million dividend right now which would eliminate the net worth of GEICO, would it still have a lot of value? Of course, it would have a lot of value. You’d have to do something, you’d have to be part of another entity that kept insurance regulators happy, but the franchise value is the big value in something like that.



A Tweedy, Browne Company report once noted the importance of understanding where a company stands relative to its competitors: “With GEICO, for example, it was very important to know and understand that competitors such as Travelers, Aetna, State Farm Insurance, etc. would not adopt GEICO’s simple no-agent, no-commission business model, and match GEICO’s low prices for automobile insurance coverage. These competitors had too much to lose” (p. 41).

“GEICO is a company with a sustainable cost advantage over its competitors. There is nothing unique about auto insurance” (ibid., 48).

“In terms of what it’s already done and where it’s going over time, [it’s] probably the single best investment,” Buffett proclaimed at Berkshire’s 2005 Annual Meeting. “We purchased the first half of GEICO for $40 million. Now the second half cost us $2 billion. I’m glad I didn’t buy it in thirds.”

In 2008, GEICO became the nation’s third largest insurer of private passenger vehicles with 9.5 million cars insured and 5.6 million policyholders. It is one of the most significant businesses Berkshire owns, successful even during the economic turmoil of 2008 and 2009. GEICO tends to do well in economic downturns when saving money becomes even more important to people. The policyholders pay GEICO about $1,200 a year on average for the promise of car insurance which relies on direct marketing and offers a 24-hour, seven-day-a-week telephone line to its customers. “Each week, 10,000 drivers switch their car insurance to GEICO,” said a GEICO flier inserted in Berkshire’s 1995 Annual Report. Thirty thousand drivers a week inquire about a switch to GEICO’s, and only a relatively small percentage leave, and those are often because of old age or death.

The company has 500,000 policyholders in Florida alone and about 225,000 in Texas.

In the late 1990s State Farm had about 20% market share (see The Farmer from Merna); Allstate, 11%; Progressive, 7%; GEICO, 5%; and Nationwide, about 5%. In 1999, GEICO’s CEO Tony Nicely was quoted as saying, “Warren has told us that in 10 years, he wants GEICO to have a 10% market share,” (St. Petersburg Times, December 15, 1999). GEICO had more than 7% of the market at the end of 2007. By 2008, it was the third largest auto insurer in the U.S.

Although most property and casualty companies normally lose money some years on their underwriting, GEICO failed to make an underwriting profit only once in almost two decades. That means that almost every year, the company is generating huge amounts of money to invest without having to pay anything for it. For GEICO, that float is essentially an interest-free loan.

Insurers generally overcome their underwriting losses (culprits: drunk drivers, bad weather, and road rage) by making profits from their investments, and GEICO is well-known for savvy investments. It is willing to invest more heavily in the stock markets than most insurance companies, usually outdistancing stock performance averages thanks to the stock-picking abilities of its co-CEO, Lou Simpson. Buffett has called Simpson the best investment person in the property-casualty industry.

The company has kept its underwriting ratios below 100 for all but one year in the past decade, meaning that the company takes in more money in premiums than it pays out in claims and expenses. That sets it apart from most other property-casualty companies, which pay out more in claims and expenses than they collect in premiums and rely on investments alone for profits. In general, the industry is substantially dependent on investment income for profits.

Most of GEICO’s employees are in insurance underwriting; only a handful of people under Simpson make up the investing team.

The founders of GEICO and their principles are well worth mentioning.

GEICO was founded by Leo Goodwin and his wife, Lillian, in 1936. Leo Goodwin was an accountant for the insurance company United Services Automobile Association (USAA), a company located in San Antonio, Texas, that serves military personnel and their families. By studying accident statistics, Goodwin learned that federal, state, and municipal employees had fewer accidents than the general population. With this knowledge, the Goodwins chose to begin a business exclusively for this group of safe drivers. Thus GEICO was born.

Buffett has acknowledged GEICO’s source in targeting safe drivers: “GEICO was founded by an official of USAA and his wife, Leo and Lillian Goodwin, in 1936. We stole the idea from USAA, which insured military officers” (San Antonio Express-News, March 20, 1994). GEICO has since expanded to insure good drivers in many occupations.

Goodwin also learned that the largest overhead expense for most casualty insurance companies is the cost of advertising and selling. He saw that if you could cut out the middleman and insure better-than-average drivers, you could sell a $30 car insurance policy at a large savings of $6 or $7. Today, GEICO advertises widely and heavily but still uses no middleman.

In those early days (GEICO received its charter in 1936), Goodwin sought out Fort Worth banker, Cleaves Rhea, who believed in his idea. Rhea agreed to invest $75,000 if Goodwin could put up $25,000 to capitalize the fledgling company. Goodwin received 25% of the stock and Rhea 75%.

In the difficult early years, Goodwin and his wife Lillian worked 12 hours a day, 365 days a year for a combined monthly salary of $250. Goodwin devoted weekends to writing responses to customers’ inquiries or complaints.

Since the Goodwins targeted government employees as safe drivers with steady incomes, they knew that Washington, D.C. was the largest potential market; so the company moved there and rechartered in 1937.

The company’s underwriting losses declined each year until a $5,000 underwriting gain was achieved in 1940, with a $15,000 net income. This was the first of 35 consecutively profitable years.

In the fall of 1941, a hailstorm damaged thousands of cars in the Washington, D.C. area. Goodwin arranged with repair shops to work 24 hours a day exclusively for GEICO policyholders. Anticipating glass shortages, Goodwin had truckloads of glass shipped to Washington, D.C.

Because of Goodwin’s quick thinking, GEICO’s policyholders’ cars were repaired in days whereas policyholders with other companies waited weeks.

In 1948, the Rhea family sold its 75% stock holding to Graham-Newman and a small group of private investors. The value of the company at that time was about $3 million. Later that year, Graham-Newman distributed its stock to its shareholders, and the company became publicly owned.

In 1949, GEICO passed the $1-million profit mark and began to expand its

operations. In 1952, the company broadened its business to include all state,

county, and municipal employees, thus gaining a larger group of prospects.

Leo Goodwin retired in 1958 and became founder chairman. He had seen his novel concept—with its operating principles of selling direct and marketing to preferred-risk customers—grow from $104,000 in written premiums in 1936, to $36.2 million in 1957.

Investors fared well, too. An investment of $2,000 in GEICO shares in 1948, would have grown to $95,000 at Goodwin’s retirement in 1958.

The 1970s were not as kind to GEICO.

Between 1972 and 1974, the introduction of no-fault insurance and public clamor over skyrocketing insurance rates had resulted in states requiring prior rate approvals. After an era of over-expansion, rising claims and inflation attacking its stock and bond portfolies, GEICO tittered on the brink of bankruptcy in 1975.

In May 1976, the board of directors elected John Byrne as chairman, president and chief executive officer. Byrne took three drastic steps to turn the company around:

Operation Bootstrap—This included rate increases, vigorous cost controls, and a reunderwriting of the entire book of business.



Reinsurance—Byrne convinced 27 GEICO competitors that providing reinsurance relief was in their best interest.



New Capital—The investment banking firm of Salomon Brothers agreed to underwrite a $76-million stock offering, which increased common stock to an equivalent of 34.3 million shares.



Buffett liked what he saw in Byrne and arrived on the scene, buying a slice of GEICO’s stock.

It took only one year under Byrne’s leadership for GEICO’s operating profit to return. No wonder Buffett has called Byrne his “meal ticket” and the “Babe Ruth of insurance.”

After rescuing GEICO, Byrne later rescued Fireman’s Fund, which he sold to Allianz AG in 1991. Byrne kept the holding company called Fund American, swapping cash for its investment portfolio. “He liquidated much of that, returning nearly $3 billion of capital to shareholders through stock buybacks, and disappeared into a 100-year-old clapboard house in Norwich, Vermont.

“No rose-smeller he. For nearly 10 years, Byrne, 68, has searched for a new cause. He dabbled unsuccessfully in the mortgage business and tried to buy both Travelers and Home Holdings” (Forbes, July 24, 2000).

In 1997, Byrne retired as CEO of Fund American but came out of retirement and began buying small insurance companies. [Byrne’s current company is White Mountains Insurance Group.]

“Referring to his new companies, Bryne said, ‘If Buffett made me an offer at 20% above my intrinsic business value, paid for in Berkshire Hathaway stock, he’s got it. I don’t think he’s smart enough to respond to that’” (Forbes, July 24, 2000).

Back in 1949, GEICO had created outside “sister companies;” and in 1977, it began to buy back those stocks.

Also in 1977, Byrne recruited William B. Snyder from Travelers to join him at GEICO; Snyder, along with others, helped Byrne launch the successful Operation Bootstrap.

Snyder was chosen to be GEICO’s chairman and chief executive when Byrne left in 1985.

Under Snyder’s leadership, the emphasis at GEICO, now based in Chevy Chase, Maryland, emphasized stellar driving records: If anything goes wrong with that record, Snyder has said, “we can be fairly unforgiving.”

In 1991 when Berkshire already owned 48% of the stock, the stake was duly noted by Chairman Snyder at GEICO’s annual meeting held at a regional office in Dallas.

Buffett showed up for the meeting, taking a seat in the back row. More than 90% of the stock was represented in the room. Snyder, conducting the meeting and spotting Buffett in the back of the room, said, “Warren Buffett is here.” The statement was met with applause. Snyder added, “Together, Warren Buffett and I own 48% of the company.”

The prospect of being controlled by Berkshire never seemed to bother Snyder: “Warren Buffett is such an enlightened owner that we frankly wouldn’t be distressed. We thought about this back when he had 35%–37% of the stock, and we see no problem. Nothing will change.” Snyder said Buffett exercised no control over the company at that time.

Lou Simpson and then president Tony Nicely, both responded, “Absolutely nothing changes.”

After Snyder left the company in 1993, Nicely took the lead as co-CEO, running insurance operations, along with co-CEO Simpson who handled capital operations.

Nicely is a lifelong Virginian whose father and grandfather devoted a total of 94 years to the Chesapeake and Ohio Railroad (Wall Street Journal, October 17, 2000).

Starting as a clerk at GEICO at age 18, Nicely worked his way up through the company ranks.

Nicely spoke to students of Old Dominian University in Norfolk, Virginia in 2004, telling them that everything depends on reputation. He said if any [GEICO] employees are caught lying, cheating, or stealing, “there are no warnings; [they] will be fired.” He also recommended that the students read the Berkshire annual reports (Virginia Pilot, February 18, 2004).

In late 1995, GEICO had a $900 million stock portfolio containing such stocks as Freddie Mac, Nike, Reebok, about 1,300 shares of Berkshire, and a bond portfolio of more than $370 million consisting of tax-exempt municipal bonds and Treasury securities. GEICO sold its three million shares of Reebok in late 1995, but kept its 2,350,000 shares of Nike (The Wall Street Journal, April 23, 1996). Its portfolio has included such stocks as Burlington Northern, Mattel, and Manpower.

GEICO, as noted, puts a significant portion of its money in bonds. In 1998, The Washington Post (March 30) pointed out GEICO’s preference for bonds over equities: “GEICO prefers not to invest much in equities. Instead, the giant auto insurer sinks most of its $6.5 billion investment portfolio into safe, stodgy federal, state, and municipal bonds that yield about 6% a year.”

Unlike many insurance firms, GEICO has no exposure to real estate and little to junk bonds.

The company’s earnings have continued to be solid, with only a few fender-

benders along the way. It has the ability on the investment side to be wise with its money despite its penchant for “muni-bonds.” After all, its investment folks are occasionally in touch with Buffett.

NEWS FLASH ON AUGUST 25, 1995! Berkshire bought the remainder of GEICO for $2.3 billion. Berkshire had previously acquired 51% of the stock and agreed to buy the remaining 49%, making GEICO a wholly owned unit of Berkshire. GEICO is run independently of Berkshire’s other insurance operations.

Berkshire and GEICO officials had initially talked about a purchase paid for with securities, but Buffett said that although “it looked like it might work, it was very complicated.” Tax problems nixed the idea.

The final agreement ended up being $70 per share in cash: “So management said they would be satisfied if we could do it for $70 [a share],” Buffett noted. “I gulped and squirmed and said okay. They got the last penny out of me” (The Washington Post, August 26, 1995).

Of his 10951 investment in GEICO, Buffett said, “I felt very comfortable with that commitment, and I feel equally comfortable with the major commitment that Berkshire Hathaway made today.”

In the early days, Buffett bought GEICO on the cheap; but in order to buy the whole company, he was willing to pay full dollar for a one-of-a-kind business. What accounts for the change? Business Week (July 5, 1999) reported that Tony Nicely had no explanation, “The Buffett psyche is notoriously labyrinthine. I could easily spend a lot of time trying to analyze Warren if I didn’t consciously try not to. There are certain mysteries you just have to accept.”

How did Berkshire buy the rest of GEICO? The Omaha World-Herald ran a story from The Washington Post (November 7, 1995) that quoted proxy information filed with the SEC:

For years, Buffett had mentioned to top GEICO officials that his company, Berkshire Hathaway, should consider acquiring 100% of GEICO. But no discussions took place until August 17, 1994. That was the date on which Buffett met in Washington with Louis A. Simpson, co–chief executive of GEICO and the company’s longtime financial whiz, and Samuel C. Butler, chairman of the GEICO board’s executive committee.



Buffett suggested that Berkshire acquire GEICO in a tax-free transaction, with GEICO shareholders swapping their shares for Berkshire common stock. Simpson and Butler said they were concerned about the proposal. First, because Berkshire stock did not pay a dividend, as did GEICO. Second because they thought it would be difficult to accomplish the stock swap in a fair way.



Berkshire Hathaway stock, one of the highest-priced stocks on the market, was then selling for $18,700. A GEICO stockholder who had 200 GEICO shares would have received only a fraction of a Berkshire share and since no fractional shares would be issued, the GEICO stockholder would wind up with taxable cash.



The conversation then turned to the possible use of a new Berkshire convertible preferred stock having a dividend equal to GEICO’s dividend. Buffett indicated that he’d be willing to swap one share of the preferred stock—with a stated value of $55 a share—for each share of GEICO. Butler replied that, while he would talk it over with GEICO’s financial advisors, he would not recommend any such deal to the GEICO board unless the fair market value of the Berkshire preferred was at least above $60.



Meanwhile, Buffett raised questions about tax issues involved in a tax-free stock swap; and the two companies started to research those issues. The article continued:

On March 1, 1995, Simpson and Butler met in New York with Buffett and his partner, Charles T. Munger. Again they talked about a deal, but each side held firm to its position on price. Butler and Simpson noted that since August, Berkshire stock had climbed to $22,500 a share. And they expressed serious concern about how that lofty price might affect the fair market value of a share of Berkshire preferred stock, especially if something should happen to Buffett.



GEICO officials asked Butler to call Buffett and tell him they would go for a $70-a-share cash transaction or for a convertible preferred stock deal that was worth $70 in the market. Two days later, Butler made the call. Buffett asked if the price was negotiable. Butler answered no. Buffett then said he really did not want to issue preferred stock at $70 a share. Moreover, he said, he would prefer a cash deal.

Buffett then said he wanted to talk to his partner Munger about the deal. Later in the day, after conferring with Munger, called Butler and said yes, he would agree to do the deal for $70 in cash.

“To sum up,” Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1995 Annual Report, “we entered 1995 with an exceptional insurance operation of moderate size. By adding GEICO, we entered 1996 with a business still better in quality, much improved in its growth prospects, and doubled in size. More than ever, insurance is our core strength.”

In his “Owner’s Manual” to shareholders in June 1996, Buffett wrote of the financial benefits afforded Berkshire from its insurance holdings:

Berkshire has access to two low-cost, non-perilous sources of leverage that allow us to safely own far more assets than our equity capital alone would permit: deferred taxes and “float,” the funds of others that our insurance business holds because it receives premiums before needing to pay out losses. Both of these funding sources have grown rapidly and now total about $12 billion.



Better yet, this funding to date has been cost-free. Deferred tax liabilities bear no interest. And as long as we can break even in our insurance underwriting—which we have done, on the average, during our 29 years in the business—the cost of the float developed from that operation is zero. Neither item, of course, is equity; these are real liabilities. But they are liabilities without covenants or due dates attached to them. In effect, they give us the benefit of debt—an ability to have more assets working for us—but saddle us with none of its drawbacks.



Of course, there is no guarantee that we can obtain our float in the future at no cost. But we feel our chances of attaining that goal

are as good as those of anyone in the insurance business. Not

only have we reached the goal in the past (despite a number of important mistakes by your Chairman), but have now, with our acquisition of GEICO, materially improved our prospects for getting there in the future.



At Berkshire’s 1996 Annual Meeting, Buffett said, “Five years from now, I think you’ll be very happy with the fact that we own 100% of GEICO.” It didn’t take five years for shareholders to realize that GEICO is one of Berkshire’s most promising growth opportunities. One huge hidden value at Berkshire: There is no stock quote for GEICO, and some may forget to value it fully. GEICO just may be worth twice what Buffett paid for the whole company.

When asked why it took him so long to acquire all of GEICO, Buffett said, “It takes money, you know” (Omaha World-Herald, August 26, 1995).

Buffett told shareholders in 1996, “The real news at Berkshire this year is the exceptional performance of GEICO.”

In Berkshire’s 1996 Annual Report, Buffett wrote about GEICO’s sustainable cost advantage: “GEICO gets more than one million referrals annually and these produce more than half of our new business, an advantage that gives us enormous savings in acquisition expenses—and that makes our costs still lower.… GEICO’s sustainable cost advantage is what attracted me to the company way back in 1951, when the entire business was valued at $7 million. It is also why I felt Berkshire should pay $2.3 billion last year for the 49% of the company we didn’t then own.”

GEICO’s voluntary auto policies grew 10% in 1996, the best rate ever to that point. That was nothing compared to 1997, when they grew 16%. By mid 1999, policies were growing at the rate of 23.3%. By April 2003, GEICO had hit a milestone of five million policyholders and was insuring 8.4 million vehicles.

After the acquisition, Buffett put a new incentive plan in place with half of the employee bonuses and profit-sharing based on earnings of business that has been on the books more than a year, and half of that tied to policyholder growth.

Little dots and stray brush marks that Buffett made with GEICO on his canvas years ago now formed a complete picture, one big part of his continuing masterpiece in the making.

GEICO, which has a triple-A credit rating from S&P, is tearing up the road.

The company has 22,000 employees at 12 major U.S. locations: Washington DC; Woodbury, New York; Buffalo, New York; Fredericksburg, Virginia; Macon, Georgia; San Diego, California; Dallas, Texas; Honolulu, Hawaii; Coralville, Iowa; Lakeland, Florida; Virginia Beach, Virginia; and Tucson, Arizona.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1997 Annual Report, “GEICO is flying, and we expect that it will continue to do so.” No wonder he titled his insurance segment in the report: “Insurance—GEICO (1-800-555-2756) and Other Primary Operations.” In the 1998 report, the section simply became GEICO (1-800-847-7536). The 1999 Annual Report added GEICO.com to that segment.

Also in the 1997 report, Buffett pushed for increased market share for GEICO: “GEICO’s underwriting profitability will probably fall in 1998, but the company’s growth could accelerate. We’re planning to step on the gas: GEICO’s marketing expenditures this year will top $100 million, up 50% from 1997. Our market share today is only 3%, a level of penetration that should increase dramatically in the next decade. The auto insurance industry is huge—it does about $115 billion of volume annually—and there are tens of millions of drivers who would save substantial money by switching to us.”

At the opening of GEICO’s West Coast headquarters in Poway, California, Buffett recounted his earlier interest in GEICO and that long-ago Saturday visit to the Washington DC headquarters when he met with Lorimer Davidson: “When I got there, the doors were locked, so I pounded on them until a janitor came.… It probably all goes back to that janitor who opened the door, but I didn’t get his name” (San Diego Union-Tribune, September 23, 1999).

After his appearance at the opening, he met with employees and signed autographs. As the crush of people grew, GEICO officials tried to get Buffett away. He insisted he was fine, adding, “I don’t mind; I just pretend I’m signing insurance policies” (San Diego Union-Tribune, September 23, 1999).

In March 2000, he visited the Woodbury office in Long Island to congratulate employees on their superior performance. As the story goes, Buffett signed a ton of autographs on $1 bills and remembered people’s names.

This was only a short time after reports stated that he was on his deathbed in an Omaha hospital. Falsely. Or either he made a quick and miraculous recovery.

Under Berkshire, GEICO has transformed itself into a huge force as the low-cost producer in the industry. Buffett changed the compensation structure with profitability of the business factored into uncapped bonus plans (16.9% of employee compensation in 1996, 26.9% in 1997 and 32.3% in 1998). A big effort was put into both advertising and the company’s infrastructure. GEICO is one of the largest advertisers on cable TV.

Buffett promised an even greater push at GEICO with $300–$350 million for advertising alone in 2000. [GEICO spent $631 million on ads in 2006.] “Tony’s [Tony Nicely’s] foot is going to stay on the advertising pedal (and my foot will be on his),” Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1999 Annual Report.

Also in that report, Buffett stated he considered such advertising expenditures the best investment Berkshire could make: “Through its advertising, GEICO is acquiring a direct relationship with a large number of households that, on average, will send us $1,100 year after year. That makes us—among all companies, selling whatever kind of product—one of the country’s leading direct merchandisers.”

Value Line (March 31, 2000) discussed Berkshire’s marketing program for GEICO: “The magnitude and rate of growth of Berkshire Hathaway’s investment in the private passenger automobile insurance business is awesome in scope. To be sure, the impact of the aggressive marketing program on profitability has been significant and not well received by investors. But we think the company will stay the course, much to the dismay of its peers in the business, since Berkshire Hathaway is taking a calculated risk in building a known brand name. In fact, management described GEICO as one of the largest direct merchandisers in the nation. The strategy could reshape the industry and have ramifications above and beyond the personal automobile sector.”

In 2000, GEICO ran into a wall as its advertising failed to bring in much new business and a number of policyholders left. GEICO spent $260.7 million in advertising in 2001 compared with $165.4 million in 2000 (Omaha World-Herald, June 26, quoting Advertising Age). Apparently, many policyholders left for State Farm, the nation’s biggest auto insurer. But Buffett figured GEICO’s “cost of float” was about 6% whereas State Farm’s was about 23%. “The willingness of the largest player in the industry to tolerate such a cost makes the economics difficult for other participants.” Buffett maintains that GEICO has the better business model because it is a low-cost operator, and the entire industry was being hit with increasing costs of wrecks. Buffett summed up GEICO’s good year in Berkshire’s Annual Report: “At GEICO, everything went so well in 2002, that we should pinch ourselves. Growth was substantial, profits were outstanding, policyholder retention was up and sales productivity jumped significantly. … GEICO took in $2.9 billion in premiums when Berkshire acquired full ownership in 1996. Last year, its volume was $6.9 billion.” GEICO turned in such a terrific year in 2002 that employees were awarded profit-sharing payments equal to 19% of their base salary.

Just for fun, here are some supposedly actual statements found on industry insurance forms as to the cause of accidents:

1. Coming home, I drove into the wrong house and collided with a tree I don’t have.

2. The other car collided with mine without giving warning of its intention.

3. I thought my window was down, but I found out it was up when I put my head through it.

4. A truck backed through my windshield into my wife’s face.

5. A pedestrian hit me and went under my car.

6. I pulled away from the side of the road, glanced at my mother-in-law, and headed over the embankment.

7. I attempted to kill a fly, and I drove into a telephone pole.

8. I had been shopping for plants all day, and was on my way home. As I reached the intersection, a hedge sprang up obscuring my vision; and I did not see the other car.

9. I had been driving for 40 years, when I fell asleep at the wheel and had an accident.

10. I was on my way to the doctor with rear end trouble and my universal joint gave way, causing me to have an accident.

11. My car was legally parked as it backed into the other vehicle.

12. An invisible car come [sic] out of nowhere, struck my car and vanished.

13. I told the police that I was not injured, but on removing my hat, found that I had a fractured skull.

14. An indirect cause of the accident was a little guy in a small car with a big mouth.

15. I was thrown from the car as it left the road. I was later found in a ditch by some stray dogs.

16. The telephone pole was approaching. I was attempting to swerve out of its way when it struck my front end.

With drivers like these, how can auto insurers be profitable?

Jokes aside, GEICO’s success results from being the low-cost producer, grabbing the float, and investing it well.

In what’s called a “situ-mercial,” GEICO ran a spot in a crime drama weaving itself into the story. A lawyer for an inmate in a jail finishes a call on his cell phone. “Well,” the lawyer says, “I’ve got some fantastic news.” The inmate asks, “I’m outta here?” … “No, it was GEICO,” the lawyer replied. “I just saved myself a bunch of money on my car insurance” (The Wall Street Journal, March 2, 2004).

A birthday card featuring the GEICO gecko has been circulating:

HE can save you a BUNCH on

CAR INSURANCE

But he can’t do squat

about your AGE.

Happy Birthday

GEICO broke ground October 21, 2004, on its $40 million two-story, 250,000-square-foot building in Amherst, New York. The facility took a year to build and will eventually employ 2,500 people. The facility played a key role in helping GEICO surpass the six-million mark for the number of policies in force in 2004.

GEICO DRIVES BACK TO NEW JERSEY

On August 16, 2004, GEICO began selling auto insurance in New Jersey for the first time since 1976 when that state switched to no-fault insurance; and GEICO could no longer afford to do business there. Buffett said one reason it returned was due to the state’s get-tough approach on insurance fraud, which saves the industry money. Buffett, on hand for the announcement, said that GEICO was not “entitled” to a single policy in the state but hopes to earn many by delivering low-cost protection.

GEICO thereby joined the growing field of auto insurers competing in the Garden State, citing insurance reforms designed by Governor James McGreevey and others as reasons for resuming business in New Jersey. Previously, more than 40 insurers, including GEICO, had bypassed the state where the population, price of cars, and frequency of phony claims pushed average premiums to some of the highest levels in the country. Citizens were upset at the high premiums, and insurance firms quit the state because business there wasn’t profitable.

New Jersey ranks 7th of all the states in terms of amount of auto premiums written and represents 3.9% ($6 billion) of the U.S. private passenger car insurance market. The new laws introduced in June 2003 stopped forcing insurers to cover all drivers and sped up the regulatory process for granting rates changes. Statutory reforms initiated by former New Jersey Banking and Insurance Commissioner Holly Bakke were largely responsible for prompting Mercury and GEICO to re-enter the market.

California-based Mercury General was the first company to come back into the state in 2003.

GEICO’s new office in Amherst, New York, handles all the sales, service, and underwriting of the business in New Jersey. GEICO’s push into New Jersey got off to a fast start. “We are now serving 140,000 policyholders—about 4% of the New Jersey market,” Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 2004 Annual Report. By 2007, GEICO had more than 10% of the New Jersey market.

CREDIT CARD BLUNDER

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 2009 Annual Report that his idea for GEICO to issue a credit card was a fiasco costing the company $50 million, before the plug was pulled and the receivables were sold off for 55 cents on the dollar.

Buffett said he brushed off questions about launching the card indicating that he was “older and wiser.” But he later concluded, “I was just older.”

In 2010, Buffett turned rock star in a GEICO video singing, “Peace of mind, peace of mind.” Dressed like W. Axl Rose of the 1980s hair band Guns N’ Roses, Buffett appeared with his head wrapped in a purple bandana, red hair down to his chest and wearing a black leather jacket. After GEICO employees sang from their cubicles, Gecko played lead guitar and a chorus of customers chimed in. The clip went viral on YouTube.

TODAY

By late 2011, GEICO had 9% of the U.S. market share and was the third largest auto insurer in America. State Farm maintained the lead with about 18%, and AllState had about 10% of the market.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Ben Graham was interviewed about GEICO in 10976:

Hartman L. Butler Jr., C.F.A.: Do you think GEICO will survive?

Graham: Yes, I think it will survive. There is no basic reason why it won’t survive; but, naturally I ask myself whether the company did expand much too fast without taking into account the possibilities of these big losses. It makes me shudder to think of the amounts of money they were able to lose in one year. Incredible! It is surprising how many of the large companies have managed to turn in losses of $50 million or $100 million in one year, in these last few years. Something unheard of in the old days. You have to be a genius to lose that much money (Financial Analysts Journal, November/

December 1976. Copyright 1976, Financial Analysts Federation, Charlottesville, Va., as found in Janet Lowe, The Rediscovered Benjamin Graham, pp. 267–268).

Of Permanent Value GEICO

GEICO The Story of Warren Buffett



The Farmer from Merna

This book tells the story of the rise of the State Farm Insurance Companies.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value GEICO



“If You Have a New Son …”

“If you have a new son or grandson in 2006, name him Tony,” Buffett wrote of GEICO’s Tony Nicely in Berkshire’s 2005 Annual Report. Buffett had earlier offered high praise for Nicely in Berkshire’s 1998 Annual Report: “Quite simply there is no one in the business world who could run GEICO better than Tony does. His instincts are unerring, his energy boundless, and his execution is flawless.” Nicely also was mentioned by Bill Gates as one of four CEOs who offered help with Gates’s second book, Business @ the Speed of Thought. Nicely once replied to a request for an updated photo self-deprecatingly: “We are so cost conscious around GEICO that we don’t take many pictures, especially of the CEO. My ugly mug hasn’t changed very much.”

GEICO The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value GEICO



Salesman of the Century

Buffett, GEICO super salesman, holds forth during the Berkshire annual meeting weekend in 1999.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

GEICO The Story of Warren Buffett



Drive Carefully!

A gecko graces the GEICO booth at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2004.

(Photo

by Andrew

Kilpatrick)

Of Permanent Value GEICO



Tony Nicely and Buffett Hold a Sales Meeting

“Tony, we have thousands of folks here,” Buffett may be saying. “If you’ll take the left half of the auditorium, I’ll take the right. Let’s see how many new policies we can sell during the annual meeting lunch break. We need to get moving on State Farm.”



“Could Switching to GEICO Really Save You 15% or More on

Your Car Insurance?”

Buffett meets GEICO’s gecko at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2006. GEICO’s Tony Nicely, at right partially hidden by the gecko’s arm, is probably smiling at having a free ad. Gecko was the brainchild of GEICO’s Ted Ward, vice president of marketing, and the Martin Agency. They arrived at the idea after a focus group was calling the company both geeko and gecko. The ad was aimed at easing the confusion so the thought that developed was, “I’m a gecko, not to be confused with GEICO.”

(Photo courtesy

of Jeff Hull)

GEICO The Story of Warren Buffett

An Urbane Green Sales Lizard with a British Accent—Gecko at Work

This GEICO ad was an insert in Berkshire’s 2003 Annual Report. GEICO has become known for ads involving cheap, amusing gags. In one, a talking duck strolls along and says: “GEICO Direct could save you hundreds of dollars on car insurance.” Result? The duck briefly lifts his wing over his bill, then reveals that his bill has shrunk. Says the duck: “Smaller bill.” Later GEICO featured a computer-generated gecko. The popular reptile acted as the company spokesman. In one ad, the lizard received telephone calls mistaking his number for the company’s number, causing him to answer the phone in a shower cap and towel. The green gecko pitchman became a pop cultural icon for ads. Another ad shows volcanoes erupting but a TV reporter remains calm saying the good news is that he just saved a bundle on his car insurance with GEICO. The humorous gecko ads and ones featuring an indignant caveman really caught on. The “so easy a caveman can do it” were also a big hit that featured a put-out caveman who in one ad says, “Walking upright, discovering fire, inventing the wheel, laying the foundation for all mankind … sorry we couldn’t get that to you sooner.”

“Every night people go out and go crazy all over France. Last night over 600 cars were set on fire. Six hundred cars! But the good news is that the rioters saved over 15% by switching to GEICO.” —David Letterman



An Indignant Caveman

Goes Hollywood

The caveman ads became so popular that ABC-TV created a show that started airing in the fall of 2007 called Cavemen. The show focused on a trio of prehistoric characters who cope with Homo sapiens in modern San Diego, thus making GEICO the first insurance company to inspire a TV sitcom. GEICO had no creative say in the show but did collect a royalty. The show didn’t last, but the ads have been so successful that GEICO returned to Martin Agency in Richmond, Virginia, for a series of commercials spoofing scandalous “scoops” on celebrity television often focusing on how an ordinary person turned his life around after saving money with GEICO. A number of ads feature an excited celebrity telling the story of a happy customer.





(Photo courtesy of Jeff Hull)

“Name Him Tony.”

GEICO’s Tony “If-you-have-a-new-son-or-grandson-in-2006,-name-him-Tony” Nicely and Buffett converse at the Berkshire annual meeting in 2006, perhaps discussing how to get 7.7% of the auto insurance market in 2008. Nicely is one of a handful of

people mentioned as a possible successor to Buffett. He has successfully run a big corporation and is well liked throughout the Berkshire world.

Of Permanent Value GEICO



Get Your Motor Running

GEICO is now the third-largest car insurer in the U.S. State Farm is by far the biggest with an 18% market share. Allstate is the second largest with an 11% market share.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Not Buffett

This GEICO ad was an insert to

Berkshire’s 2009 Annual Report.

Holly Bakke



(Photo by Gisela Baur)

GEICO The Story of Warren Buffett

GEICO Timeline

1948: Ben Graham paid $720,000 for the same percentage of GEICO Buffett paid $2.3 billion for in 1995.

1950: Buffett visits closed GEICO headquarters on a Saturday, meets Lorimer Davidson.

1951: Buffett invests $10,282 in GEICO stock.

1952: Buffett sells GEICO stock.

1971: Buffett nominated for GEICO board, but SEC reservations caused idea to be dropped.

1976: GEICO stock dropped to $2 per share due to losses.

1976: Board of directors elect John Byrne as chairman, president, and CEO.

1993: Tony Nicely becomes co-CEO of insurance operations with Lou Simpson as co-CEO of capital operations. GEICO has 2% market share.

1995: Berkshire acquires remaining 49% of stock for $2.3 billion.

2008: GEICO becomes third largest writer of personal auto insurance behind State Farm and Allstate.

2010: GEICO has 8.8% of the industry market share.

Timeline for Advertising Costs

(Adapted from version by Rick Mayhew)

Ads even include being a sponsor on “C’mon Man!” on ESPN’s Monday Night Football.

1995: $35 million

2001: $219 million

2003: $238 million

2004: $502 million

2006: $631 million

2007: $751 million

2010: $900 million (much of it on Gecko and Caveman commercials)

Of Permanent Value GEICO



60





GEN RE


“The welfare and prosperity of a modern developed national economy depends heavily upon the strength and quality of the insurance business serving that economy.” —Eric Maynard,

author of the unpublished A History of General Reinsurance Corporation

Berkshire announced on June 19, 1998, that it planned to buy General Re Corp. Based in Stanford, Connecticut, General Re is the largest reinsurance company in the U.S. and one of the largest in the world. Reinsurance companies insure other insurance companies. Not the sort of thing to which the young and restless aspire.

Berkshire offered a 29% premium to Gen Re’s closing price that day of $220.25 a share. The gigantic deal, paid for in Berkshire stock, did not close until December 21, 1998, after a ruling by the IRS that the merger was tax-free. The tax-free ruling was important since Buffett paid in Berkshire stock. He essentially “sold” about 20% of Berkshire’s stock holdings and picked up a large bond holding. Without paying taxes, Buffett shifted the percentage of things away from stocks and into bonds.

But judging by Berkshire’s sharp stock price decline after the acquisition was announced, many Gen Re shareholders chose not to become Berkshire shareholders.

Berkshire is not everyone’s cup of tea. For example, William A. Oates, Jr., of the Northeast Investors Growth Fund, sold his Gen Re stock in 1998 saying, “I sold it because I’m one of these guys that doesn’t believe in Warren Buffett. I think he’s a cult, and I think that Berkshire Hathaway is overvalued” (The New York Times, November 1, 1998).

Berkshire’s stock slide wasn’t all because of Gen Re’s poor performance in a down cycle for the insurance industry. Shortly after Buffett had referred to big Berkshire stock holdings Coke and Gillette as “Inevitables,” they took a dive as their foreign sales slumped. Disney, Wells Fargo, Freddie Mac, and Wesco stocks also dropped in mid-1999.

Based on prices at the time of the deal’s announcement, Gen Re’s shareholders could have expected about $276.50 per Gen Re share or a total of about $22 billion. But because the Berkshire–Gen Re interlinked stock package declined in the six months prior to the closing, Gen Re shareholders received $204.40 a share or about $16 billion in Berkshire stock, about 16 times 1998 operating earnings.

Buffett commented on one of the benefits of the merger: “The merger will bring more than $80,000 of investments to Berkshire for each Class A or Class A–equivalent share issued. That’s beneficial, being nearly double the existing level, or, put another way, the merger brings more than $24 billion of additional investments to Berkshire.” Gen Re owned roughly $19 billion in bonds and about $5 billion in stocks, and it had about $15 billion in “float” (premiums paid by clients but not yet paid out for claims). Gen Re has insurance interests in workers’ compensation, professional liability, auto and casualty and life, as well as medical malpractice; but Gen Re, while profitable, is smaller now than it was in 1998.

The giant deal boosted Berkshire’s assets by about 65% while increasing the number of Berkshire shares only about 22%.

Buffett talked of synergies, something he rarely does. He said the merger would remove constraints on earnings volatility at Gen Re, which in the past had forced Gen Re to hand off some of the business it wrote to other companies. Now wide swings in earnings could be better absorbed by the financially strong combination of Berkshire–Gen Re. Gen Re could develop its global business at whatever pace it saw fit. Also, Gen Re gained tax flexibility because of the reliability of Berkshire’s future large and diverse streams of taxable income. Lastly, Berkshire’s huge capital allowed all its insurance units—including Gen Re—to operate unfettered by worries about a sharp market decline. “These synergies will be coupled with General Re’s pristine worldwide reputation, long-standing client relationships and powerful underwriting, risk management and distribution capabilities,” said Buffett. “This combination virtually assures both Berkshire and Gen Re shareholders that they will have a better future than if the two companies operated separately.”

At a press conference, Buffett said, “We’re creating Fort Knox here.”

Ron Ferguson, Gen Re’s CEO, was to join Berkshire’s board, but then declined. “Ron notified me he deferred his decision to be on the board,” Buffett said at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1999. Buffett explained that serving on a board can be restricting when it comes to matters of stock purchases, compensation packages, and taxes. “The invitation to him to be on the board is 100% open to Ron at any time.” Ferguson, however, didn’t join Berkshire’s board in 2001 after his retirement from Gen Re simply because he didn’t want to, according to reports.

Signs were apparent that Gen Re’s management was unsettled by the Berkshire purchase. According to Business Week, March 20, 2000, “Ferguson outraged many of his colleagues by keeping his negotiations with Berkshire secret from all but one of them [in the six-person office of chairman] until just before the deal was announced. Ferguson might have anticipated opposition, in part because of Buffett’s well-advertised opposition to the use of stock options as an executive incentive. James Gustafson, General Reinsurance’s president and chief operating officer, promptly resigned, and sources say that a number of other senior executives aspire now to nothing more than retirement.”

Gustafson sent Business Week a letter which was published in the April 17, 2000, issue:

I read with interest Anthony Bianco’s [formerly with Business Week now with Portfolio magazine] commentary, “The Sage Has Some Explaining to Do” in the March 20 edition.



Mr. Bianco made no attempt to contact me but that didn’t prevent him from guessing about why I left General Reinsurance. For the record, from the moment I learned of Berkshire Hathaway’s interest in General Re, I have believed that the combination is a perfect one. And I didn’t promptly resign as president and COO because of “Buffett’s well-advertised opposition to stock options.” In fact, I spent seven months following the announcement of the acquisition from June 1998 to February 1999 traveling to Gen Re offices around the world assuring the company’s management team, employees, and customers that the acquisition was right for them. I resigned for the opportunity to help lead the St. Paul Companies, one of the leading primary commercial insurers in the world. But even when the opportunity presented itself, it was still a very hard decision to leave Gen Re, a great company in every respect, after 30 years.



Gen Re traces its roots from Norwegian Globe Insurance Company of Christiana [now Oslo], Norway. Norwegian Globe was established in 1911 and began business in New York City in 1917. In 1921, Duncan Reid founded General Casualty Reinsurance Corp. of New York. In 1945, the Mellon family combined its Mellon Indemnity; and the company took over operations, gaining a near monopoly in the U.S. reinsurance market. The company bought out its largest competitor, National Re, in 1996, and opened an office in China a year later.

The company earned about $1 billion a year before merging into Berkshire but had posted staggering underwriting losses of more than $7 billion from 1998 through 2002 before righting itself.

It engages in global reinsurance, often writing coverage for protection of ships and airplanes. In addition to writing all lines of property/casualty reinsurance directly from primary insurers, General Re’s 3,200 employees also provide actuarial, claims, underwriting, financial, and investment management services around the world. It owns General Reinsurance Corp. and National Reinsurance Corp., among the largest property and casualty reinsurance groups in the U.S.

The company operates as a dealer in the interest-rate swap and derivatives market, which banks, insurers, and other companies use to hedge their exposure to risk, through General Re Financial Products Corp. (GRFP). It also offers investment services to the insurance industry.

However, GRFP was planning to sell derivative positions or the derivatives unit, according to a Bridge News story (January 31, 2000) citing sources familiar with the company. The story quoted a source as saying, “Buffett had instructed his lieutenants at Gen Re to get out of derivatives because he ‘hates’ them.” The story said Buffett doesn’t like investing in products he doesn’t understand. It’s not that Buffett hates derivatives because he doesn’t understand them; he hates them because he does understand them. Gen Re said on February 2, 2000, it was weighing “strategic alternatives” for its financial products business. In the end, General Re decided not to sell GRFP after a sale brokered by Goldman Sachs collapsed.

Over the years, Gen Re has raised its interest in Cologne Re of Cologne, Germany, a major international reinsurer now called General Reinsurance. AXA SA, Europe’s second-largest insurer, sold its minority stake in the company to Gen Re. Gen Re paid $817 million in a deal that was effective in 2003.

General Reinsurance, formed in 1846 in Berlin, is the oldest reinsurance firm in the world. It does business around the globe in 150 countries from 37 locations. Gen Re acquired it in 1994. General Reinsurance, in turn, owns a 27% stake in Gothaer Re, a small reinsurance firm based in Germany.

In reply to an inquiry about this transaction, Buffett said that it was not done at a bargain price and had worked this way: “There has been a put and call arrangement on this stock for years that became effective in 2003. Our 89% has always included these shares, since the transaction was effectively done years ago with settlement now.” In 2008, Gen Re bought the rest of the stock of Cologne Re, and Buffett took over the investment portfolio.

In 1988, Gen Re had part of the risk for Pan Am Flight 103, the airliner destroyed by a bomb over Lockerbie, Scotland. In more recent years, it has suffered losses from fires at the Brussels Airport and flooding along the Oder, affecting mainly Polish and Czech clients. It was also the lead insurer of such high-profile disasters as the 1996 crash of Trans World Airlines Flight 800.

In 1999, Gen Re had $1.25 in claims for every $1 in premium. A record-breaking hailstorm in Sydney, Australia, among other disasters, hit Gen Re in a year filled with natural catastrophe losses, including earthquakes in Taiwan and Turkey and storms in Europe.

On the day after Christmas in 1999, a storm ravaged France, causing havoc on the famed gardens of Versailles. “Winds reaching 100 mph uprooted 10,000 of the 250,000 trees on this 2,000-acre estate. About 80% of Versailles’ rare tree specimens, some more than two centuries old and therefore fragile, were lost ... The winds that devastated Versailles took out 7% or 300 million, of France’s eight billion trees and damaged three-fourths of the country’s parks and forests” (Business Week, April 24, 2000).

If that weren’t enough, Gen Re was the risk-bearer on the largest house fire in history. The home, located in Westchester County in Bedford, New York, was formerly owned by music industry executive Tommy Mottola and songbird Mariah Carey. The buyer of the home was neighbor Nelson Peltz, chief executive of Triarc Cos. that runs Arby’s, Snapple, and Royal Crown Cola. The house burned to the ground, and Gen Re suffered a $20-million loss.

To rub more salt in Gen Re’s wounds, losses around that time also included $100 million from insuring box-office sales for a series of five films that turned out to be flops, including Barbra Streisand’s movie The Mirror Has Two Faces.

In regard to such policies, analyst Alice Schroeder said, “The insurer is betting that it knows more about what revenues from a Hollywood film are likely to be than the film’s producer and the bank financing the deal.”

Gen Re was hit with a $50-million loss in 2001 from a French chemical plant explosion and was hit again for $58 million in 2002 as a result of floods in Europe.

All of this began to sound like something from The Arabian Nights, particularly the adventures of Sinbad the Sailor: “Hear me, and may God preserve you! Hasten back and leave everything; save yourselves from sudden death, for this that ye think is an island is not such. It is a mighty fish lying entranced in sleep on the surface of the sea since times of old, and trees have grown upon it; but your fires and your frolicking have awakened it, and lo! it moves; and, if it sink into the sea, ye will assuredly be drowned. Hasten then, and save yourselves!”

In 1998, Gen Re set aside $275 million to cover potential losses in workers’ compensation reinsurance in the U.S. through an involvement with an ill-fated insurance pool called Unicover, now known as Cragwood Managers. Many other insurance companies involved in the Unicover loss, estimated at $1 billion, have not reported potential losses on their part. Many lawsuits were filed against Unicover.

Unicover Managers, an insurance middleman in South Plainfield, New Jersey, wrote workers’ compensation coverage passing along most of the risk to insurers and reinsurers.

The following is the situation according to Forbes (January 10, 2000):

[Unicover’s John Pallat] and his brokers got a triumvirate of companies—Cologne Life Re, a subsidiary of General Re (now part of Berkshire Hathaway), Phoenix Home Life, and Sun Life—to take on most of the exposure under the policies. Incredibly, these three reinsurers took on portions of the premium at a ratio of 400%. This meant they were taking on $4 of loss and expenses for every $1 of premium. They underestimated the future payouts.



But the trash-passing did not stop here. It went on and on, with some brokers entering the equation in more than one place and with some insurers at a remove of several layers from where the insurance originated.



The daisy chain began to break in late 1998. Sun began hearing rumors about huge volumes of reinsurance. It belatedly realized it was exposed to significant losses, later pegged at up to $910 million.



In early 1999, both Sun and Phoenix withdrew from Unicover, refusing to accept any more business. They returned the premiums and refused to pay claims. Cologne also refused to accept more business, but continued to pay.…



It appears that Warren Buffett was completely unaware of this workers’ comp exposure when he had Berkshire Hathaway buy General Re in 1998.



Some Berkshire shareholders thought the Gen Re purchase was misbegotten. For a long time things had been peachy for Berkshire. With the Gen Re purchase, the pie hit the fan and continued to do so for years to come.

Buffett immediately put in a cash bonus plan to replace Gen Re’s stock option plan at a cost of $63 million. Buffett, in his letter to Berkshire hathaway shareholder dated March 1, 999, said, “Formerly what counted for these managers was General Re’s stock price; now their payoff will come from the business performance they deliver.” The purchase of Gen Re, in one move, reduced Berkshire’s exposure to fluctuations in the stock market on a percentage basis since Gen Re has such a large portfolio of fixed-income securities, including a large amount in municipal bonds. Berkshire gained enormous liquidity, and Gen Re won the ability to write far more business. For example, in 1997, Gen Re laid off $1 billion in business, including business with Berkshire, for a lack of resources. “The biggest advantage [of the deal] is probably the chance to maximize [Gen Re’s] investment portfolio,” Buffett said (Business Week, July 6, 1998).

With the close of the deal in late 1998, Berkshire had shareholders’ equity that was the highest of all companies in the U.S. and second only to Royal Dutch in the world. However, a subsequent merger of Exxon and Mobil made that combination the largest in net worth, moving Berkshire to third in the world.

The purchase of Gen Re was Berkshire’s watershed event—good and bad—in all its fabled history since its early days as a struggling textile mill.

Gen Re met on September 18, 1998, to vote on the deal; Ferguson said Gen Re first approached Berkshire about a joint venture, then later Buffett suggested a full combining of the companies. Ferguson said, “The best reinsurance underwriter [is joining] the best investor.” He spoke of “strategic homeruns.”

At the Berkshire special meeting September 16, 1998, Buffett said he wanted the combined Berkshire–Gen Re enterprise to become the “premier reservoir of financial strength in the insurance industry for time immemorial.”

John Steggles, the former president of Gen Re subsidiary Gen Re Intermediaries, known then as Herbert Clough, recalls how Buffett and Ferguson met in 1985:

GEICO under [Jack] Byrne’s direction was now thriving and Warren had become the biggest individual stockholder—he was also getting more involved in reinsurance deals—General Re was heavily involved with GEICO and Jack Byrne and I thought it would be beneficial all around if Warren Buffett and the General Re Chairman knew one another—so I arranged a private room dinner at my New York Club—The Metropolitan Club—(1 East 60th Street). I invited Frank Munson, Jack Byrne, Warren Buffett, and Frank who was then Chairman of General Re who brought Ron Ferguson who I think was then President and Director. The date was early February 1985. Warren arrived considerably late.



It turned out Buffett had been meeting with 20 or so people, including Leonard Goldenson, the head of ABC-TV, on negotiations for Cap Cities to buy ABC-TV. The negotiations got sticky but were resolved.



The gestation period for Berkshire/General Re has been long but both have prepared exceptionally well for this great birthing. They are both very strong and great parents—both unique in their bloodlines and growth.



Steggles, a Berkshire shareholder today via the Gen Re acquisition, recalls that he looked at Berkshire in 1976, when it was trading at about $40 a share. He shakes his head at the conclusion he drew after reading Berkshire’s 1976 Annual Report: “Bunch of cats and dogs. It’ll never make any money.”

On November 3, 1998, Gen Re agreed to buy U.K.-based insurer DP Mann Holdings (which later became Faraday Holdings Limited).

The company, founded by David Mann in 1984, had premiums of about $390 million in 1998. DP Mann has been profitable every year since.

DP Mann and Gen Re had a working relationship for 14 years prior to the buyout. Discussions between Gen Re and DP Mann predated the Berkshire discussions, according to IBNR Insurance Weekly (November 8, 1998). Mr. Mann said, “This deal is about giving us the strength that comes from being part of a major international insurance group.” In short, David Mann is General Re’s man in London. The buyout of DP Mann for an estimated $125 million to $165 million gave Gen Re a larger presence in London, the world’s third largest reinsurance market. However, in 2001, DP Mann shared in the loss of the sinking of an oil rig off South America.

Faraday Underwriting Limited of London is the managing agent for Syndicate 435 at Lloyd’s, which was hit with losses from the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. In 2002, while on a visit in London to promote NetJets, Buffett spent two hours talking with the Faraday team headed by Nigel Barton. “Faraday provides us with access to the Lloyd’s of London company markets,” Buffett said. “Faraday is an important part of our U.K. strategy, and I’m proud to be associated with such a fine team” (Bloomberg, September 23, 2002). Berkshire raised its stake in Faraday Syndicate to 100% in 2003.

Gen Re, known as “Mother Re” by its employees, claims more than 1,000 clients, most of whom have been with the company for years. At Berkshire’s special meeting on September 16, 1998, Buffett said, “We should be number one by a significant margin in the world reinsurance market in 10 to 15 years.”

Buffett sold almost all of Gen Re’s stock position, reportedly $3.7 billion after taxes, about the time Berkshire and Gen Re merged.

In Berkshire’s 1998 Annual Report, Buffett wrote about the stock sale: “Once we knew that the Gen Re merger would definitely take place, we asked the company to dispose of the equities that it held. (As mentioned earlier, we do not manage the Cologne Re portfolio, which includes many equities.) Gen Re subsequently eliminated its positions in about 250 common stocks, incurring $935 million of taxes in the process. This ‘clean sweep’ approach reflects a basic principle that Charlie and I employ in business and investing: We don’t back into decisions.”

A 150-person investment unit was cut back to one person: Warren Buffett.

As the financial services industry continues to consolidate, no doubt Berkshire will capture an ever-increasing piece of the global financial action in the years ahead.

In the early 1980s, 130 reinsurance companies in the U.S. were in operation. Today only 28 are in business. Gen Re, once the largest U.S. reinsurance company, fell behind Employers Re, a subsidiary of General Electric, in 1999.

Despite Gen Re’s slow start in 1999, it began expanding in Europe and around the world. With the explosive growth of Berkshire’s GEICO auto insurance business and the solid performance of its own insurance operations, Berkshire stands today as an insurance empire.

Gen Re’s Ron Ferguson suffered a subarachnoid hemorrhage on November 19, 1999, but he recovered.

On June 1, 2000, Gen Re and Cologne Re united under the name GeneralCologne Re.

What Buffett accomplished with the purchase of Gen Re was the sale of a big part of Berkshire at a high price. The result also created far less exposure to the stock market. The following is an Internet post on November 28, 2000:

Buffett did sell in 1998. He just did it in a way that was very creative and avoided triggering taxes.



He sold 18% of Berkshire Hathaway (with a currency, BRK.A stock, that was selling far above intrinsic value) to buy General Re. By selling 18% of BRK.A he was also selling 18% of Coke and Gillette at their recent peaks.



This transaction was both significant in its size ($22B if I remember correctly) as well as its timing and its effect on Berkshire’s capital structure.



Let’s look at some data from BRK.A’s balance sheets:



At year-end 1995 - Total Marketable Securities were $22.8B, Total Shareholders Equity (ex operating co’s equity) was around $16.3B. So for every dollar of book value, Buffett had $1.40 invested in the stock market.



The reason he could invest more than $1 is because he employs deferred capital gains taxes and insurance float to add leverage which carries little or no cost (most of the time).



Let’s look at this relationship of marketable securities to book value (ex operating co’s book value) since 1995.



YEAR - RATIO YEAR - RATIO



1995 - $1.40 1998 - $0.72



1996 - $1.26 1999 - $0.71



1997 - $1.21 2000 Q3 - $0.65



Without selling his major holdings, Buffett has trimmed back significantly such that every $1 of book value has significantly less exposure to the stock market.



Buffett said in Berkshire’s 2000 Annual Report that things were at last turning around: “At General Re, the news has turned considerably better: Ron Ferguson, along with Joe Brandon, Tad Montross, and a talented supporting cast took many actions during 2000 to bring that company’s profitability back to past standards. Though our pricing is not fully corrected, we have significantly repriced business that was severely unprofitable or dropped it altogether. ... The last couple of years haven’t been any fun for Ron and his crew. But they have stepped up to tough decisions, and Charlie and I applaud them for these.”

Buffett later mentioned some management rearrangements in the midst of the turnaround: “In 2001—just days before the 9-11 terrorist attack—young Joe Brandon was named CEO and later chairman, and Tad Montross was named president as Ferguson retired and entered a long-term consulting agreement with Gen Re and Berkshire. At the time, Brandon said, “The underlying results are turning around. They’re not where we want them to be but they are much closer.”

Ferguson wrote the following letter to Business Week (March 25, 2002):

The answer to the question about General Re Corp. in “Buffett: Right Again?” (Finance, Mar 4) is Yes. As you quoted Berkshire Hathaway Inc. shareholder David J. Winters as saying, “Gen Re is incredibly well-positioned for the long run, and it will ultimately prove to be a shrewd acquisition.” General Re Corp.’s underwriting results during our first three years under the Berkshire banner have been awful, and as then-CEO I feel fully accountable and responsible—and I am offering no denials or excuses here.



I must, however, take exception to the implication that Warren E. Buffett, while justifiably disappointed with our results, has lost faith and confidence in General Re or in me. I never observed or even felt that to be the case.



I had for some time thought about retiring at 60, mainly because we have an incredibly talented team to take the company forward. My retirement was foreshadowed by a major reorganization almost two years ago when Joe Brandon became CEO of our North American operations and two of our major Global Business Units. Ten months ago, I informed Mr. Buffett of my decision and plans, and they were announced on Sept. 5. I am confident that the company now led by Joe Brandon will prove Mr. Buffett and Mr. Winters to be right.



A Gen Re unit, General Star International Indemnity of London, filed a lawsuit against Chase Manhattan Bank in late 2001, contending that the bank tricked it into writing bad policies to insure 11 different film productions, including A Civil Action and Rules of Engagement. General Star underwrote loans covering the production costs of Angela’s Ashes, Runaway Bride, and other Paramount film flops. Large losses resulted. The suit claimed that General Star was misled by Chase to issue insurance policies in connection with the motion picture financing. To make matters worse, Berkshire took a $1-billion underwriting loss in the last quarter of 2001, about half of which was from lacking reserves large enough to cover claims. The loss also included $170-million increase to the estimate for World Trade Center–related losses and $46 million related to Enron coverage (“Enronitis”).

“IN MY VIEW, GEN RE IS FIXED”

After four long years of racking up huge losses, the turnaround at General Re appeared to be underway in the first quarter of 2002. Berkshire’s entire insurance operations came in with a slight underwriting profit, meaning Berkshire was getting the float for free. General Re recorded a loss of only $88 million. “We’re back,” Buffett said during Berkshire’s annual meeting weekend in 2002, even taking the unusual step of releasing the insurance results. Actually, it was a case of still trying to come back as Gen Re ended up with a $1.3 billion loss in 2002, making a total of $8 billion in losses since Berkshire’s purchase of the company. Buffett said in Berkshire’s 2002 Annual Report that correcting mistakes from earlier years made him think of a line from a country song: “I wish I didn’t know now what I didn’t know then.” Many of the huge losses were eventually offset by investment income.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 2002 Annual Report that at the time of General Re’s merger into Berkshire, he thought all was well:

I had studied the operation for decades and had observed underwriting discipline that was consistent and reserving that was conservative. At merger time, I detected no slippage in Gen Re’s standards.



I was dead wrong. Gen Re’s culture and practices had substantially changed and unbeknownst to management—and to me—the company was grossly mispricing its current business. In addition, Gen Re had accumulated an aggregation of risks that would have been fatal had, say, terrorists detonated several large-scale nuclear bombs in an attack on the U.S. A disaster of that scope was highly improbable, of course, but it is up to insurers to limit their risks in a manner that leaves their finances rock-solid if the “impossible” happens. Indeed, had Gen Re remained independent, the World Trade Center attack alone would have threatened the company’s existence.



Asked at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2003 if there had been any impairment of value at General Re, Buffett said that despite the company’s bad years, the company was “worth more now than when we bought it.” In a Barron’s interview (October 27, 2003), Buffett said, “In my view, Gen Re is fixed.”

The effort to wind down Gen Re’s derivatives unit was described in Condé Nast Portfolio magazine (May 2007):

The derivatives market, one of the fastest-growing areas of finance, is estimated at $300 trillion. A subset of that—credit default swaps, which are derivatives based on companies’ creditworthiness—last year reached $26 trillion, twice the size of the U.S. economy.



In their most benign form, derivatives are probably the greatest financial innovation of the past 25 years … “A financial crisis is likely to be a global event, not a local event, and derivatives will probably help make that happen,” says Joe Brandon, C.E.O. of General Re, a reinsurer owned by Berkshire Hathaway.



Brandon has grown intimately familiar with the perils of derivatives during a grand five-year experiment conducted on orders from his boss, Warren Buffett, to close Gen Re’s derivative-business.…



At Buffett’s behest, Brandon embarked on a task that lost Berkshire and Gen Re a cool $409 million before taxes …



Gen Re’s business was conservative. Yet it still lost money, with only a tiny percentage of trades piling up huge losses. Roughly 98 percent of its deals were fine. That suggests that when there are problems in a derivatives portfolio, they will be harder to discover, because of their rarity.…



The General Re unit started out with more than 23,000 trades worth just under $1 trillion. The losses from excising those trades accounted for about half of Gen Re’s total loss. But even that overstates the story. In ditching the portfolio, Gen Re ended up making a modest amount on most contracts. It was a mere 500 trades that accounted for more than $200 million of the losses. The toxic 500 fell largely into one basket: complex foreign-exchange agreements. These were often contracts that spanned periods of 30 years or more and involved bets on both interest rates and multiple currencies. For example, Gen Re brought together Japanese retailers (who had become fed up with low returns in their local market) with all sorts of lending agencies, such as the World Bank. Gen Re hedged those trades with offsetting contracts pegged to moves in interest rates and currencies over several years. But because of what was essentially a math error, the hedges were inadequate.



Gen Re quickly learned that even without math mistakes, the squirrelly real world can throw off a sound financial model. In one set of trades, Gen Re figured it had found a bit of treasure. It entered into contracts involving the U.S. dollar, using what’s called a Bermudan swap option. These contracts were theoretically worth more than another common option because an investor could get out of them at multiple points in the future rather than at a single fixed date.



That’s the theory, anyway. When Gen Re went to unwind its trades, it couldn’t capture the extra value that its Bermudan swap options were supposed to have. “The models we used were simply models,” says Nelson. “They didn’t take into account real-life situations” (Portfolio, May 7, 2007).



PROBE OF GEN RE

“A sea of troubles” (Hamlet)

The Securities and Exchange Commission asked Gen Re at the end of 2004 to provide information related to certain insurance products. The request was part of a government probe into whether financial services firms were helping companies manipulate earnings. Then on January 6, 2005, New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer’s office subpoenaed Berkshire. Berkshire issued the following statement:

Omaha, NE — After receiving the Securities and Exchange Commission’s request for documents and information relating to nontraditional or loss mitigation insurance products on December 29, 2004, General Re Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway Inc., today received a subpoena for virtually identical documents and information from the New York State Attorney General. Consistent with the SEC’s request, the subpoena applies to General Re as well as its affiliates, including Berkshire Hathaway’s other insurance subsidiaries. Berkshire Hathaway and General Re will cooperate fully with the New York State Attorney General.



Berkshire Hathaway and General Re are also cooperating fully with an ongoing investigation by the U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia, Richmond Division, relating to one of General Re’s former clients. General Re and four of its current and former employees originally received subpoenas for documents from the U.S. Attorney in October 2003 relating to General Re’s transactions with this client. Recently, General Re received requests for additional information related to this client and for information related to its finite reinsurance business from the U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia and the Department of Justice in Washington. Berkshire Hathaway and General Re will cooperate fully with these requests.



In early 2005, regulators were scrutinizing a “nontraditional” insurance contract between Berkshire and insurer AIG occurring in late 2000 or early 2001, to find out if it was designed to make AIG’s finances look stronger than they were. Sold as an insurance contract where insurance risk presumably changes hands, such contracts could be twisted into loans in disguise, giving companies better accounting results. “Finite” insurance is generally described as a blend of traditional insurance and financing.

The investigation focused on a contract that involved a call from AIG Chairman Hank Greenberg to Ronald Ferguson, who was CEO of Gen Re in late 2000 (The Wall Street Journal, March 4, 2005). In an interview (CNBC, January 14, 2005), Buffett said Berkshire’s law firm was looking into the matter, which involved a wide investigation of the reinsurance industry.

Greenberg resigned on March 14, 2005, as pressure mounted on AIG following a series of investigations, which included a probe of the reinsurance contract that Greenberg proposed to Ferguson. Buffett was called for questioning before regulators. As the story goes, Gen Re’s contract with AIG said, “The transaction did obligate AIG to make an additional $100 million in claims payments should additional losses develop. But regulators are investigating whether any contract provisions between the two companies negated this apparent risk transfer, thus holding the losses to $500 million.”

Gen Re agreed to transfer $600 million in policies to AIG in addition to paying $500 million in premiums. Prosecutors said Gen Re booked the deal properly, but AIG did not.

____________________

Gen Re lawyers discovered the questionable policy. Gen Re CEO Joe Brandon called Buffett who contacted Berkshire’s lawyer Ron Olson to investigate the Gen Re–AIG matter. The Olson team unearthed the Gen Re–AIG policy that they thought to be questionable and went to authorities with their information. The chain reaction went from Buffett’s tip to Greenberg’s resignation.

A story in The New York Times (April 10, 2005), quoting insurance executives, said a memo and an e-mail message existed alleging that Buffett had extensive knowledge of the contract. But it also quoted a person with direct knowledge of communications between Buffett and Ferguson stating that no such e-mail was ever sent to Buffett and that Buffett never passed judgment on the deal’s propriety.

The story also quoted Munger as commenting on the matter: “What Warren’s trying to do with his life is to teach a grand lesson: the right way to run a business and the right way to live a life. A lot of people are coming to Omaha [for the annual meeting] to reinforce the right way to live and the right way to run a company. I jokingly refer to it as a catechism … The chance that Warren Buffett wanted to make a little extra money out of a subsidiary that is a freckle of Berkshire’s earnings is just madness.”

New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer appeared on ABC’s This Week program (April 10, 2005) and spoke highly of Buffett: “He is a witness. We believe he can shed some light on a series of transactions … He has succeeded the right way. He stands for smart, long-term investing, transparency, accountability—all those things we value and support.”

Buffett met with regulators in New York on April 11, 2005, and afterwards said, “I told them everything I know.”

Berkshire fired former Gen Re CEO Ron Ferguson as a consultant to Gen Re on May 19, 2005, after Ferguson invoked the Fifth Amendment in response to questions by regulators.

Reports on June 6, 2005, said that John Houldsworth, who headed Gen Re’s reinsurance unit in Dublin, agreed to plead guilty in helping AIG mislead shareholders and auditors about Gen Re’s transaction with AIG. He cooperated with authorities.

Also, former Gen Re executive Richard Napier pled guilty to federal charges that he helped AIG improperly boost its financial numbers. The SEC said the executives knew the deal wasn’t a bona fide reinsurance transaction because it was structured so AIG wasn’t exposed to any risk.

Fortune (August 8, 2005) described the deal in this way:

The tip that led to Hank Greenberg’s office came from an improbable source: Berkshire Hathaway. Warren Buffett’s company was already under scrutiny from both the Justice Department and the SEC. Regulators were investigating a Berkshire reinsurance subsidiary, General Re, for selling finite coverage used to hide the deteriorating financial condition of a Virginia malpractice insurer. That deal prompted a question: Who else had Gen Re helped to dress up financial statements?



While the federal prosecutors wanted to know the answer to that question, they wanted to get it quietly. Buffett’s company was a big fish, and they didn’t want to tip off witnesses. … So instead of a subpoena, they sent Berkshire more informal “information requests.” But to the feds’ surprise, Berkshire, on Dec. 30, disclosed the federal inquiry anyway. Spitzer instantly jumped in, sending Berkshire a subpoena demanding information about Gen Re’s finite insurance business.



On Feb. 8, Berkshire’s lawyers arrived in Spitzer’s office to tell the regulators about a deal certain to grab their interest: a finite insurance transaction between Gen Re and AIG. In this deal it was Greenberg’s company buying the stuff. What’s more, explained the visiting lawyers, it wasn’t some midlevel transaction between flunkies. Greenberg had initiated it personally. The Berkshire lawyers had presented Spitzer’s staff with an inch-thick, three-ring binder filled with tabbed documents; now they walked them through the entire deal.



It started with an Oct. 31, 2000, phone call by Greenberg to Gen Re CEO Ron Ferguson. Greenberg had been stung by analysts’ concerns that AIG’s loss reserves were too low.



In September 2005, Joe Brandon, who became Gen Re’s CEO in 2001, received a “Wells Notice” from the SEC indicating the possibility of civil action in connection with the ill-fated Berkshire-AIG reinsurance policy of 2000–2001.

More Wells Notices went out in connection with this investigation. Berkshire’s September 9, 2005, news release stated that a Wells Notice went to former Gen Re Senior Vice President Christopher Garand and another to a current Senior Vice President and Assistant General Counsel of General Re, Robert Graham. Subsequently, former Gen Re CEO Ron Ferguson, received one as well.

In mid-2006, it came to light that the SEC was investigating finite reinsurance transactions involving Gen Re, Prudential Financial, and a predecessor of St. Paul Travelers. Garand and Gen Re ex–vice president Robert McGowan were questioned. Both men invoked their Fifth Amendment rights not to comment during the interviews. Gen Re had briefed the SEC about the transactions on June 13, 2006, reports said.

In connection with the Gen Re–AIG transactions of 2000, four former executives of Gen Re—Ronald Ferguson, Elizabeth Monrad, Robert Graham, and Christopher Garand—and a former AIG executive Christian Milton were indicted on September 20, 2006, after the case was moved from Virginia to Connecticut. They all pled not guilty. The indictment in Connecticut also said that there were unnamed coconspirators. A trial in Hartford, Connecticut started January 7, 2008.

Jury selection had started December 3, 2007, with press reports saying Gen Re executives may argue that contracts they arranged with AIG didn’t defraud investors because Buffett knew what they were doing. Buffett, who was not charged, has been quoted as saying the charges by the Gen Re executives are “factually incorrect.”

Press reports quoted Berkshire’s lawyer, Ronald Olson, as saying, “Mr. Buffett denies that he passed judgement in any way on the challenged AIG/Gen Re transaction in November 2000, or at any other time.”

As the trial began, prosecutors said Greenberg initiated the deal with a call to Ferguson on October 31, 2000, seeking to ease analysts’ concerns about AIG’s reserves. They also said Ferguson helped AIG “lie” about its balance sheet which in turn deceived investors about AIG’s ability to absorb losses.

The deal itself, for which Gen Re was paid $5 million, was improper because the companies agreed AIG would not incur losses.

Buffett biographer Alice Schroeder, an insurance expert, testified how “worrisome” investors consider the combination of falling reserves and rising premiums, which was the case in AIG’s third quarter of 2000.

Schroeder testified she raised her rating on AIG to a “strong buy” on March 14, 2001, after AIG said its reserves for absorbing losses rose in the last quarter of 2000. She said she probably would not have upgraded her rating had she known that AIG masked loss reserves that were actually decreasing, not increasing (Bloomberg, January 9, 2008).

Schroeder said that she raised her rating after speaking with former AIG CEO Maurice “Hank” Greenberg and that he “expressed confidence in the reserves.” Greenberg denied any knowledge of improper accounting, but he was forced from his job in 2005.

Prosecutors claimed that AIG, which was Gen Re’s biggest client, provided $600 million of reinsurance coverage in exchange for $500 million in premiums that AIG took in as reserves. Prosecutors said that because of a “secret, unwritten side deal” by the defendants and other co-conspirators, the policy did not transfer underwriting risk from Gen Re to AIG and this didn’t count as a reinsurance policy.

During the trial, Buffett was never called as a witness; although, he had been on call to rebut witnesses if need be. But such testimony never emerged. In the end, the defendants did not take the stand; although, five character witnesses were called.

Postal Inspector James Tendick said postal inspectors found an e-mail sent in the fall of 2000 by Ferguson to Buffett and Brandon in which Ferguson recounted a telephone conversation he had with AIG CEO Hank Greenberg saying that Greenberg was eager to do a deal. Ferguson said he told Greenberg that Buffett and Brandon wanted him to be involved in the deal.

Of key concern in this trial was whether Buffett passed judgement on the final contract. Tendick, who investigated the case for three years, testified that in a final report about Gen Re’s operations sent to Buffett, there was no mention of the transaction was made.

All the defendants were found guilty by a jury on February 25, 2008, after seven days of deliberations. “This is a very sad day, not only for Ron Ferguson, but for our criminal justice system,” Ferguson’s lawyer, Clifford Schoenberg, said. “I and the rest of Ron’s legal team will not rest until we see him—and justice—vindicated.”

CONVICTIONS TOSSED

In 2011, the four Gen Re executives and the AIG executive won reversals of their convictions on the grounds that certain AIG declining stock price data should not have been admitted in court. A U.S. Court of Appeals ordered a new trial for the executives. The five had been free on bail while they challenged their convictions.

Brandon resigned on April 14, 2008, amid reports that federal prosecutors were pushing for his removal. Brandon was not charged in the case but had been listed as an unindicted coconspirator and had received a Wells Notice from the SEC in 2005, stating that he might face charges. With Brandon’s resignation, Franklin “Tad” Montross, long the president of Gen Re, was named Chairman and CEO.

Asked about Brandon at the Wesco meeting in 2008, Munger said he couldn’t address the specifics of a legal matter but said that he stood behind “every nice word we’ve said or written in the past few years” and specifically his statement at the 2007 Wesco meeting, when he called Brandon one of the top reinsurance executives in the country.

In 2008, Prudential Financial agreed to settle charges that it improperly reported more than $200 million in income stemming from purported reinsurance contracts after a federal complaint alleged that from 1997 through 2002, Prudential entered into a series of finite contracts with General Re. The contracts, the lawsuit said, had no economic substance. The improper accounting on Prudential’s part resulted in an overstatement of income for the years 2000 through 2002, the complaint alleged. Prudential agreed to settle the matter while neither admitting nor denying the charges.

In late 2008, Ron Ferguson was sentenced to two years in prison. The judge in the case noted the sentence was well under federal guidelines, and prosecutors had called for a sentence of life in prison. The judge cited Ferguson’s many good deeds in life. Indeed, Ferguson planned to go into the ministry. Later, AIG’s Milton was sentenced to only four years when he could have been sentenced to as much as 210 years. Garand was sentenced to a year and a day in prison. Gen Re’s former CFO Elizabeth Monrad was sentenced to 18 months. Later, John Houldsworth was given probation for his testimony against the others, and Napier got two years probation after assisting prosecutors.

In early 2009, Gen Re agreed to pay $72 million to settle investor claims about its role in the fraudulent transactions of 2000 and 2001 involving AIG, the latter of which collapsed into government arms after huge derivative losses during the financial meltdown of 2008.

In early 2010, Gen Re reached a $92-million settlement with the Justice Department to avoid prosecution for its involvement in a fraud scheme involving AIG.



$22 Billion OK with You, Ron?

Berkshire’s CEO, Warren Buffett (right), and Gen Re’s CEO, Ron Ferguson, announced in New York on June 19, 1998, that Berkshire would buy Gen Re for about $22 billion in Berkshire stock. Some say Buffett bought too early.

(AP/Wide World Photos)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Gen Re



(Photo by Andrew Kilpatrick)

Gen Re Headquarters

“I’ve never been to the home office. … I hope they have one” (Miami Herald, December 27, 1998, quoting a talk by Buffett to University of Florida business

students). This is Gen Re headquarters at the Financial Centre in Stamford, Connecticut. Buffett bought two companies in 1998—Gen Re and NetJets—without seeing the home office of either.

Gen Re The Story of Warren Buffett



Bill Gates’ Chauffeur’s Doghouse

This mansion was being remodeled by the new owner, Nelson Peltz. The gutted home served as a symbol of the bad year for Gen Re and Berkshire, underscoring one of humanity’s age-old problems: things can go wrong. For Gen Re, it was a time of fire, floods, and locusts.

(Photo courtesy of

The Journal News/Frank Becerra, Jr.)



The Arabian Nights

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Gen Re



John Steggles

(Photo by

Celia Sullivan)

Gen Re The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Gen Re

Gen Re The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Gen Re

Gen Re The Story of Warren Buffett



Buffett Leaving the Building after Meeting Regulators

Buffett leaves meeting with regulators in New York on April 11, 2005. At left is Buffett’s lawyer, Ron Olson.

(AP/Photo)

Of Permanent Value Gen Re



Joe Brandon



Tad Montross

(Photos courtesy of GeneralCologne Re)



61





STORM STORIES


During the height of the 2005 hurricane season, Hurricane Katrina devastated the Gulf Coast virtually wiping out parts of Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama. Subsequent flooding in New Orleans made it a double blow to that city. Katrina was expected to cost the insurance industry from $40 billion to $60 billion, not to mention the need for perhaps $200 billion from the government to rebuild after this industry’s most expensive disaster in history.

Berkshire issued a press release Regarding its expected proportion of the industry loss in connection with Katrina: “Due to the extraordinary devastation created by Hurricane Katrina, it is particularly difficult to estimate an industry loss for this event and we don’t intend to at this time. However, Berkshire Hathaway has previously stated that it expects its share of industry losses from catastrophes such as Hurricane Katrina to be 3–5%. Berkshire continues to believe this to be true and expects it will incur 3–5% of the industry losses associated with Hurricane Katrina.”

Katrina was followed by Hurricane Rita which struck along the Texas-Louisiana border causing perhaps $6 billion in claims for the insurance industry. In the end, Katrina combined with Rita cost Berkshire an eye-popping $2.99 billion, or about $2 billion after tax. Then Hurricane Wilma struck Florida. The year 2005 was a very good year ... for hurricanes.

Hurricanes Charley and Ivan, two of the four hurricanes to hit Florida in 2004, each had cost all insurers more than $7 billion.

In 2004, Berkshire had paid about $1.25 billion out of $22 billion in insured damages in the four Florida hurricanes. In comparison, Berkshire suffered $3.4 billion in losses in 2005 from hurricanes.

In addition to Berkshire’s direct losses in these events, Berkshire also suffered losses from its investees including White Mountains. GEICO was also hit with a ton of claims in the events.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 2005 Annual Report, “We estimate our loss from Katrina at $2.5 billion—and her ugly sisters, Rita and Wilma, cost us an additional $.9 billion.”

After that, who was writing some of the biggest policies for the 2006 hurricane season? Berkshire, of course.

Harrah’s Entertainment, the world’s biggest casino company, paid 50% more for property and casualty insurance to be protected by Berkshire as a lead underwriter. Berkshire replaced AIG and ACE Ltd. as those companies pulled some coverage (Bloomberg, June 6, 2006).

“Berkshire had the capacity we were looking for,” said a Harrah’s spokesman. The company was seeking to recover $1.8 billion for four of its 40 properties wrecked by storms in 2005 hurricanes. “When Buffett gambles, he gambles big,” he added.

Berkshire’s prices for some policies in 2006 were up 20-fold from 2005 prices, one insurance broker said. In some cases, Berkshire was getting premiums worth half the value of potential payout. Of course, Berkshire could lose billions if a big hurricane were to hit its insured properties.

“Every major account I’ve placed, those with half a billion dollars or more of coverage, had Berkshire involved,” another broker was quoted as saying in 2000: “That was not the case prior to this year. They were not on any of those placements” (Bloomberg, June 6, 2006).

Buffett told The New York Times (October 21, 2006) that he and Ajit Jain worked out a deal to provide $1.5 billion in coverage for the 2006 hurricane season for a single insurance company covering almost all its potential claims in a big storm. The company was not identified.

One policy was identified by Bloomberg News (November 3, 2006). It stated that when Penn National Gambling couldn’t get enough property insurance after Hurricane Katrina wrecked two of its Mississippi casinos, the company turned to Berkshire which charged $20 million to cover $200 million of potential damage to its 16 gambling sites.

Bloomberg also said Berkshire was part of a group that charged Florida’s Miami–Dade County public school system $30 million for $200 million of coverage. The year before the county paid less for $700 million of coverage.

With predictions being dire for the 2006 hurricane season, Berkshire was able to charge as much as 30 cents for a dollar of coverage in some cases. So when the 2006 hurricane season came in sunny side up, Berkshire, keeping most of the premiums and paying very little in claims, recorded a huge gain.

Buffett, who rarely comments about quarterly results, expressed his satisfaction in a statement about the third quarter report in 2006: “Our insurance business has benefited in a major way from the absence of catastrophe losses. This is due not to managerial brilliance, but rather to good luck. Last year, conversely, we got clobbered by a spate of hurricanes, more of which we will surely see in the future.”

Berkshire reduced its hurricane insurance written in 2007 by about half from 2006.

In the first half of 2007, no major insurance losses reared up for Berkshire; although, it did have a $100-million loss from the windstorm Kyrill, which hit northern Europe in January 2007.

In the third quarter of 2008, Berkshire absorbed about $1 billion in losses from the Gustav and Ike hurricanes and in the first quarter of 2011, it suffered $1.7 billion in losses from disasters in Japan, Australia and New Zealand.



Aftermath of

Hurricane Katrina

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Storm Stories



62





PROTECTION AGAINST THE BIG ONE


In late 1996, Berkshire agreed to sell California’s newly-created state-run earthquake insurance agency $1.5 billion of reinsurance for four years for a premium of $590 million. The premium was paid in equal parts to Berkshire during the four-year period of the coverage. The policy went into effect April 1, 1997.

Berkshire was betting that no big earthquake would hit California before March 31, 2001. If the damage from any quake until that time had exceeded $7 billion in homeowners’ claims, Berkshire would have had to pay the next $1.5 billion in claims.

Certainly Berkshire would have taken a big hit if the Big One had occurred. If a loss were suffered of $1.5 billion minus $590 million—or $910 million—it would amount to quite a bit less than that after tax-loss deductions. Still, it was a huge bet that no large quake would occur in California through March 2001. The bet paid off big for Berkshire.

The California Earthquake Authority’s actuary, John Drennan, said that calculations of annual quake probabilities indicate that the chance was only one in 20 that Berkshire would have to pay out even a penny in return for the big premium (The Los Angeles Times, November 18, 1996). He said the annual probability of a big California quake is only 1.27%. “In an 80-year period, you would expect to have one year where the losses exceeded $7 billion.” So in four years, the chances would be one in 20, but of course the Big One could hit tomorrow. Although the premium appeared high, California officials were quoted in the story as saying that it would still be cheaper than paying interest on bonds, which the earthquake authority originally had planned to sell to shore up its resources.

The $7-billion figure relates only to damage that would be paid by the quake authority. In the 1994 Northridge earthquake, private insurance firms paid $8.5 billion in residential damage claims.

Under a new state law designed to provide more bare-bones coverage and limit the state authority’s liability, new limits were placed on coverage of a home’s contents. Garages, pools, and fences were exempted, and deductibles were raised to 15%. With these changes, the state authority’s payout in a quake the size of Northridge would be about $4 billion, rather than $8.5 billion. Total damages to all public and private facilities in the Northridge quake were $27 billion.

The Los Angeles Times story said of the $27 billion, a little more than half of the relief came from private insurers, and the rest came from the federal government. After Northridge, private insurers mounted an effort to lessen their exposure by forming a state agency for homeowners’ insurance.

The story noted that selling earthquake insurance was profitable for the companies in every California quake but one. However, damages from that one—Northridge—far exceeded all the earthquake premiums ever paid. In the end, the quake would have to be very big to affect Berkshire. Still, it could happen.

Maybe that’s why some of the boilerplate in Berkshire’s reports says it has “significant liquidity and above average capital strength.”

It turned out the earthquake authority abandoned a $1.5-billion bond offering even as its banker, Morgan Stanley, was in the middle of marketing it (Barron’s, January 6, 1996). The agency shelved the offering after it suddenly received better terms from Berkshire.

“The bond deal was getting to be too expensive. We were able to save anywhere from $20 million to $40 million a year with reinsurance from Berkshire,” said Greg Butler, head of the earthquake authority.

The Barron’s story quoted Berkshire’s Ajit Jain as saying, “The problem with these [bond] deals is that investors are being provided fixed-income type returns for equity-type risk. Since we take on the risk and put aside capital for it, we can provide a lower cost.” This demonstrated the business advantage of Berkshire’s enormous capital strength, speed, and savvy.

Butler was quoted in the San Francisco Chronicle (November 19, 1996) as saying that Berkshire, unlike other reinsurers, didn’t use sophisticated statistical models to assess its risk and determine its premiums. “I have no idea how Buffett did it,” Butler said. “Maybe by the corn on his foot.”

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1996 Annual Report of the California policy:

So what are the true odds of our having to make a payout during the policy’s term? We don’t know—nor do we think computer models will help us, since we believe the precision they project is a chimera. In fact, such models can lull decision-makers into a false sense of security and thereby increase their chances of making a really huge mistake. We’ve already seen such debacles in both insurance and investments. Witness “portfolio insurance,” whose destructive effects in the 1987 market crash led one wag to observe that it was the computers that should have been jumping out of windows.



Berkshire also has a contract—about half the size of the California contract—with Allstate that covered Florida hurricanes in 1996.

Also in Buffett’s insurance discussion in the 1996 Annual Report he said, “Large as these coverages are, Berkshire’s after-tax ‘worst-case’ loss from a true mega-catastrophe is probably no more than $600 million, which is less than 3% of our book value and 1.5% of our market value.”

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Protection Against the Big One



63





WHITE MOUNTAINS INSURANCE


White Mountains Insurance Group and Berkshire ended their years-long relationship in 2008, agreeing to an asset swap by which Berkshire gave back its 16.3% stock stake for $708 million in cash and two small insurance companies that White Mountains owned.

The two insurance companies turned over to Berkshire were Commercial Casualty Insurance Co. and International American Group Inc. which had gross assets of about $435 million. Both of the small insurers that Berkshire bought will only manage existing policies until they are paid off and the companies are closed. They are not writing new policies. The swap valued the White Mountains shares at $485 a share, which the companies said was the stock’s value at the time of the agreement.

White Mountains CEO Ray Barrett was quoted as saying the deal would allow his company to leave runoff businesses “with potentially volatile reserves, to significantly reduce underployed capital and to redeem one-sixth of the company’s shares at a small premium” to book value. He added that White Mountains had grown to the point that it was competing with some areas of Berkshire’s insurance businesses. “This is a graceful, value-enhancing way to go our separate ways,” Barrett said.

Britain’s largest insurer, CGNU, PLC, said on September 25, 2000, it had agreed to sell its struggling U.S. property and casualty insurance operations, CGU, at 70% of book value to White Mountains Insurance Group (formerly Fund American Enterprises Holdings, Inc.) for $2.6 billion.

In the complicated deal, Berkshire agreed to buy $300 million in convertible stock of White Mountains, which is based in Bermuda and has executive offices in Hanover, New Hampshire.

In the end, Berkshire gained a large stake in White Mountains, which was formerly only a small specialist in reinsurance. With the purchase of CGU, White Mountains became a major player in property and casualty insurance. White Mountains and its partners paid just $1.7 billion in equity for a company with a net worth of $3 billion (Forbes, October 30, 2000).

At a press conference announcing the sale, Jack Byrne, White Mountains’ CEO, said his agreement with Buffett called for a $200 million stake, but at the last minute Byrne needed $300 million. “I called him at 11 p.m. last night. He was playing bridge on the computer.” Byrne said he needed another $100 million. Buffett said sure and went back to playing bridge. Maybe that’s one reason Byrne calls Buffett “the most amazing businessman the world has ever seen.” Byrne has been a longtime Buffett friend since the days Byrne ran GEICO.

Likewise, Buffett thinks a lot of Byrne’s abilities and once said, “Byrne is like the chicken farmer who rolls an ostrich egg into the hen house and says, ‘Ladies, this is what the competition is doing.’”

He also called Byrne the “Babe Ruth of insurance” when Byrne was the head of GEICO. White Mountains’ operating principles read a lot like Buffett’s play book, “Think Like Owners,” “Invest for Total Return,” and “Strategic Purchases.” “We really don’t have much of a strategy other than to increase intrinsic value per share” (2000 Annual Report, p. 21).

Byrne said the White Mountains deal would be financed from cash and new bank debt. Lehman Brothers brought in three banks on a $1 billion loan: Bank One, FleetBoston, and Bank of America. Management and other investors put in $300 million in a specially formed acquisition company in return for 18% of White Mountains’ stock.

Also in the deal, Berkshire’s National Indemnity agreed to reinsure up to $2.5 billion of CGU’s old liabilities—which will take years to pay off—for a premium of $1.25 billion. In early 2000, CGNU, the parent, decided to sell its U.S. property and casualty business as part of a merger of CGU and Norwich Union. The sale originally was expected to bring $4-5 billion. CGNU said it took the lower price to make a clean exit from the U.S. and it was sure about the Byrne-led group’s financing. The operations that were bought still had large claims for asbestos and lead poisoning from policies written years ago.

White Mountains arranged with Berkshire’s National Indemnity to cover asbestos and environmental exposures. The agreement covers all exposures on businesses written before 1987, asbestos claims for businesses written before 1993, and all lead liability losses for businesses written before 1996. An agreement with Berkshire’s General Re was written to support continuing operations. So Berkshire not only bought a convertible preferred stock but also acted as a backstop against claims development.

Sequoia Fund’s Jonathan Brandt said at Sequoia’s annual meeting in 2001:

There’s not a whole lot of competition for these deals in a lot of cases. I spoke to one of the large European reinsurers to ask them if they had competed for one of these retrospective contracts. And they said that by the time they got their team ready—a team of about 30 analysts—to go over the book that was being ceded to Berkshire that Berkshire had already done the deal. That should give you some idea of the kind of flexibility that Warren has.



CGNU’s U.S. insurance unit, based in Boston, is the 16th largest in the market and has 7,000 employees. It had $4.2 billion in premiums in 1999.

About two weeks after the CGU announcement, White Mountains said it would buy Internet insurance venture Esurance. Esurance serves more than half the states in the U.S., specializing in auto insurance. Folksamerica, a unit of White Mountains, agreed to buy the San Francisco-based online seller for an undisclosed sum. Esurance had premiums of $201 million in 2004. Esurance has an agreement with ebix.com, an insurance portal, to provide online auto insurance quotes to their customers. Esurance, through its online service (www.esurance.com), offers advice, quote comparison, and instant coverage and claims handling.

Among the White Mountains affiliates are Folksamerica of New York, New York; Main Street America of Keene, New Hampshire; American Centennial Insurance Company of Wilmington, Delaware; and Peninsula Insurance Company of Salisbury, Maryland.

Byrne, who owns more than a million shares of White Mountains, seemed in a buoyant mood in his letter in the 2000 White Mountains Annual Report, “Did we have a Boffo year 2000, or what? Fortune smiled on your company.” He ended by saying, “I am pleased to have most of you as partners.”

The oddball photo accompanying the letter was of Byrne as a much younger man with an editor’s note that said: “This picture of Jack was retired to the archives in 1978.”

White Mountains’ purchase of CGU closed on June 1, 2001, and CGU Insurance was renamed OneBeacon Insurance Group.

OneBeacon is one of the oldest property and casualty insurers in the U.S. Its history includes being among the first to write auto policies. It honored claims arising from the great San Francisco earthquake and the sinking of the Titanic. It has also insured several U.S. presidents.

In a letter to shareholders on July 5, 2001, Byrne said, “The OneBeacon transaction was akin to the minnow swallowing the whale.” After White Mountains purchased OneBeacon, the company raised prices and walked away from unprofitable business. As a result, the company had a decline in new business.

At the White Mountains annual meeting in 2001, Byrne said it was possible the company might make more acquisitions. How would he finance such a venture? “Mr. Buffett is always there,” Byrne said. “He’s the best partner to have” (Bloomberg, August 24, 2001).

White Mountains, like everyone, suffered heavy losses from the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. Operations at the Folksamerica unit across the street from the World Trade Center were restarted two days later using backup facilities in Staten Island. After the attacks, White Mountains set up a reinsurance unit to take advantage of soaring rates. The unit, based in Bermuda, is headed by Anthony Taylor, a former underwriter with the Lloyd’s of London market. Byrne is the chairman of the unit.

In early 2002, OneBeacon entered the directors’ and officers’ liability and professional liability markets under the name OneBeacon Professional Partners. Also in early 2002, Montpelier Re, a Bermuda-based reinsurance company founded with the help of a $200 million investment from White Mountains, began business with $1 billion in capital. White Mountains’ stake amounts to 27% of Montpelier Re, which had a public offering in 2002 that raised about $200 million. Byrne is chairman of Montpelier Re; the CEO is Anthony Taylor.

Byrne began the 2002 White Mountains’ Annual Report by saying: “Two thousand and two was a lovely and constructive year for us. Our tangible book value per share grew a nice 15%, and our business values grew more than that. I am pleased. The only thing I need to add to the letters from my colleagues is applause.”

In late 2003, White Mountains expanded to Europe by agreeing to buy the

insurance unit of ABB, Ltd., for $440 million. ABB is Europe’s largest electrical engineering company. In April 2004, White Mountains completed the buyout of Stockholm-based Sirius International Insurance, which sells reinsurance to other underwriters. The acquired company includes Sirius America Insurance Co., a primary insurer in the U.S., which wrote $96 million in premiums in 2002.

Leucadia National, Berkshire’s partner in restructuring Finova, owns 4.2% of White Mountains. Leucadia paid $75 million for its stake which was worth $172.5 million at the end of 2003 (Leucadia 2003 Annual Report).

On May 27, 2004, Berkshire agreed to exercise all of its warrants to buy 1,724,200 shares, or 16%, of White Mountains’ stock. Berkshire paid an additional $294 million in cash to buy the shares. The stake is now worth north of $1 billion. Byrne’s family owns about 17% of the stock, and Franklin Mutual Shares owns about 19% of the mainly institutionally-owned stock.

Berkshire received the warrants when it helped White Mountains finance the buyout of CGNU. The warrants gave Berkshire the right to buy 1.7 million shares of White Mountains at $170 each at any point through 2008. White Mountains had a call option on the warrants that could have gone into effect in May 2004. Its stock was trading at about $500 at the time.

White Mountains gave Berkshire a 2% discount on its exercise price to give it further incentive to pay for the shares early. The $294 million that Berkshire paid was worth about $800 million right after the warrants were exercised into shares. The investment has fared well since.

At the end of 2004, White Mountains had total assets of $19 billion and a book value of $3.7 billion, or $342.52 a share.

White Mountains was hit hard in 2005 by hurricane losses. Indeed, CEO Steven Fass began his letter in the 2005 Annual Report saying, “This is certainly not the letter I envisioned as my first as White Mountains’ new CEO. As a result of the financial impact of hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma on our insurance operations, and the related decline in the value of our investment in Montpelier Re, our financial results for 2005 were very disappointing. Fully-converted, tangible book value, including dividends, grew by an anemic 2%, obviously well below our targets. All-in, Katrina, Rita, and Wilma, as well as the lesser-known but still significant European storm Erwin, cost the Company $310 million after-taxes in 2005… Masked by the magnitude of the catastrophic losses is the otherwise strong underwriting performance of our operating units.”

In 2006, White Mountains Chairman Jack Byrne said that losses in 2005 storms “wiped out” investors in Olympus Re, a firm set up to help White Mountains tap into the surge of reinsurance needed after 9/11. The so-called “sidecar” deal hurt such investors as Franklin Mutual Funds Advisers and money managers Third Avenue and Fairholme Capital.

RAILSPLITTER HOLDINGS

In 2008, Berkshire acquired Railsplitter Holdings from White Mountains and in 2012 Berkshire got $45 million for the last of its stake in White Mountains..



All Smiles

White Mountains Insurance Group’s former Chairman Jack Byrne owns about 20% of the company’s stock. In 2003, George Gillespie was named chairman. In 2006, Byrne returned as chairman.

(Photo by Shawn Henry)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value White Mountains Insurance



How Jack Byrne

Will Look at 100

White Mountains Chairman Jack Byrne in flower-of-his-youth photo retired to the archives in 1978, but summoned for use in 2001.

(With

permission of

Jack Byrne)

White Mountains Insurance The Story of Warren Buffett

January 8, 2002



Mr. John J. Byrne

Chairman

White Mountains Insurance Group

80 South Main Street

Hanover, NH 03755



Dear Jack:

I can’t tell you how delighted I am that you are finally being named insurance leader of the year. Now you can deliver the acceptance speech that you have been rehearsing for the past 22 years. Don’t forget to leave out the reference to President Reagan’s recent election.

I hope that there is a cash award that goes with this honor. As you know I have a 20% quota-share in earnings from any activity in which you are involved that turns out to be profitable. It’s been a long time since the last check.

I understand that the candidate pool for the award has become so depleted that this year the contest was only between you and Saul Steinberg. I’m glad you edged him out, even if the tie had to be broken by Ray Barrette flipping a coin (without witnesses). Now that the nominating board has lowered its standards, I’m betting that next year’s winner will be Martin Frankel.

Jack, I’m still grateful that back in 1976 you taught me everything you know about insurance. I well remember the occasion: It was during a coffee break at GEICO Plaza. Fortunately, I later met Hank Greenberg, Ron Ferguson, and Tony Nicely and now have achieved at least a modest understanding of the business.

So, subject to the reservations I have detailed above – congratulations.



Sincerely,



Warren E. Buffett



(Photo stolen from the 2002 White Mountains Annual Report)

Patrick and

Jack Byrne

“You’re still not

listening to me.”

Of Permanent Value White Mountains Insurance



64





A GAMUT OF INSURANCE COMPANIES


Berkshire has continued to write major reinsurance policies in recent years, both prior to and following September 11, 2001. “On September 11, people woke up and realized that instead of having diversification, you actually have aggregation because of the possibility of losses happening all at the same time,” said Ajit Jain, head of Berkshire’s reinsurance business (Business Week, July 15, 2002). With the attack on the World Trade Center, not only did the buildings collapse, but a myriad of business interruptions occurred and workers’ compensation policies were triggered.

Still and all, Berkshire has written some major policies in the past two decades:

• In 1996, Berkshire entered into a large contract with Allstate Insurance Company covering property risks in Florida.

• In July 1999, Berkshire’s National Indemnity Co. agreed to provide protection to Bermuda-based ACE Ltd., which was acquiring Cigna’s property and casualty business. For $1.25 billion in premiums, National Indemnity provided ACE $2.5 billion in protection against unexpected losses at the Cigna business. The agreement protects ACE against adverse reserve development at Brandywine Holdings, a Cigna unit that was created to pay off the claims on the company’s discontinued asbestos and environmental businesses. For the $1.25 billion in premiums, Berkshire would see large losses. How well the contract works out for Berkshire depends on two factors: 1) the amount and speed of the claims (the slower, the better for Berkshire) and 2) how well Berkshire invests its $1.25 billion.

• In 1999, ACE Re Group bought a $300-million, 5-year, second-event retrocession index cover, which is the protection that a reinsurer buys from another reinsurer (retrocession) to guard against a second catastrophe or event striking in one time frame. The rates are set for five years and the limits of liability fluctuate with an economic index.

• Countrywide Credit Industries, a leading residential finance company of Calabasas, California, announced February 3, 2000, that National Indemnity would provide Countrywide’s Balboa Life and Casualty unit with an extra layer of protection against property and casualty risk. The agreement called for National Indemnity to buy up to $100 million in newly issued shares of a special purpose class of Countrywide preferred stock if certain events took place. The primary trigger would be weather- and fire-related catastrophic events. The agreement lasted until January 1, 2003.

• In 2000, Frontier Insurance Co., having financial difficulties, said it had

purchased an option to buy $800 million in reinsurance from National Indemnity. On September 27, 2000, Frontier exercised that option and bought an $800-million reinsurance policy from National Indemnity. In 2001, the policy was raised to $858 million.

• In the third quarter of 2000, St. Paul Companies gave Berkshire $180 million in assets to assume losses of $315 million over time.

• Berkshire along with Allianz AG, Europe’s biggest insurer, and a group of other insurers teamed up in 2002 to offer airlines insurance against terrorism. The insurers offered to cover a plane for as much as $1 billion and an airline for $2 billion a year.

• Reports in 2002 stated that Berkshire was the lead international reinsurer for the second layer of reinsurance coverage for the new German terrorism insurer Extremus AG. Berkshire took more than $378 million of the second layer for its own books for the period of August 2002 to December 2003.

In 2003, Berkshire’s National Indemnity unit covered ACE Ltd. for

$533-million worth of reinsurance (in addition to that provided in a 1999 transaction) to help with its asbestos reserves.

Originally, ACE bought Cigna’s property casualty unit in 1991 on the condition that Cigna get retroactive reinsurance coverage from National Indemnity to cover its old business, much of it asbestos-related.

The main value of such a retroactive reinsurance policy is the time value of money. Also under such a policy, Berkshire establishes a deferred charge account which is the difference between the premium received and the expected eventual loss. The amortization of the deferred charges set up is reported as underwriting losses. Applying the corporation’s tax rate to the charge can result in millions of dollars of reduced taxable income.

According to a Wall Street Journal (January 28, 2003) report, General Electric paid $20 million to Berkshire for $200 million in coverage that is triggered in the event of a GE policyholder’s insolvency or to pay judgments from a lawsuit filed by shareholders against a director or directors on behalf of the company.

Hartford Financial Services Groups said in 2007, it would offer some high-risk commercial property owners twice as much insurance coverage as a result of an agreement with Berkshire. These so-called “surplus lines” policies covered losses as high as $25 million. Surplus lines are usually bought for properties in disaster-prone areas, vacant buildings, manufacturing plants, and apartment buildings. The agreement means a buyer won’t have to go to multiple sources for such coverage. Hartford and Berkshire will share the risks equally in most cases, according to a Hartford statement.

FOR LITTLE OR NO CASH

On November 1, 2000, CGNU, the largest U.K. insurer, said that it was

selling its London insurance market unit, Marlborough Underwriting Agency, to Berkshire for little or no cash. The price was said to be less than $14 million. CGNU said it would take a charge of $651 million for costs related to buying reinsurance from Berkshire to cover any claims from Marlborough customers exceeding reserves. Some of the risk related to possible asbestos pollution claims.

Buying Marlborough gave Berkshire access to the Lloyd’s of London market, which underwrites about 5% of the world’s insurance. Lloyd’s was founded in the late 1680s as a way for merchants to trade shipping news. In recent years Lloyd’s has suffered a string of financial woes, often from claims related to storms and other natural disasters.

Analyst Alice Schroeder said (Bloomberg, November 1, 2000) that Berkshire may possibly not use Marlborough to write any new business, betting simply that it can squeeze profits out of its existing business. This could be done using economics of scale to generate investment income and pay claims more efficiently. “I think they’re buying a runoff book,” she said.

The deal meant that Berkshire received $2.4 billion in float—$1.7 billion of original reserves plus $651 million additional reserves. The liability is capped at the $3.2 billion mark, and any additional liabilities would revert to CGNU.

In 1998, Berkshire bought DP Mann, one of the largest of Lloyd’s insurers. Speculation abounded then that Mann would become a platform to buy a string of Lloyd’s syndicates, but no further Lloyd’s purchases were made until Marlborough. Just two months before the Marlborough deal, Berkshire helped finance the $2.6-billion purchase of CGNU property and casualty business by White Mountains Insurance Group.

In March 2001, Lloyd’s of London faced a $285-million claim due to the sinking of the world’s largest oil-drilling rig. After a series of explosions, a 40-story Petrobras rig sank off the coast of Rio de Janeiro, killing 11 of 175 workers.

The insurance underwriting at Lloyd’s was led by the Marlborough Agency.

The hit to Marlborough was not known; a number of other companies also had exposure to the cost of the rig collapse.

KEMPER INSURANCE COMPANIES

On May 8, 2002, Berkshire announced a strategic relationship with privately held Kemper Insurance Companies. Berkshire invested $125 million in a new Kemper unit that underwrites commercial and professional liability coverage.

Berkshire took a 15% stake in the unit that Kemper carved out to hold all future business in those areas. Kemper’s stake in the unit was $708 million. Kemper also planned to buy reinsurance from Berkshire. The stake was made in the Long Grove, Illinois–based company as most insurance rates were rising after the terrorist activity of September 11, 2001.

Kemper, a leading provider of property/casualty insurance and risk management services, had 2001 revenues totaling $5.9 billion and assets of $8.9 billion.

As of January 1, 2003, Berkshire and Kemper agreed that National Indemnity would provide a cut-through endorsement on Kemper policies. The policies are backed by the A++ credit rating of National Indemnity.

Kemper CEO David Mathis said in a press release, “Under this agreement, we have the backing to continue to operate our core businesses while we restructure our operations in preparation for demutualization, a process which we believe will ultimately enable us to access the capital needed to improve our balance sheet, enhance our ratings, and profitably execute our business plan.”

In connection with the agreement, Kemper repurchased Berkshire’s minority equity investment in Kemper for $125 million.

Press reports in 2003 said Berkshire canceled two reinsurance contracts and reversed an investment in Lumbermens Mutual Casualty, the parent of Kemper Insurance Cos., that defaulted on its debt. The reports said that in 2002, Berkshire backed out of a $125-million investment in a Lumbermens’ subsidiary.

The transactions were part of a decision to shut down its underwriting business after an expansion hurt the insurer, a large provider of workers’ compensation coverage.

GAUM

In late 2002, Berkshire bought a 40% stake in the world’s largest aviation

insurer, Global Aerospace Underwriting Managers (GAUM). GAUM has annual premium income of more than $1 billion.

GAUM was previously owned by the British insurers, Royal & Sun Alliance and Aviva, and underwrites hull and liability insurance coverage for many of the world’s leading airlines as well as coverage for aircraft maintenance.

In addition to Berkshire, the other new owners were Swiss reinsurer Converium, with a 25% stake, and Munich Re, with 24.9%. Royal & Sun Alliance kept a 10.1% holding. Berkshire planned to provide 25% of the pool’s capacity in 2003 through National Indemnity similar to the proportions provided by Munich Re and Converium.

Financial terms of the transaction were not disclosed. Both Aviva and RSA withdrew from aviation insurance because of big losses during the previous decade. However, after 9-11, aviation insurance premiums rose dramatically.

Although neither company commented, Aviva said the value of its share of sold GAUM’s assets was 15 million pounds. RSA said it sold 12 million pounds of the company’s assets to the new group’s members. According to Converium, the value of its investment in GAUM was less than $45 million. Converium has suffered rating downgrades.

In 2004, Berkshire’s National Indemnity and Munich Re stepped in to provide security for Converium’s investment in GAUM. GAUM said Converium would no longer write GAUM’s risks but would retain its investment stake in GAUM.

In late 2005, Converium announced an aviation fronting arrangement with National Indemnity and Munich Re, effective October 1, 2005. The agreement insured Converium’s continuation in the GAUM pool.

In 2008, the European commission cleared the way for Berkshire and Munich Re to acquire joint control of GAUM.

BUYING CONVERIUM’S U.S. BUSINESS

In October 2006, Berkshire’s National Indemnity Co. paid $295 million to buy the troubled U.S. business of Swiss reinsurer Converium Holding AG.

Converium had faced a financial collapse in the summer of 2004, after the

company had to increase its reserves for liability reinsurance contracts in the U.S.

Because of lowered credit ratings, Converium’s premium income was halved to about $2 billion in 2005 and was expected to be about the same in 2006. The sale price included $95 million in cash and the assumption of $200 million in debt.

BOAT AMERICA CORP.

Berkshire’s National Indemnity Co. bought privately held Boat America Corp. in July 2007, for an undisclosed sum.

Boat America is the main supplier of towing, insurance, and other services to the nonprofit boat owners’ association, BoatU.S., which has over half a million boat owner members and was not part of the Berkshire purchase. Boat America provides recreational boaters not only towing and insurance but also financing, travel, and yacht charters. It manages one of the largest recreational yacht insurance programs nationwide and operates the largest network of on-the-water towing fleets in the U.S.

The purchase was revealed after the Federal Trade Commission gave antitrust clearance on July 12, 2007, for an unspecified transaction relating to Boat America. The FTC said it was granting early termination of the waiting period needed under the Hart-Scott-Rodino antitrust law, indicating the government had no objections to the transaction on antitrust grounds.

The nature of the transaction was not disclosed, but the Boat America employee stock ownership trust, which owned the company, was listed as a party to the transaction.

After the FTC announcement, Boat America CEO William Oakerson confirmed that his company and NICO had entered into a stock purchase agreement for the Alexandria, Virginia–based company.

Oakerson was quoted (Dow Jones Newswires, July 12, 2007) as saying that Boat America was first approached by Berkshire in 2006, but that the company didn’t think it was the right time to consider the offer. Oakerson said he and other company officials reconsidered after becoming more familiar with the values of Buffett and Berkshire. “We’ve gotten to know the Berkshire Hathaway group a little more from a remote standpoint. Our board of directors and management team got more comfortable with it,” Oakerson said.

Boat America’s Product Group which formerly consisted of 62 retail stores, mainly along the eastern seaboard, offers boating equipment and was bought by West Marine, Inc., in 2002. Boat America also owns Seaworthy Insurance Co.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Extra Insurance

Extra Insurance The Story of Warren Buffett



CEO Bill Oakerson

(Courtesy of

Boat America)

Prop at BoatU.S. Booth at the annual meeting in 2008



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Extra Insurance



BoatU.S. Booth in 2008—All Aboard!

Fellow in the middle is a Barack Obama look alike.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



65





SYMETRA


White Mountains announced on March 15, 2004, that it together with Berkshire was leading an investor group that would buy the life and investments business of Safeco Corporation for $1.35 billion. A press release said the final price was subject to an adjustment based on the June 30, 2004 adjusted book value. The transaction was closed in the third quarter of 2004 for $1.5 billion.

Safeco Corp. chose to sell this unit in order to focus on its property and casualty business. The unit was put on the block in the fall of 2003.

Safeco Life & Investments, now called Symetra Financial, concentrates mainly on group insurance, individual life insurance, structured settlements, retirement services, and mutual funds.

As of December 21, 2003, Safeco Life & Investments had about $22.5 billion total assets and $2.57 billion in GAAP book value. President Randy Talbot and his management team continued to run the business after the acquisition.

Joining an acquisition entity with equity of about $1 billion, White Mountains and Berkshire each invested $200 million. The entity secured bank financing of $350 million. White Mountains and Berkshire were to receive warrants to buy more shares of the company. On a fully converted basis, White Mountains and Berkshire each own more than 20% of the Safeco unit.

Other investors participating in the purchase included Caxton Associates, LLC; Highfields Capital Management; Och-Ziff Capital Management; Vestar Capital Partners; DLJ Growth Capital Partners, LP; CAI Capital Partners; Fairholme Capital Management; and Prospector Partners.

At the time of the sale, Safeco Life & Investments included Safeco Life Insurance Company, Safeco Securities, Safeco Asset Management Company, Safeco Investment Services, and other subsidiaries.

Along with its name change to Symetra, the company planned new corporate headquarters in Bellevue, Washington. The company has 1,200 employees and a network of 20,000 agents and advisers serving 2 million customers.

Symetra announced on April 25, 2007, a definitive agreement to buy Medical Risk Managers, Inc. (MRM) of South Windsor, Connecticut. Terms were not disclosed.

Symetra long has been an industry leader in medical stop-loss coverage designed for employers that self-insure their group health plans. Symetra’s buyout of MRM was intended to strengthen its stop-loss portfolio and gain greater entry into the employee benefits market.

In 2007, Symetra filed an initial public offering to sell up to $750 million in common stock. White Mountains thus planned to sell part of its holdings in Symetra while retaining substantial holdings in it along with White Mountains and Berkshire owning about a third of the company. David Foy, White Mountains’ CFO, would head. However, the big life-insurance IPO was postponed in November 2007 because of unfavorable market conditions. Symetra had a stockholders’ equity of $1.4 billion as of September 2007.

In October 2009, Symetra filed for an initial public offering (IPO) which was withdrawn because of poor market conditions. The IPO finally came out in January 2010 and traded under the symbol “SYA.”

Berkshire and White Mountains each own 26.9 million shares of Symetra and both plan to keep their shares.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Symetra



66





MEDICAL PROTECTIVE


Berkshire and GE announced on May 6, 2005, that General Electric was selling its Medical Protective Corp. insurance unit to Berkshire for $825 million. Thus it paid a premium of about 12% over premiums of $737 million. The company had $680 million in premiums in 2008 and had $800 in premiums in 2011.

The professional liability insurer for physicians and dentists was sold to Berkshire’s NICO insurance subsidiary.

The nation’s first provider of medical liability insurance, Medical Protective has been in business since 1899. Medical Protective, with a triple-A credit, is based in Fort Wayne, Indiana; employs about 330 people (about 200 of them work in Fort Wayne); and earned profits of $75 million in 2004. It has $511 million in statutory surplus. The company writes medical malpractice insurance for about 75,000 primary healthcare providers.

Tim Kenesey remains president and CEO of the company. For GE’s part, CEO Jeffrey Immelt is trying to pare down slower-growth businesses and has been selling some of GE’s insurance units.

In a statement, Buffett said, “For more than 100 years, Medical Protective has been the ‘gold standard’ in protecting the assets and reputation of healthcare providers. The Medical Protective team has successfully navigated through difficult insurance cycles by consistently delivering the nation’s best defense for doctors and solid results for shareholders. Medical Protective will be a great addition to the Berkshire Hathaway group of businesses.”

Buffett paid a four-hour visit to the company on September 7, 2005.

In December 2007, A.M. Best gave Medical Protective its highest financial strength rating of A++, citing the company’s backing by Berkshire as well as “benefits derived” from two significant reinsurance transactions. These transactions include a loss portfolio transfer and a quota share agreement between Medical Protective and its parent, Columbia Insurance Company, and an affiliate, National Indemnity Company, which are indirectly, wholly owned subsidiaries of Berkshire Hathaway.

“We are proud to offer healthcare providers the best financial strength and stability available in the country,” Kenesey said in a press release. “For over a century—while so many other carriers have come and gone, Medical Protective has been protecting the reputations and assets of healthcare providers with the nation’s best defense and solutions.”

BUYING PRINCETON INSURANCE

Medical Protection announced the planned acquisition of Princeton Insurance Co., a malpractice firm, on September 29, 2011. The purchase was made from Medical Liability Mutual Insurance Co.

Terms of the all-cash deal were not disclosed. But on CNBC the next day day, Buffett, in giving a wrapup of new investments, mentioned that the day before he had paid $400 million for an insurance company.

Princeton Insurance, based in Princeton, New Jersey, employs about 100 people and is the largest medical professional liability insurance in the state. It writes professional liability policies for 16,000 health-care providers, including doctors, nurses, dentists, and hospitals. Princeton generates about $140 million in premiums each year and has a surplus of about $400 million.



MedPro CEO Tim Kenesey

(Photo courtesy of Medical Protective Corp.)

The Story of Warren Buffett



The Medical Protective Booth

The Medical Protective booth was well manned at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2006.

(Photo by Tommy Terrell)

Of Permanent Value Medical Protective



67





APPLIED UNDERWRITERS


Berkshire agreed to buy Applied Underwriters, a leading financial services and workers’ compensation company, on February 8, 2006, a transaction that closed in May 2006. The deal included Applied’s North American Casualty insurance companies. Terms for the privately held company were not given.

Applied, founded in 1994, provides a number of insurance lines and is a leading company in crafting workers’ compensation and business services for small and medium-sized companies. With about 500 employees, Applied had sales of about $425 million in 2004. Over the years, the company has done increasing amounts of business with Berkshire’s National Indemnity Co.

Berkshire said Applied would continue to be managed by its founders, Chairman and CEO Sidney R. Ferenc, and President and COO Steven Menzies. In a statement, Buffett spoke well of Applied’s managers: “We are delighted to become partners with Sid and Steve. We invest in proven companies that are industry leaders and that offer significant growth potential. Applied’s management team has the disciplined mindset necessary to lead a profitable underwriting operation.”

The company originally was and still is based in San Francisco. In 1998, Applied moved most of its operations from San Francisco to Omaha to escape the difficult employment conditions of the region’s high-tech boom.

Announcement of the deal was made on Business Wire, a press release company Berkshire had agreed to buy the month previous to the Applied Underwriters buyout.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 2005 Annual Report about how the Applied purchase came about: “Less than a year ago, Applied entered into a large reinsurance contract with Ajit Jain, the extraordinary manager of National Indemnity’s reinsurance division. Ajit was impressed by Sid and Steve, and they liked Berkshire’s method of operation. So we decided to join forces. We are pleased that Sid and Steve retain 19% of Applied.”

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Applied Underweiters



68





INSURING A $1 BILLION LOTTERY


Berkshire’s National Indemnity, under a policy arranged by Ajit Jain, insured a $1 billion Internet lottery in the fall of 2000, for Grab.com. For a premium of “several million dollars,” according to Grab.com cofounder Andrew Warner, Berkshire agreed to pay out the prize money if any player matched seven numbers from 1 to 77 (Reuters, October 2, 2000). Also, Berkshire was to get a small payment from Grab.com for each player who entered the lottery.

The odds of someone matching seven numbers out of 77 is about 2.4 billion to one. Even if every person eligible to play—U.S. residents over 13 and British residents over 18—were to enter the contest, the chance of Grab.com paying out the $1 billion was about 1,000 to one.

Further, the money would not be paid out in present dollars. Any $1 billion

winner would have the choice of taking $175 million right away or having the installments paid out over 40 years, starting with 20 annual payments of $5 million, 10 installments of $10 million, and nine of $20 million, followed by a balloon payment of $620 million in the 40th year.

Insurance is compulsory for lottery-style contests in New York. The $1 billion prize was by far the largest ever offered in a sweepstakes.

“It’s not a big risk for us,” said John Arendt, an assistant vice president for Berkshire Hathaway’s reinsurance division. “As long as the premium is higher than the odds, we’re comfortable.” He went on to say, “By comparison, the chance that Berkshire Hathaway will have to cough up $1 billion this year to cover one of its natural disaster insurance policies is something like 1 in 100.”

Andrew Warner, Grab.com’s CEO, said, “We’ll keep running this until we get a billionaire out of our lottery players” (ibid.).

Nobody correctly picked the seven winning numbers in Grab.com’s first

$1-billion lottery. However, Colleen Rich, a nurse in West Carrollton, Ohio, was a $1 million winner and receives her prize in equal annual installments of $25,000 over 40 years.

Grab.com’s Warner was pleased for that winner and epressed his hope for an even bigger one: “We’re absolutely thrilled for Colleen, and we wish her and her family all the best with their million-dollar prize. We were disappointed that we didn’t have a $1-billion winner, and we’re still desperate to make someone a billionaire. We’re already in discussions with our insurance company [Berkshire’s National Indemnity] about launching our next $1-billion contest.”

Regarding Grab.com’s contest, Buffett’s had this response: (Fortune, February 19, 2001): “I wouldn’t have thrown a party if we had had to pay off, but we take well-judged chances like that all the time. That’s what we do that almost no one else is willing to do.”

Berkshire insured a similar kind of $1-billion lottery in 2003. The chance was one in a thousand that Berkshire would have to pay a winner $250 million in present value or $1 billion in installments. Players could go online and enter codes found on some specially marked Pepsi products. On a show hosted by Drew Carey, the 1,000 sweepstake’s winners had a chance to become a

$1-million winner and then the $1-million winner had a million-to-one long shot (a very slim) chance to win $1 billion. The premium for the annuity was an undisclosed seven-figure sum.

Berkshire was to pay no more than 250 times what it received from Pepsi, and the chance of having to pay out was one in a million. The odds were with Berkshire. Buffett said Berkshire would write such a policy for $2.5 billion of winnings but not $25 billion.

Buffett, Pepsi, and a chimpanzee were the unlikely collaborators in the lottery. The prize was based on a six-digit number created at random by a chimp shuffling six individual figures. To prevent any fraud, the chimp was chosen jointly by Pepsi and Berkshire.

“We are currently in the monkey-interviewing stage,” a Pepsi spokesman said before the drawing was held. A 41/2-year-old chimpanzee named Kendall was picked for the monkey business.

No $1-billion prize was rewarded, but the final contestant lost only after his first four numbers matched.

When a certain author was telling his wife the amusing chimpanzee story, a less-amused wife replied, “Monkey see, monkey do.”

Buffett said in Berkshire’s 2003 Annual Report that he had originally playfully suggested that any winner be paid $1 a year for a billion years. Also, he said that Pepsi renewed its insurance with Berkshire for a repeat contest in 2004.

In 2005, Berkshire’s National Indemnity was part of a group that insured the Noble Poker $100 Million Mega Tournament.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Got Pepsi?

Chimp Kendall picked winning numbers for $1-billion lottery in 2003.

Of Permanent Value Insuring a $1 Billion Lottery



69





BACKER OF LLOYD’S OF LONDON


Having tested the waters of the Lloyd’s of London insurance market early in the millennium, Berkshire has jumped in—ankle deep—during the past several years.

Lloyd’s, which can underwrite 15 billion pounds of premiums annually, is a market more than 300 years old and made up of 66 underwriting syndicates. It’s not a company, but an unusual market for insurance.

Lloyd’s is housed in a modern tower with a 13-floor glass atrium in London. Each syndicate is a separate business with its own investors. Originally, only individuals, “Names,” could invest. Today, corporations such as American International Group and Berkshire provide capital, but the companies’ liability is limited.

• In 2002, Wellington Underwriting of London bought reinsurance from Berkshire to increase the amount of insurance it can write to $1.4 billion. Buying the so-called quota share reinsurance boosted Wellington’s ability to back new business through Lloyd’s of London. Berkshire earns 30% of the profits from the new business written by Wellington. Under the agreement, Berkshire provided Lloyd’s Syndicate 2020, a company managed by Wellington Underwriting, with 338 million pounds to boost the amount of business it could insure.

Lloyd’s, a major player in the global insurance industry, nearly collapsed twice in recent years.

• In July 2002, Berkshire increased its investment in Lloyd’s of London by pledging 50 million pounds to Euclidian, a Lloyd’s managing agency, to boost its underwriting capacity for Syndicate 1243.

BUYING EUCLIDIAN FOR ONE POUND

In 2004, Berkshire agreed to provide about 31 million pounds, taking a 25% stake in a public offering of Euclidian, the largest insurer of caravans in Europe and tour operators in Britain. Afterwards, Berkshire bought Euclidian for only one pound. Euclidian had been the target of a failed insurance consolidation. It had been looking for a partner after being told by Lloyd’s it would not be permitted to underwrite any further premiums without more capital. Euclidian was folded into Berkshire’s Marlborough underwriting arm.

• In September 2002, Trenwick Group Inc., an insurance and reinsurance company in Bermuda, said it had agreed for Berkshire to boost the total premium capacity of Trenwick’s Managing Agents’ Syndicate 839 at Lloyd’s for the 2002 year to $512 million. Berkshire made a $212 million investment in the Lloyd’s syndicate. Berkshire provided a $93 million increase in Syndicate 839’s Lloyd’s underwriting capacity via a qualifying quota share (QQS) reinsurance facility. This freed $119 million in new underwriting capacity by providing reinsurances on some of the syndicate’s businesses.

• In November 2002, Berkshire agreed to provide Trenwick’s Syndicate 839 with 100 million pounds in 2003, an increase of 62.5 million pounds provided for the syndicate in 2002. Also, Berkshire agreed to provide a qualifying quota reinsurance facility of 30 million pounds to Syndicate 839 for 2003. The capital was to be applied to the aviation segment of the syndicate’s business.

In late 2002, Hiscox Plc said it had secured a QQS reinsurance arrangement with Berkshire for the 2002 account for up to 50 million pounds. This was in addition to an existing 151 million pounds. Hiscox, listed on the London Stock Exchange, underwrites business at Lloyd’s of London. Hiscox said in 2004 it had reached an agreement with Berkshire’s Marlborough unit to give to Hiscox the renewal rights for the majority of business currently placed with Marlborough’s Syndicate 1861. Marlborough and Hiscox agreed that Hiscox’s Syndicate 33 offers renewed terms on business written in the energy, marine, and energy liability, and cargo accounts. Marlborough retained the marine excess of loss account and the marine hull account.

Buffett first became heavily involved with Lloyd’s of London when Berkshire bought General Re in 1998. General Re had purchased Faraday a bit earlier and managed Syndicate 435. Berkshire’s units, including Gen Re, have provided money to Lloyd’s operations in the hope of tapping their blue chip client list.

In March 2007, Berkshire’s National Indemnity reportedly made a retroactive insurance deal to assume the liabilities of Sompo U.K., a unit of Sompo Japan Insurance, through its own U.K. unit, Transfercom.

RESCUING LLOYD’S OF LONDON “NAMES”

On October 20, 2006, Berkshire announced a deal to take over the remaining insurance liabilities held by thousands of Lloyd’s of London “Names,” the wealthy underwriters who have long supported London’s insurance market. The agreement would mean the Names no longer need to live with the uncertainty of facing claims from Lloyd’s customers because Berkshire would pay up to $7 billion in claims over the coming decades.

It would end the long-running disaster triggered by the insurance market’s near collapse more than a decade ago primarily because of overwhelming asbestos claims as well as claims stemming from Hurricane Andrew in 1992.

Berkshire’s National Indemnity unit struck the deal to provide up to $7 billion of additional reinsurance coverage to Equitas, the vehicle responsible for most of Lloyd’s liabilities before 1993.

According to press reports, the agreement provides final relief to more than 30,000 Names who could face more claims if Equitas were unable to meet its obligations. As part of this deal the Names share in two payouts, one of 50 million pounds and a second of 80 million pounds.

Equitas Chairman Hugh Stevenson told reporters, “the reinsured Names will no longer have any liability and will be able to sleep soundly—Berkshire Hathaway is providing the mattress.”

In a statement, Buffett said: “A decade ago, Equitas was launched in order to resolve innumerable problems involving the most complex of insurance issues. Skeptics were many and vocal. But the management of Equitas was equal to the task, and its efforts have enormously benefited insureds, Names, Lloyd’s and the general reputation of U.K. industry. Their skill in resolving complicated and contentious matters allows the transaction announced today. Much, however, remains to be done. Putting Berkshire Hathaway’s Gibraltar-like strength behind the remaining problems—which will take many years or decades to be resolved—eliminates any remaining worries for all concerned.”

Buffett was also quoted as saying (The New York Times, October 21, 2006), “I don’t think we can make a killing. We could take a big loss. Nobody knows in this kind of thing. We’re taking on everything Lloyd’s wrote before 1992.”

The announcement came a few months after Equitas celebrated its 10-year anniversary, defying skeptics who believed it had little chance of survival. Its total liabilities have been pared down from 15 billion pounds in 1996 to 4.4 billion pounds in 2006.

In the first stage of the deal, which closed at the end of March 2007, Berkshire will provide $5.7 billion of reinsurance coverage. In return, Equitas gave Berkshire its assets. In a sense, Berkshire bought the “old” Lloyd’s and will conduct the runoff of those old claims.

In the second stage, under a process called novation, Equitas will apply to the U.K. High Court for approval to transfer all outstanding liabilities of the Names to Berkshire. If this is successful, and completed by the end of 2009, Berkshire agreed to provide up to an additional $1.3 billion of reinsurance. If all that comes to pass, Berkshire is to receive total payments of about $749 million.

Berkshire would buy Equitas, which would fade away as a company but would continue to operate from London as a rebranded company headed by Ajit Jain. Jain and his staff will be faced with the formidable job of managing $13.9 billion in potential claims. About 55% of Equitas claims involve asbestos. The others include a variety of disasters.

Equitas has existing reserves of about $8.7 billion, money which Berkshire could invest in a much broader way than Equitas because of Berkshire’s sterling credit rating. Buffett’s aim will be to have profits from investing that sum to outpace the claims he’ll have to pay. What Berkshire is getting from the complicated deal is $7 billion or more of “float” (liabilities that, in this case, are very long-tail).

With Berkshire’s reinsurance coverage, the deal would virtually double the assets available to Equitas to pay claims. The “new” Lloyd’s will still exist, operating as it has since 1993. Credit ratings for both Equitas and Lloyd’s were immediately raised after the deal was announced. By bailing out Equitas, Berkshire would eliminate a significant problem Lloyd’s and its Names have on their plate. It would free Lloyd’s to keep operating without a large monkey on its back.

When the insurance market was hit with the huge losses of the early ’90s, Lloyd’s created Equitas and the Names were required to pay a premium to move their liability to the new company. The difficulty in assessing the liabilities meant the Names could never be certain that Equitas would cover all possible claims. The deal with Berkshire means the Names can organize their estates with greater certainty.

Describing how the deal got off the ground, Buffett told the Financial Times (October 20, 2006), “I’ve followed Equitas ever since it was formed because it was one of the most important events in insurance industry history. Maybe five years ago we briefly explored the idea of whether a transaction of this sort would be feasible and we came to the conclusion it was not feasible at that time. There were just too many unknowns and not enough time had elapsed to get a reasonable fix on what the future developments might be. And then six months ago, after the March 31 report {Equitas Annual Report} came out, I raised the question with Ajit Jain about whether there had been enough experience that we could propose something and then it went from there. I was not involved with the discussions. They primarily involved Ajit Jain on our side and then we had a number of other people working on it.”

One Internet poster saw the deal’s upside for Berkshire this way:

Assuming that there is enough money in Equitas today to handle the next 20 years, the economics of the deal from Berkshire Hathaway’s perspective becomes clear. National Indemnity is taking the back-end of the claim stream 20 years out, it is committing to pay up to $7 billion for that back-end portfolio of claims. In exchange for making that commitment, it is getting £286 million today in surplus (a number I derived from taking the current surplus and subtracting the amount that Equitas will retain from that in the deal), plus £90 million in cash from the Corporation of Lloyd’s, plus another £22 million from Equitas. While it gets that money over a couple of years, let’s simplify things and say that Berkshire Hathaway is receiving £398 million in cash today (approximately $746 million) for its $7 billion reinsurance commitment beginning in 2026.



If National Indemnity earns a return of 5.57 percent on that money annually over this period, National Indemnity breaks even on the deal. In other words, in exchange for the cash payment of $746 million, National Indemnity can grow that money to the $7 billion back-end reinsurance commitment. What this means of course is that National Indemnity makes money on this deal if any of the following occur:



a. It gets more than 5.75 percent real rate of return (if the return is 6.25, it will make nominally $1.4 billion, with a $123 million present value).





b. The money in Equitas lasts longer than 20 years, allowing National Indemnity to further grow its nest egg.





c. The claim stream becomes less than Equitas is currently projecting.





In part, here’s how Buffett described the Equitas deal in Berkshire’s 2006 Annual Report: “From the start, many people predicted Equitas would eventually fail. But as Ajit and I reviewed the facts in the spring of 2006—13 years after the last exposed policy had been written and after the payment of 11.3 billion pounds in claims—we concluded that the patient was likely to survive. And we decided to offer a huge reinsurance policy to Equitas.

“Because plenty of imponderables continue to exist, Berkshire could not provide Equitas, and its 27,972 names, unlimited protection. But we said—and I’m simplifying—that if Equitas would give us $7.12 billion in cash and securities (this is the float I talked about), we would pay all of its future claims and expenses up to $13.9 billion. That amount was $5.7 billion above what Equitas had recently guessed its ultimate liabilities to be. Thus, the Names received a huge—and almost certainly sufficient—amount of future protection against unpleasant surprises. Indeed the protection is so large that Equitas plans a cash payment to its thousands of Names, an event few of them had ever dreamed possible.

“And how will Berkshire fare? That depends on how much ‘known’ claims will end up costing us, how many yet-to-be presented claims will surface and what will be the cost, how soon claim payments will be made and how much we earn on the cash we receive before it must be paid out. Ajit and I think the odds are in our favor. And should we be wrong, Berkshire can handle it.”

The first phase of the complicated deal did materialize in late March 2007, after approval from UK watchdog—The Financial Service Authority—as well as the Equitas Trustees and the New York State Insurance Department.

Under the deal, Names were to share in a payment of 50 million pounds, or about $98 million. The deal meant that the billions of dollars of Equitas liabilities and assets were transferred to Berkshire. The moment the $7 billion in assets were delivered to Berkshire, Buffett turned almost the entire portfolio into cash. On May 6, 2007, he said in a press conference he sold almost all of the some 500 equity positions into cash, giving Berkshire a fresh start with the money.

“I proceeded to sell 496 or 497 of them in a couple of days. That was the latest manifestation of perhaps the ill-founded belief that we could do better than the S&P,” Buffett said during Berkshire’s annual meeting weekend in 2007.

A HIT TO EARNINGS

The Equitas deal means a hit to earnings for Berkshire that come from the amortization of a balance sheet item called Deferred Charges for Reinsurance Assumed (DCRA). At year end 2006 (pre-Equitas), DCRA amounted to $1,964 million and was being amortized at a rate of about $300 million a year. At the end of the first quarter of 2007, DCRA was $4,163 million. The jump was the result of Equitas, according to Glenn Tongue, managing partner of T2 Partners LLC in New York.

Buffett mentioned in the 2006 Annual Report that the amortization rate would go from $300 million to $450 million as a result of the Equitas transaction. Tongue said that seems to indicate incremental amortization (charge) to underwriting is about $150 million a year. The first quarter of 2007 filing further indicates that the amortization will be about $140 million for the last nine months of 2007, which would annualize out to $185 million. So the charge probably will be between $150 million and $185 million.

Decades ago, no one would have predicted that Berkshire’s tiny insurance operations would be buying Equitas and thereby resolving the most difficult problem facing the venerable and mighty market of the 300-year-old Lloyd’s of London.



Lloyd’s of London Marketplace

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Backer of Lloyd’s of London

Backer of Lloyd’s of London The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Backer of Lloyd’s of London



70





PROTECTION FOR WORLD MARKETS


On April 3, 2006, Bloomberg reported that according to SEC filings, Berkshire sold a form of insurance to buyers who wanted protection from a drop in “four major equity indexes” over the next 15 or 20 years, according to an SEC filing.

Buffett is thus betting that indexes, three of which are outside the U.S., won’t tumble and force Berkshire to pay a claim. The “long-duration equity index put contracts” involve large transactions which give Berkshire premiums upfront before Berkshire faces the risk of paying claims later. The derivatives contracts obligate Berkshire to cover the put buyers’ long-term losses in the stock market. If markets were to collapse and remain way down for decades, Berkshire could be on the hook for as much as $14 billion. Indeed, it suffered large paper losses on derivatives in 2008.

The Bloomberg story quoted David Winters of Wintergreen Advisers in Mountain Lakes, New Jersey, as saying, “They figured out a very interesting strategy that basically nobody else can do because of their size and long-duration capital. Buffett and Munger have made the ultimate contrarian play here. They take a premium in today, and they’re willing to buy securities if markets really plunge.”

Stock-index contracts, which are derivatives that function like put options, increase Berkshire’s risk if market losses occur. For example, a 30% decline in each of the indexes in 2005 would have led to a $900 million pretax loss for Berkshire, according to a March 2006 SEC filing. The Bloomberg story said that Berkshire’s maximum exposure was about $14 billion at the end of 2005.

The contracts are insured against a low-probability event—exactly what Berkshire’s insurance businesses seek. That means Berkshire would buy securities at a time of collapse—exactly as it wants to do. Berkshire didn’t say which stock indexes were covered, however, the company could lose up to $14 billion if all four indexes covered by the puts fell to zero. Historical trends overall show rising markets.

Like contracts are insurance policies, essentially protecting buyers from a catastrophic long-term collapse in world stock prices. Berkshire disclosed in the filing that it sold a similar kind of insurance on bonds known as credit-default swaps. In those contracts, also derivatives, Berkshire bet the bond issuers wonr’t default. “Berkshire utilizes derivatives in order to manage certain economic risks of its businesses as well as to assume specified amounts of market and credit risk from others,” the company said, according to the Bloomberg story.

Berkshire collected premiums of about $2.5 billion in the first nine months of 2007 from selling insurance on stock indexes and bonds in the form of derivatives guaranteeing payment to the buyer in the event of a specific loss in an underlying entity of the contracts, according to The Wall Street Journal (November 5, 2007). The article said sellers of stock- and credit-insurance contracts usually bet that the risk priced into the underlying securities is overstated.

The theoretical value of the underlying contracts, which include stock index options and credit-default swaps, has risen by $12 billion, or 52%, to $35 billion since the end of 2006, the Journal said, adding the estimated value of the contracts was about $5.6 billion, an increase of $2.3 billion, or 70%, from the end of 2006.

INSURING BOND INSURERS

The Wall Street Journal (November 13, 2007) suggested that Berkshire may step into the turmoil of the credit markets by being a reinsurer for beleaguered bond insurers. With billions in cash and superior credit rating, Berkshire could provide relief to other insurers or go into the business itself. The story reported that major bond insurers were reaching for help from large bond insurers.

Wall Street’s Glenn Tongue was quoted, “Fear has moved away from hurricanes and is now moving into the financial markets.”

If Buffett were to wind up stabilizing the debt markets, it would have slight overtones of when J.P. Morgan came to the rescue of the banking system during the Panic of 1907.

TURNING FORTUNES ON THE DERIVATIVES CONTRACTS

Buffett’s derivative bets in 2007 and 2008 were large disasters. Though he may be right long-term, but he ran into some of the worst market conditions ever, and the unrealized losses on the derivatives ate into earnings.

On May 18, 2009, Buffett confirmed to CNBC that Berkshire had made some changes to its derivative portions, with a lower stock price over a shorter time period. He told CNBC’s Becky Quick that about $2 billion of put options on the S&P 500 stock index had been altered. He also said changes had been made to a derivative contract on a foreign exchange contract. The “new” contracts would become money makers if the S&P rebounds by 15% over the next 15 years. Buffett said he didn’t pay a “dime” in cash to restructure the derivative.

Buffett added he still thought Berkshire would make money on the “old” and “new” contracts.

One report (The Motley Fool, August 4, 2009) said some of the contracts rest the strike price on S&P puts, from 1,500 down to the high 900s. In return, the expiration date dropped from 18 years out to 10 years out.

Some of the contracts were on the S&P, some on the U.K.’s FTSE100 Index,

the Dow Jones Euro Stoxx Index, and some on Japan’s Nikkei 275 Stock Average.



David Winters Drilling Deep for Value Investments

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Protection for World Markets



71





BOND INSURANCE BUSINESS


— IN —

Berkshire launched its own bond insurance business in New York on December 28, 2007. In an effort to profit from the crisis in the nation’s credit markets, Berkshire Hathaway Assurance Corp., headed by Berkshire’s insurance guru Ajit Jain, planned to offer local governments financing for public projects. The appeal to the borrower would be the safety of Berkshire’s triple-A credit rating.

Berkshire offered to guarantee the bonds that local governments use to finance public projects, such as sewer systems, schools, and hospitals.

Berkshire’s entry put pressure on big bond insurers, such as MBIA Inc. and Ambac Financial Group, because of concerns that those companies, although highly rated themselves, were facing losses in the credit markets. Buffett said (The New York Times, December 29, 2007) that he decided to form his own bond insurance company rather than buy one, in order to avoid “buying into anybody else’s trouble.”

Berkshire entered the New York market after being urged by New York state’s insurance regulator (Financial Times, January 8, 2008).

The paper reported that the move by Eric Dinallo, New York’s superintendent of insurance, was made amid concerns that losses by other bond insurers could hurt their triple-A credit ratings. It quoted Ajit Jain saying that Dinallo had called him in November 2007: “Ajit, this bond insurance is a very important issue for us. Most of the major bond insurers are regulated by the state of New York.... New York State is a major issuer of municipal bonds. We can’t afford to have the industry go into a tailspin.”

Berkshire Hathaway Assurance Corp. made its first foray into the business by guaranteeing $10 million of New York City’s tax-free bonds. The deal was on New York City debt maturing in 2012. Goldman Sachs bought the insurance paying a costly premium of 26 basis points (Reuters, January 8, 2008).

“We’re tiptoeing into the market doing very small deals. We want to see if we can get the pricing that we find acceptable to us. Once we find this is real, we’ll put in a lot more capital,” Jain said (The New York Times, January 9, 2008).

For starters, Berkshire put up $105 million in capital.

As for the amount of business Berkshire might one day write, Jain had this to say: “Something like $5 billion I would not have a problem with. Anything more than $10 billion, I would start to sweat.… So it’s something in that range and, quite honestly, it depends on pricing. If the pricing is attractive, I might say let’s [insure] $6–$7 billion,” Jain said (Financial Times, January 9, 2008).

Jain also told CNBC (January 9, 2008) that Berkshire would consider partnering with or buying a bond insurer.

After hearing that Rhode Island wanted Berkshire to apply for a license to operate in the state, Buffett was quoted as saying, “Rhode Island, here we come.”

Suddenly Berkshire went national, agreeing to expand its new bond insurers throughout the country in exchange for expedited licensing.

Cathy Weatherford, CEO of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, offered to help speed the approvals by allowing Berkshire to submit an electronic application to all states. She said, “The agreement with Berkshire Hathaway is a win-win for states and the company” (Bloomberg, January 28, 2008).

Bond insurers guarantee about $2.5 trillion in bonds issued mostly by states and local governments, traditionally safe entities to cover. They also underwrite a variety of structural products, including securities backed by risky subprime mortgages whose value plummeted in the credit crash of 2007–2008. This put in doubt MBIA and Ambac’s triple-A ratings and left insurers searching for new capital to shore up large losses.

Berkshire wants higher fees than normal for the security of its triple-A credit backing and intends to write quality business at premium prices.

A HUGE BOND REINSURANCE OFFER

In a dramatic half-hour announcement on CNBC (February 12, 2008), Buffett offered to reinsure the municipal liabilities of MBIA, Ambac, and FGIC.

Berkshire was prepared to put up to $5 billion toward the plan.

One company turned down the offer, of which Buffett said, “It would solve it in one stroke of a pen. Our proposal puts the municipals at the front of the line.”

Bond insurers, some in danger of losing their triple-A credit rating, offered to lend their rating to more than $1 trillion of municipal debt. The offer would back only municipal bonds, which are largely considered to be the softest only after treasuries. In essence, Buffett’s offer was to help troubled insurers by offering a backup level of insurance to some $800 billion in municipal bonds.

“When I go to St. Peter, I will not present this as some act that should entitle me to get in.... We’re doing this to make money,” Buffett said, calling the idea something not created in one of his pro bono moments.

And the money would be good. Berkshire proposed to reinsure the municipal bonds in exchange for a fee equal to 1.5 times the remaining unearned premiums over the life of the bonds. That’s 50% more than the insurers charge. Were Berkshire to get all the business, it could bring in billions.

In a February 6, 2008, letter, Jain wrote, “I would submit that our proposal at the pricing levels we require is actually a cheap way for MBIA to raise capital as compared to other alternatives.”

Berkshire’s offer was not accepted. However, a Morgan-led group provided capital that kept afloat the banks that gave credit to healthy companies, and the crisis quickly passed.

Reuters (February 22, 2008) reported that Berkshire’s bond insurer unit was gaining business at a rapid pace by backing 112 municipal bonds in the previous two days. By March 3, 2008, Berkshire had written 206 transactions for a total of $69 million in premiums.

By mid-2008, Berkshire had about $1 billion in capital, was pursuing ways in 49 states to write insurance on municipal bonds, and had entered agreements that generated $520 million in consideration. In its first six months, Berkshire’s unit produced $210 million in premiums with the total impact on its underwriting results described by Berkshire as “minimal.”

Berkshire also received $310 million for transactions structured as credit default derivatives contracts, which provide counterparties with credit protection on certain municipal bonds.

Traditionally, bond insurers offered insurance to generally financially-safe municipalities; but in recent years, insurers have started issuing structured debt products. Called collateralized debt obligations, that risky and complicated mix of assets, which include subprime loans, became worth far less as the nation’s housing crisis deepened.

— OUT —

In October 2009, as local municipalities faced rising financial woes, the municipal bond insurer that Berkshire formed in 2007 largely pulled out of insuring new bonds issued by cities and states.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Bond-Insurance Business



72





REINSURANCE STAKES OUTSIDE STATES


SWISS RE

Swiss Re announced on January 23, 2008, that Berkshire had bought a 3% stake in the company and had entered a reinsurance contract under which Berkshire would assume a 20% share of all of Swiss Re’s property and casualty business for the next five years, effective January 1, 2008.

Swiss Re, founded in 1863 in Zurich, Switzerland, is one of the world’s largest and most diversified reinsurers, with operations in 25 countries. It carried the “AA” credit rating at Standard and Poor’s at the time of Berkshire’s initial involvement.

Berkshire, through its Columbia Insurance Company unit, had bought 11,250,000 Swiss Re shares in the open market.

Jacques Aigrain, Swiss Re’s CEO, was quoted as saying Berkshire bought its shares without any prior discussions. “We are extremely proud to have them among our shareholders.”

For Swiss Re, the deal meant a lowering of capital requirements and an ability to buy back more stock, a program Swiss Re had begun in 2007 and continued throughout 2008 as Swiss Re stock, along with most all stocks, plunged following large losses in the subprime credit markets.

Swiss Re, as it turned out, had debt exposure to the suffering mortgage companies Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae totaling $9.8 billion. At mid-year 2008, Swiss Re was reporting lower profits because of write-downs in debt-related investments and lower premium income. Swiss Re stock fell 40% in 2008 amidst its heavy losses from investment write-downs.

In the midst of this turmoil, Swiss Re was still looking to the future, saying in August 2008 it was buying the life insurance business of Barclay’s, the British bank.

The following year, in February 2009, Berkshire made a $2.6-billion capital infusion into Swiss Re in the form of a high-yielding bond paying 12% a year. Arrangements were that the bond could be converted into stock in three years at 25 francs a share, which, in light of the fact that Swiss Re stock was trading at roughly twice that amount in early 2010, would have turned out to be a good option. Berkshire was also to get a fee of two billion francs for providing Swiss Re with an additional five billion francs in reserve if needed to cover possible losses in its property and casualty business.

After Berkshire’s February 2009 capital infusion, which brought Berkshire’s total investment in Swiss Re to about 20%, Buffett said in a statement, “We are delighted to have the opportunity to increase our investment in Swiss Re.” He continued, “I am very impressed by Jacques Aigrain and his management team.”

Aigrain, however, resigned days after the announcement of the new Berkshire investment and was replaced by Stefan Lippe, his deputy CEO. Aigrain had backed the company’s hurtful entry into a variety of financial products that suffered big losses.

On January 18, 2010, Swiss Re said that it transferred part of its life insurance business to Berkshire for $1.27 billion to free up capital. Christian Mumenthaler, Swiss Re’s head of life and health, said this deal was “a significant step forward in Swiss Re’s strategy to increase capital efficiency” (MarketWatch, January 18, 2010). The deal took place retroactively to October 1, 2009.

Berkshire’s potential losses on the deal supposedly capped at $1.5 billion. Mumenthaler was quoted as saying that Swiss Re estimated it would take a “‘once in a thousand years’ event” for the cap to be reached. The deal could bring in more than $50 billion in premiums over the next 50 years.

On November 4, 2010, Swiss Re, after reporting strong earnings, announced it would repay its costly loan from Berkshire. It was not penalized for the early $3.1-billion repayment, but it did have to pay full interest and an adjustment for foreign exchange. Berkshire’s two-year return was expected to exceed $1.3 billion (more than 40% on the money Berkshire loaned) as a result of the 12% dividend and a premium of 600 million Swiss francs ($623 million). Repayment was made in January 2011.

Berkshire’s investment in Swiss Re turned into a big success, as results at that European reinsurer steadily improved after the 2008 dive.

MUNICH RE

In 2008, the year Berkshire got involved with Swiss Re, reports surfaced that Berkshire had bought a 0.5% stake (amounting to about one million shares) in Munich Re, the largest reinsurer in the world.

By January 2010, Berkshire’s stake in Munich Re had risen to slightly above 3% of the company, an investment of about $1 billion. The 3%-ownership level, under German rules, triggers a public disclosure.

Reportedly, Buffett’s voting rights in Munich Re are potentially more than 5%. Munich Re said in a statement that Buffett held financial instruments that could lift his voting rights to 5.09%, likely meaning that Buffett held options to buy 2% more of Munich Re than the 3% he already held.

By March 2010, Buffett had raised the stake in Munich Re to almost 8%.

Munich Re announced on October 19, 2010, that Berkshire had increased its stake to more than 10% and also planned to buy more voting rights in the coming year. Berkshire’s stake in Munich Re was valued at just under $3 billion at the time.

“The investment serves the purpose of making trading profits and not of implementing strategic objectives,” Munich Re said in a statement.

At the end of 2010, Berkshire owned 19,259,600 shares, or 10.5%, of Munich Re.

HAREL

Berkshire’s National Indemnity entered a reinsurance agreement with Israel’s Harel Insurance Investments as of January 1, 2009. National Indemnity agreed to insure 20% of Harel’s general insurance retention in a deal initially set to last two years. Harel said the agreement reduces its insurance and finance risks by tens of millions of shekels a year.

WHAT’S UP?

Some have suggested that Berkshire’s investments in Munich Re and Swiss Re were one way to increase exposure to the reinsurance industry without disrupting pricing in a weak market. Whatever the reason, Berkshire has been stretching out its reinsurance realm/arms: first, Europe; then Middle East. What will be next?

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Stakes in Swiss Re and Munich Re



73





A NEW HOME FOR AJIT JAIN


Ajit Jain, Berkshire’s famed insurance guru, bid $8.2 million in July 2009 to buy the New York condo once owned by scam lawyer Marc Dreier.

Dreier had lived in the 4-bedroom, 41/2-bath, 3,000-square-foot One Beacon Court condo on East 58th Street until he was sentenced to 20 years in prison for fleecing 13 hedge funds and individual investors of $740 million.

Bidding started at $3 million for the One Beacon Court condo, which overlooks the Queensboro Bridge from a 34th-floor vantage point. Jain outbid the 45 people at a Manhattan bankruptcy auction.

“You think I went too high?” Jain joked as he signed the paperwork. “Right now, I’m having buyer’s remorse” (Omaha World-Herald, July 26, 2009, quoting the New York Daily News).

Dreier had paid $10.4 million for the condo in 2007. A similar-size one in the 55-story building had sold at the time for $12 million.

Dreier, nicknamed “Mini-Madoff” after swindler Bernie Madoff, reportedly left behind a photo of himself with singer Diana Ross, seven pairs of Ermenegildo Zegna shoes, and an expensive bottle of wine. Dreier spent his last days of freedom under armed guard confined to the condo.

Would Jain’s new home need an expensive super-cat insurance policy?

No, what it really needed was expansion. In 2010, Jain bought a neighboring apartment at One Beacon Court for $14.65 million. Combining the two condos into one complex, as brokers were expecting would happen, would create a residence of about 6,000 square feet.

Other residents of One Beacon Court include Beyonce, Jack Welch, and Brian Williams (New York Real Estate, February 26, 2011).

THE JAIN FOUNDATION

Jain has set up a foundation which has spent $7 million seeking to cure muscular dystrophies caused by dysferlin protein deficiency. The disease affects one of Jain’s sons (Fortune, November 21, 2011).

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value A New Home for Ajit Jain



74





BOYS TOWN


Buffett made his first newspaper purchase on January 1, 1969, when Berkshire bought the Sun newspapers, Omaha’s neighborhood weeklies, from Stan Lipsey. Lipsey had earlier bought into the Buffett Partnership and had become a lifelong friend of Buffett, serving for decades as publisher of The Buffalo News.

Buffett’s role in his many media properties has been almost exclusively devoted to the business side; but in at least one case, he had a very definite impact on the editorial end: He played a key role in helping disclose the financial scandal at Boys Town in Omaha.

Back in 1917, Father Edward J. “There Are No Bad Boys” Flanagan, a lanky Irish Catholic priest who is now up for sainthood, paid $90 to rent a drafty Victorian house to shelter five homeless Omaha boys. The refuge for youngsters from state welfare agencies expanded and was the subject of a 1938 hit movie starring Spencer Tracy and Mickey Rooney. Father Flanagan was a hero. With growth and strong leadership, the institution also became a financial powerhouse. It did help children, but not nearly as many as it could have with the huge stock portfolio it began accumulating from fund-raising.

In 1972, Buffett, 41 at the time, has said he was sitting in his family room filling out Form 990 PF for nonprofit groups for the Buffett Foundation. He read that the filings were available to the public in a booklet so he figured the Boys Town filing had to be public. After having sensed a problem with Boys Town’s financial statements, he paid $50 to get a copy of that booklet.

Buffett described his 1972 discovery to reporter Jonathan Laing (The Wall Street Journal, March 31, 1977): “I knew of an IRS regulation that required charitable foundations to publicly disclose their assets for the first time, so I told our editor to get a copy of the Boys Town filing. I’d heard a lot of rumors during my fund days about Boys Town’s large stockholdings, but even I was staggered when we found out that the home, which was constantly pleading poverty and caring for less than 700 kids, had accumulated assets of more than $200 million.”

Boys Town’s net worth was growing much faster each year than the spending on care for children.

In a letter to this author, Buffalo News Publisher Stan Lipsey described his take on how the Boys Town story came into fruition:

The idea for the Boys Town story came from Warren Buffett. Warren, Paul Williams, editor of the Sun, and I would meet at Warren’s house and brainstorm ideas for investigative or enterprise stories for the Sun newspapers. As weeklies, it was hard to report breaking news against a daily and the electronic media, so we had to come up with our own enterprise pieces.



In one of these sessions, Warren talked about Boys Town and Paul and I went to work on it. Paul headed the team and organized the investigation. He and I would develop strategy, timing of interviews, and review information we secured.



At one point, we had a good story, but not the ultimate one. Warren was crucial because he told us about the IRS Form 990 regulation [of 1969] which Congress had just passed requiring foundations to disclose their assets. When we secured the Boys Town Form 990 in Washington, it totaled 100 pages that revealed holdings of $219 million.



While I helped brainstorm the story and read everything several times, Paul Williams developed it. Near the end of the investigation, so there would be no leaks, we moved four reporters with telephones, desks, and tape recorders into the basement recreation room of Paul Williams’ house.



Without Warren, there was no story, no Pulitzer. It was his idea, he told us about the Form 990, and then he analyzed the vast Boys Town holdings that totaled $219 million.



The eight-page story won a Pulitzer Prize in May 1973 for special local reporting. Buffett came up with the headline for the story, citing Luke 16:2 from the Bible: “Give an account of thy stewardship.”

Buffett sold Sun Newspapers in 1981, and they ceased publication in 1983.

Allan Maxwell recalls his days working for the weekly as a newspaperboy: “I was a carrier for about five years and the pay was great for a 15-cent newspaper. I was able to keep five cents, as I recall,” said Maxwell, adding, “I only wish I’d put my profits into Berkshire.” Maxwell is a former pharmaceutical drug salesman in Omaha.

Today Boys Town is a well-regarded institution that helps thousands of youngsters. From its single campus, it has expanded its youth-care services to 17 other cities. Its trust fund in 1998 amounted to $733 million (Omaha World-Herald, June 28, 1999).

Buffett told The Wall Street Journal’s Laing (March 31, 1977) that he considered the newspaper business more interesting than most businesses: “Let’s face it. Newspapers are a lot more interesting a business than, say, making couplers for rail cars. While I don’t get involved in the editorial operations of the papers I own, I really enjoy being a part of institutions that help shape society.”

Bodybuilder/actor and subsequent politician Arnold Schwarzenegger came to Girls and Boys Town August 28, 2000, to receive the Father Flanagan Award for his role as a humanitarian. More than 1,000 people packed into the Music Hall in the Village of Boys Town to see “The Terminator” receive the school’s highest honor. Schwarzenegger told students to continue their education and stay away from drugs, gangs, and violence. Students stood and cheered when he closed his talk with, “I’ll be back” (Omaha World-Herald, August 29, 2000).

In 2000, bodybuilder, actor, and soon-to-be-governor of California Arnold “I’ll Be Back” Schwarzenegger visited “The Oracle of Omaha” at Berkshire’s headquarters.



“He Ain’t Heavy, He’s My Brother.”

This is the motto for the nonprofit group which helped 24,000 children in 2011.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Boys Town

This pillar graces the entrance to Boys Town in Omaha.



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



The Sun Logo

(Courtesy of John Gass)

Of Permanent Value Boys Town



Contestants in the Bill Gates Look-alike Contest

In 2000, future California Governor Arnold “I’ll Be Back” Schwarzenegger visited Boys Town in Omaha.

(Photo courtesy of Omaha World-Herald)



75





MEDIA CONNECTIONS


Buffett’s first tip about the Boys Town scandal was not to his own paper, but to his friend Charles Peters, publisher of The Washington Monthly, in which Buffett had a small investment.

“I passed it [the tip] on [to his newsmen]. They decided not to pursue the story, largely, on the grounds, I suspect, that an investor’s article idea had to be suspect. Warren then gave the story to an Omaha newspaper, which won a Pulitzer for it” (Charles Peters’ autobiography, Tilting at Windmills, p. 196).

Peters gave an account of how Buffett, Jay Rockefeller, and Louis Marx became investors in the magazine, and how Buffett needed some convincing to stay invested:

Jay Rockefeller and Louis Marx got us to $100,000 with additional pledges. Then Jay introduced me to Warren Buffett …



In October [1969] he [Buffett] flew into Washington with two friends, Joseph Rosenfield, from Des Moines, and Fred Stanback, a North Carolinian who was heir to a headache remedy fortune. Together, they agreed to put up the remaining $50,000. We took all that money and blew it.



The magazine, praised for its literary efforts, always struggled financially. Jay and Warren Buffett went to New York to ask James Kobak, a prominent magazine consultant, if there was any hope for the Monthly. … Warren was impressed with Kaplan [Gilbert Kaplan of Institutional Investor] and said that he might be willing to put up another $50,000 if Kaplan took over the direction of the Monthly’s business affairs long enough to get us straightened out.



But in early September came a fifty-minute phone conversation with me in which it was clear that Warren’s two sides were still at war. I was grateful for what he had already done for us and could understand his suspicion that the magazine was at best doomed to a life on the fiscal margin. So I wasn’t angry when, at times during the conversation, he tried to withdraw from further involvement. But if I wasn’t angry, I was desperate, because I knew I had to hold him in if the magazine was to survive. The conversation went back and forth: Warren would come within an inch of pulling out, and I would slowly try to pull him back. Then the dance would be repeated. Warren, who did not get to be a billionaire by being slow-witted, kept finding new escape routes, each of which had enough instant plausibility to put me into a state of near panic. My mind went into its highest gear as I tried to block the exits.



Finally, he agreed to stay in. I have never been more keyed up than at that moment. … Warren’s sympathetic side had won out over the hard-boiled investor (pp. 174–5).



Peters said his investors rarely called for favors; but when they did, they were innocent. “Warren, for example, asked me to introduce him to Kay Graham, which I did, and it turned out to be a very good thing for both of them. He became her principal financial advisor and the leading minority holder of Washington Post Co. stock. They have made each other a lot richer than either was before they met. I should have asked for 10%” (pp. 196–7).

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Media Connections



76





THE WASHINGTON POST


Keeping Posted

Keeping Posted, a look back over the years 1877 to 1977, was published by The Washington Post. Katharine Graham wrote a preface to the publication, which begins this way: “This book may be the answer to two bromides about the press. One is that there is nothing as stale and uninteresting as yesterday’s newspaper. The other is that the press prints only ‘bad news.’”



“Were it left to me to decide whether we should have a government without newspapers, or newspapers without a government, I should not here hesitate a moment to prefer the latter. But I should mean that every man should receive those papers and be capable of reading them.” (Thomas Jefferson)

Buffett bought his stock in The Washington Post Company during the spring and summer of 1973 for $10.6 million, making Berkshire the largest shareholder of The Post Co. outside the Graham family.

“Sometimes in life things happen very fast,” Buffett said; he “did it with about 20 orders over a several-month period.” Buffett figured that only about 10 sellers were involved.

He knew Post Chairman Katharine Graham had seen the stock go public in 1971 and watched as it floundered. He said, “I knew that the Post was going to outdo the Star, not necessarily make it fold, but outdo it.”

In her Pulitzer Prize-winning book, Personal History, Mrs. Graham wrote about takng her company public: “Warren Buffett, whose company, Berkshire Hathaway, bought about 10% of the company’s B shares in 1973, later told me he didn’t think we really had to go public but was glad we had. In fact I was glad we had, too, although I still dislike some of the responsibilities being public entails. The advent of Warren was only one of the positive things that resulted from our going public....

The date of the stock offering was set for June 15. In a ceremony on the floor of the American Stock Exchange, I bought the first share for $24.75, and we went public at $26 a share” (p. 442).

Buffett’s stake would turn out to be one of his most remarkable investments, one that he bought early when there was no particular interest in media stocks. He held on even after the Post had a near monopoly in Washington, D.C. When the company went public, it consisted of the Post, Newsweek, and television stations. Its Class B common stock was issued at $6.50 a share, split adjusted, and over the years rose to more than $900 a share, compounding about 16% a year. It is the second highest-priced stock on the New York Stock Exchange following Berkshire although not very closely. The Post’s Class A stock controls elections of two-thirds of the board, therefore, the company is held by the Graham family.

Buffett’s lifelong interest in media properties—epitomized by his purchase of Post Co. shares—always has gone far beyond cash flows. He is genuinely fascinated by media businesses, claims top journalists as friends, and has said that if business had not been his calling, journalism might have been. After all, his parents met while they worked at the school newspaper, and Buffett was once an industrious Post delivery boy.

He has a reporter’s instinct for the story, and his search for undervalued businesses combines a sharp business sense and a reporter’s detective skills. Had Buffett become a journalist, as good as he might have been, he would not have made a tiny fraction of what he has earned as an investor.

In 1973, only about 14 million shares of Post Co. stock were outstanding, of which 2.7 million Class A controlling shares were owned by Mrs. Graham, the daughter of the late Eugene Meyer, a wealthy Republican Wall Street industrialist and financier. Meyer bought the paper for $825,000 in 1933, when she was 16. He named Katharine’s husband, Philip Graham, publisher in 1946.

Also in 1973, at the beginning of the severe 1973–74 stock market slump, Post Co. stock had dropped from its original $6.50 issue price to $4 a share, adjusted for later stock splits. Buffett struck, buying his $10.6 million of Post stock, a 12% stake of the Class B stock or about 10% of the total stock. Because of buybacks, Berkshire now owns about 21%.

The $4 price implied about $80 million valuation of the whole company, which was debt free, at a time when Buffett figured the enterprise had an intrinsic worth of $400 million. Yet it was not until 1981, that the market capitalization of The Post Co. was $400 million.

Buffett, in a talk to Columbia business students October 27, 1993 said:

If you had asked anyone in the business what their properties were worth, they’d have said $400 million or something like that. You could have an auction in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean at two in the morning, and you would have people to show up and bid that much for them. And it was being run by honest and able people who all had a significant part of their net worth in the business. It was ungodly safe. It wouldn’t have bothered me to put my whole net worth in it. Not in the least.



In 1973, The Post Co.’s revenues were about $200 million. Subsidiaries included The Washington Post newspaper, Newsweek magazine, the Times-Herald Company, four television stations, and a paper company that provided most of its newsprint.

Using one rule of thumb, that a good newspaper may sell for about two and a half times its annual revenue, The Post Co. was worth four times what Buffett paid. Buffett has said the reason he could buy Post stock at a great price was because people just weren’t very enthusiastic about the world at the time.

After Buffett’s purchase, the stock fell for the next two years, and Buffett’s investment sank from $10 million in 1973, to $8 million in late 1974. Post Co. stock did not move solidly ahead of Buffett’s purchase price until 1976.

Early on, Mrs. Graham tried to get a fix on this fellow from Omaha. “I scurried and said ‘Who is he and what’s he like and is he a threat?’” If she knew little about him, Buffett knew all about her, even reading her mother’s autobiography.

Buffett was not a welcome guest at first. Andre Meyer, a friend of Mrs. Graham’s, (but no relation) was upset when he found out Buffett had taken a big stake in the Post Co. (Cary Reich, Financier, The Biography of Andre Meyer, 1983, p. 90).

“He was irate when one of the country’s most successful private investors, Warren Buffet [sic], took a substantial position in Post Co. shares. As someone who had done that sort of thing himself, Meyer was naturally suspicious of Buffet’s [sic] motives ...

“Andre kept warning me about Warren Buffett,” Mrs. Graham recalled. “He regarded all people who bought into companies uninvited as threats. But I checked Warren out rather carefully and decided that we were quite lucky in that he was a very hands-off and honorable man.”

Although Buffett convinced Mrs. Graham that he was trustworthy, Meyer kept after her, asking, “How is your boss?”

After his investment, Buffett wrote to Mrs. Graham, who still had much concern about this largely unknown man who was buying so much Post Co. stock. Buffett told her he was no threat to her position, and he fully understood she controlled the company through her ownership of the company’s Class A stock.

“I recognize that the Post is Graham-controlled and Graham-managed. And that suits me fine,” he wrote her. The letter was later jokingly referred to as the “Dear Mrs. Graham” letter (Regardie’s, February 1986).

One thing that may have broken the ice: Buffett told her he had worked for the Post as a paperboy 25 years earlier; and, in delivering the Post in the 1940s, Buffett earned about half of his initial investment money as a youngster.

“Buffett had asked Charles Peters, an acquaintance of Kay’s, to make the

introduction in 1971. Buffett had a specific reason for wanting to meet her:

He owned stock in The New Yorker, which he believed might be for sale; and he wanted to interest Kay in attempting a takeover, arguing that the Post would be the perfect owner for the magazine. Kay dismissed his suggestion” (Carol Felsenthal, Power, Privilege and the Post, p. 321).

Katharine Graham, in her book Personal History (p. 531), said they didn’t meet again until 1973, at the office of the Los Angeles Times. This was after Buffett’s purchase of Post Co. Reassured by the encounter, Mrs. Graham asked Buffett to come to dinner in Washington and take a look at The Post. A strong friendship as well as a profitable relationship developed as Buffett became her business mentor.

In late June 1974 ... I combined an analysts’ meeting in Los Angeles with a visit to Warren and Susie at their house in Laguna Beach. Warren’s family was convulsed with laughter about my visit, because Warren, who theretofore had never been known to go near water despite having vacationed in Laguna since 1962, actually bought a beach umbrella and swimsuit so as to make my visit more enjoyable. He said this was the “source of enormous merriment in our house ... because of this incredible standard—compared to what my family was used to—of flexibility I would show around you.” The visit was an intense and happy two days, during which he and I talked about many things, including the possibility of his coming on the board of The Washington Post Company.



In 1974, Buffett was named to the Post Co. board and, appropriately, chaired its finance committee. Soon he suggested the board buy back Post Co. stock. Ben Graham has said Buffett, in effect, became the lead director.

Warren’s advice and steady communication with me were critical to a number of actions I took in these years. Crucially, he persuaded me of the benefits of buying in our own stock. I had been suspicious of the idea. Repurchasing stock is commonplace today, but only a handful of companies were doing it in the mid-1970s. I felt that, if we spent all of our money buying in our own stock, we wouldn’t be able to grow. Warren went through the numbers with me, showing me what this action could do for the company in the long run, or even in the short run. He re-emphasized how low the stock was compared with its real value and how this was a better business move than many we were contemplating. He gradually made his point: if we bought in 1% of the stock in the Post Company, everyone owned a larger share of our stock at a bargain price. I decided we should do it (Katharine Graham, Personal History, p. 577).



Mrs. Graham later said Buffett “is eternally interesting and fun to be with” (The New Yorker, March 20, 2000).

Here’s how Buffett’s hallmark—the stock buy-back—worked. Between 1975 and 1992, the Post Co. bought back about 43% of its outstanding shares. Average cost was $60 a share, so it bought back more than 40% of its business at roughly a 10th of its present price. By 2000, The Post Co. had bought back half of its stock, meaning shareholders owned twice as much of its properties.

Buffett also suggested that the Post’s pension fund switch from a large bank to managers with a value orientation. After the move to value managers, returns rose substantially even though the Post told the managers to keep at least 25% of the money in bonds.

Warren and I were driving down to Glen Welby for the weekend [one day in 1979] when, as tactfully and gently as he could, he broke the news to me that Bill Ruane and Sandy Gottesman, close friends of his and investors who had bought a lot of Post stock for themselves and for their clients, were going to sell tens of millions of dollars’ worth of it. Ruane managed the Sequoia Fund, and Gottesman was a managing partner at the First Manhattan Company, and these groups were about to sell all or half of their Post stock.



Warren had pondered how best to deliver this news, and he tried sugar-coating it in every way he could. I have to admit that my immediate response was to burst into tears. Here were these terribly clever investors, reputed to have such great judgement, who no longer believed in us; others surely would be leaving in droves. I considered their move a referendum on my management of the company, and it was clear I was found wanting.



Warren did his desperate best to console me, explaining that Bill considered he had done so well on Post stock that it added up to too much of some of his portfolios. He was keeping his own stock. “You don’t know Wall Street,” Warren tried to reassure me. “People don’t think in a long-term way there. When your stock reaches $100, Wall Street will buy it.” Naturally, I thought he was just trying to make me feel better; it was absurd to think that the stock would ever reach $100. I was not consoled.



Warren, of course, had a totally different perspective from mine on what Bill and Sandy were doing. He viewed it as an enormous plus in the lifetime of the company, almost like the Times-Herald merger. Though he knew I’d be profoundly distressed by the idea, he realized right away how much the company would benefit in future profits by their selling their stock. He tried to convince me that we should be holding a party, adding, “Don’t worry. We’ll just buy what they sell. It will be good for us, and they’ll regret it.” Although I didn’t stop worrying, we did buy in the stock at an average price of $21.91, which Sandy and Bill had bought before two splits at an equivalent price of $6.50.



Once, much later, Warren and I discussed women bursting into tears in business situations, and I reminded him of our ride to Glen Welby. “Well,” he said, smiling, “we made several hundred million dollars then. The next time you burst into tears call me first.” He added, “Look at it this way, Kay. If you hadn’t bought it in, I would have burst into tears, so one of us had to cry” (Katharine Graham, Personal History, pp. 591–592).



Buffett served on the Post Co. board until 1986, when he resigned after Berkshire committed $517 million to help Cap Cities buy ABC. The resulting company became media giant Cap Cities/ABC, and Buffett was invited on its board.

Buffett had to leave the Post Co. board because Federal Communications Commission rules prohibited an individual from serving simultaneously as a director both of a company that owns a television network (Cap Cities/ABC) and also one that owns cable television systems.

A similar prohibition applies to overlaps of television signals from stations owned by different companies such as Cap Cities’ New York station and the Post Co.’s Hartford, Connecticut station. This overlap prevented Buffett from serving on both boards at the same time.

If Mrs. Graham ever had reservations about Buffett or his intentions, they soon vanished. “Our board was just devastated by his departure. They really miss him,” she was quoted in The Wall Street Journal (September 30, 1987). The devastation did not last forever. After Disney bought Cap Cities in 1996, Buffett was re-elected to the Post Co.’s board. Buffett and Mrs. Graham remained close friends, and she sang his praises. “He has wisdom, human sensitivity, and above all humor. I think it’s a unique combination,” Mrs. Graham told Adam Smith, host of Money World, in a show about the Berkshire annual meeting of April 30, 1990.

In 1987, Buffett gave a talk to the New York Center for Communications where Mrs. Graham was the guest of honor. Buffett recounted the success of the Post. “Warren also joked to the group that he had once found a sheet of paper prominently displayed on my desk that said, ‘Assets on the left, liabilities on the right’” (Katharine Graham, Personal History, p. 620).

Buffett joked, not very convincingly, about his lack of influence at the Post Co., citing as an example his lack of a role in the Post Co.’s decision to sell some cellular phone properties. “My only role with Washington Post Co.’s sale of the cellular phone properties was to recommend against the original purchase of the properties at one fifth of the price they sold it for. And that’s the last time they asked. They didn’t pay attention to me the first time, and they didn’t ask the second time,” he said at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1987.

Graham and Buffett remained friends until her death in 2001 after she fell and suffered head injuries at the Allen & Company conference in Sun Valley.

“The paper, really the company, always has been the most important thing in her whole life. This was not a step in the long dance of life; it was the whole show,” said Buffett (The Washington Post, July 17, 2001).

He wrote a tribute to her that appeared in the Post Co. 2001 Annual Report. Next to the tribute ran a Herblock cartoon with Katharine Graham’s headlined name entering heaven. The caption read, “Call Horace Greeley and Joe Pulitzer and the rest and tell them she’s here.”

Reports said that Mrs. Graham’s city estate taxes of at least $27 million were larger than Washington, D.C.’s surplus for the year.

Mrs. Graham’s second book, Katharine Graham’s Washington, was published in 2002. Unfinished at the time of her death, the collection of articles about Washington was finished by others.

Mrs. Graham’s son, Donald Graham, became The Post Co. chairman. Rhodes Scholar Boisfeuillet (this looks like the most difficult word in a spelling bee; the easier spelling is Bo) Jones Jr., a classmate of Graham’s at St. Albans and Harvard, was named publisher and CEO of the newspaper in 2000, when Graham decided to devote more time to overseeing the paper’s entry into the digital age.

In 2008, Jones was named vice chairman of the company. In early 2012, Jones left the company to become president and CEO of MacNeil/Lehrer Productions, producers of the PBS NEWSHOUR.

Donald Graham’s niece, Katharine Weymouth, was named publisher of the newspaper in 2008. Ms. Weymouth, the granddaughter of Katharine Graham, graduated from Harvard College and Stanford Law School and practiced at the Williams & Connolly law firm before joining The Post in 1996.

Donald Graham was editor of the Harvard Crimson (as was Jones), graduated from Harvard, served in Vietnam and later worked as a policeman in Washington, D.C. He became a Post reporter in 1971. About 95% of Donald Graham’s net worth is in Post Co. stock.

Donald Graham, who keeps a set of Berkshire annual reports handy in his office, has said of Buffett, “In finance, he is the smartest guy I know. I don’t know who is second.” He has since said: “I quickly saw that this was the smartest person I had ever met. Warren talks so clearly that, in a way, he’s very deceptive. A lot of us flatter ourselves that we are all influenced by him, but we always know there are deeper layers within him that we can’t see. It’s like saying my chess is influenced by Gary Kasparov or my basketball by Michael Jordan” (The New Yorker, March 20, 2000).

Buffett thinks Graham is a smart fellow himself and over the years has spent time tutoring him, “sending him annotated balance sheets and teaching him how to judge the value of acquisitions.” Graham adopted Buffett’s business philosophy of paying for quality and skimping on frills (Washingtonian, August, 1992).

Several Post board members were once standing around kibitzing, waiting for Donald Graham when Robert McNamara bet them nobody could name Abraham Lincoln’s first vice president. Nobody could. Buffett then bet $5 that Don would know the answer. “Sure,” Graham said when he arrived, “It was Hannibal Hamlin.”

“Don is incredibly smart, and his memory is off the charts,” says Buffett. “If I try to remember something from my annual reports, he can quote it back. It’s easier to call him than to look it up myself.” It was The Post Co. investment—a more than 50-fold return on his money—that secured Buffett’s reputation as a master investor. Over the years The Post has strengthened its dominance of the city’s newspaper industry, but the path was not always easy. Coverage of the Watergate scandal, particularly by Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein, brought the paper enormous acclaim, including a Pulitzer Prize in 1973 for their stories that led to President Nixon’s resignation in 1974.

“Deep Throat,” the anonymous source of some of the “Woodstein” stories, became synonymous for anything smacking of investigative journalism.

Once Woodward asked Buffett for advice on making more money. Buffett suggested investing. Woodward told Buffett, “I don’t know anything about investing.”

“Yes, you do.” Buffett said, “All it is, is investigative reporting.”

“INVESTING IS JOURNALISM.”

Buffett told Woodward, “Investing is reporting. I told him to imagine an

in-depth article about his own paper. He’d ask a lot of questions and dig up a lot of facts. He’d know The Washington Post. And that’s all there is to it.” Buffett had also said: “Investing is journalism.”

Buffett fleshed out that story during a talk at Caltech on October 21, 1997:

It’s interesting that you mention reporting [being similar to investing] because Bob Woodward, I think back in ’73 or ’74 when I first got interested in the Post, we had lunch at the Madison and he was saying what he might do with his money; and I said “Bob, why don’t you assign yourself a story, get up an hour early every morning and work on a story you’ve assigned yourself. Now, a sensible story to assign yourself would be what is The Washington Post Company worth. Now, if Bradlee gave you that story to work on, what would you do for the next week or two? You would go around and talk to people [in the television business]. You would try to figure out what are the key variables in valuing a television station and you would look at the four that the Post has and apply those standards to that. You would do the same thing to newspapers. You would try to figure out how the competitive battle between the Star and the Post is going to come out and how much different the world would be if the Post won that war.” All of these things are a lot easier than the problems Woodward would usually be working on. Sometimes people don’t want to talk to him but on this subject they would be glad to talk to him and then I said, “When you get all through with that, add it up and divide by the number of shares outstanding.” All he had to do was assign himself the right story, and I assign myself stories from time to time.



In 1954, the Post, then the third-ranking newspaper in the capital city, bought The Times-Herald—buying its 3,500 shares for $1,600 a share or $5.6 million. The paper’s rapid growth swept it past the Washington Star, which wilted under the competition from the Post before folding in 1981.

Before that, the Post Co. faced in rapid order three major problems: the stock market plunge of 1973-74; the Watergate crisis, with all the glory and headaches it brought; and a crippling strike in 1975. In 1972 and 1973, the Post Co.’s stock price was sinking because of withering criticism the paper was receiving from the Nixon White House when coverage of Watergate thundered off the presses.

At the height of Watergate, according to the Nixon tapes, Nixon encouraged talk of revoking the licenses for the Post Co.’s two Florida television stations, WJXT in Jacksonville and WPLG in Miami/Fort Lauderdale (the station whose call letters are taken from the initials of Philip L. Graham, the deceased husband of the late Mrs. Graham).

The license revocations were pushed by a number of people associated with the Nixon administration; but they were never successful, according to Chalmers Roberts, a long-time Post reporter who wrote In the Shadow of Power: The Story of The Washington Post.

Roberts was a famous reporter at the paper before the Ben Bradlee era. He typed faster than anyone at the paper, wrote thousands of stories, and pushed Katharine Graham to publish the Pentagon Papers. He died at age 94 in 2005.

The Watergate scandal was a financial blow; the bitter strike that occurred at the paper in 1975 was even worse. Even as the paper prevailed in the Watergate crisis, a new problem was brewing—relations with its unions. In late 1975, the unions went on strike. The ugliest moment came with the trashing of the pressrooms, a blow to both the finances and pride of the mighty newspaper.

Mrs. Graham was uneasy about the risk of holding out, particularly in view of competition from the Star.

The strike helped cement the relationship between Buffett and Mrs. Graham. “Characteristically, Buffett—who was ‘omnipresent at the Post,’ according to a former employee—plays down his role. ‘I was around,’ he says” (Regardie’s, February 1986).

Mrs. Graham said, “The strike was terribly hard on me, in the sense of judging how dangerous it was [financially] for us to be on strike with the Star publishing. He said, ‘Look, if I think it’s dangerous, I’ll tell you.’ He was very supportive.” Buffett and Mrs. Graham worked side by side in the Post’s mailroom more than once, sometimes staying until 3 a.m. to assemble the Sunday papers for distribution.

In her book Personal History, Katharine Graham wrote:

It was a tough job that left us filthy, sweaty, and covered with paste. We had to roll up each individual paper in a brown wrapper, paste on an address label, seal the whole thing shut, and throw the finished, wrapped package into the big, smelly, heavy, and unwieldy canvas bags at the side of the worktable, which we then dragged over to another station from which they were finally hauled off to the post office. This was the only time in my life that I regretted the substantial circulation the Post had outside of Washington. The whole job was so tedious and interminable that we came to look on it as our supreme service for the cause, the ultimate sacrifice. Warren Buffett, who spent several Saturday nights in the mailroom with us, said it made him rethink the price of the Sunday paper—no price was sufficient (p. 550).



We were all there at the Post on the night of November 4. It was a dramatic moment, with rumors of printers and pressmen carrying guns. Coincidentally, Warren Buffett and his wife, Susie, were right across the street from the paper, staying in the Madison Hotel, having come to town for their close-up look at The Washington Post Company and for a dinner in their honor at my house the next night. They were looking out their window all night at the commotion, the lights, and the television cameras. It wasn’t a very auspicious beginning for this new stockholder to observe what was happening at The Washington Post (p. 523).



We had made a serious mistake in letting the pressmen back into the pressroom, but amazingly, they had printed a paper totally prepared by nonunion labor and cold type. The wildcat strike had taught both the unions and management quite a bit. Nevertheless, when the printers came back to work, they resumed slowdowns and production disruptions.



I went home that morning at about six, tired and depressed, and only then did I remember that I had forty people coming to a black-tie dinner that night at my house for the Buffetts. Since I had been up all night I thought of canceling, but it seemed easier to go ahead with it. Warren still recalls his introduction to Washington life, sitting between Barbara Bush and Jane Muskie.



We had scheduled a lunch at the Post the next day so that Warren could meet with various people on both the business and editorial sides of the paper. There was some talk of acquisitions, and someone mentioned the problem of amortization of goodwill being a disadvantage in a company like ours, because of its accounting impact. Howard Simons, always a delightful but mischievous goad, looked at me and said, “Now Katharine, how does that amortization of goodwill work?” The conversation stopped for a second, Warren recalled, and “I could see this look on your face like he’d asked you to explain Einstein’s theory of relativity with several corollaries. Here was my chance to be a hero. So I jumped in and explained in a fairly succinct way how it worked.” When Warren finished his explanation, I looked at Howard and said, “Exactly” (p. 524).



Buffett kept encouraging Mrs. Graham and guiding her business education. “Warren saw how little I knew about business. He would bring about 25 or 30 annual reports and take me through them,” Mrs. Graham said.

During these tumultuous events, Buffett stood steadfast, and in the end, his investment grew mightily.

In 1984, Buffett wrote Mrs. Graham:

Berkshire Hathaway bought its shares in The Washington Post in the spring and summer of 1973. The cost of these shares was $10.6 million and the present market value is about $140 million .... If we had spent this same $10.6 million at the same time in the shares of ... other media companies ... we would now have either $60 million worth of Dow Jones, $30 million worth of Gannett, $75 million worth of Knight-Ridder, $60 million worth of The New York Times or $40 million of Times Mirror.



So—instead of thanks a million—make it thanks anywhere from $65 to $110 million (John Train, The Midas Touch, p. 77).



Now, make it thanks more than a billion.

Throughout the 1980s, the Post Co. racked up tremendous financial gains and journalistic recognition in the form of Pulitzer Prizes. Today, the Post Co. oversees a vast journalistic enterprise with a stock market value of about $9 billion. The Post Co.’s interests include The Washington Post, by far the most influential paper in one of the world’s most important cities. Daily circulation of the Post in 2005 was about 700,000; and Sunday circulation was a bit under 1 million. By 2008, circulation had dropped to 659,724 daily and 878,100 on Sunday and by 2009 by 615,628 daily and 845,587 on Sunday.

The Post’s first single-copy price hike since 1981 came in 2001, with a jump from 25 to 35 cents.

The Post Co. owns The Herald in Everett, Washington, which has a daily circulation of about 46,000 and 50,000 on Sunday.

In recent years, the Post has surpassed its bigger archrival, The New York Times, in both profitability and stock market value. In addition to the Post newspaper, which accounts for about half of the Post Co.’s profits, the company owns Newsweek, the national news weekly with 3.1 million subscribers. Newsweek has long run second in circulation to its main competitor, Time magazine. The Post Co. bought Newsweek in 1961 for $15 million, but in a sign of the times of advertising going to the Internet, the unprofitable magazine was sold to audio equipment magnate Sidney Harman in 2010. The sale price was $1 and the Post contributed $10 million toward Newsweek’s liabilities.

The Post Co., also owns six television stations: WDIV/TV4 in Detroit; WPLG/TV10 in Miami/Fort Lauderdale, which traded stations with Meredith Corp.; WCPX in Orlando, changed to WKMG in honor of Katharine Meyer Graham in 1998, after trading CBS stations with Meredith Corp. in 1997; and WJXT/TV4 in Jacksonville. It bought KPRC-TV in Houston and KSAT-TV in San Antonio in 1994 for $253 million. Also, it owns a large cable television franchise sold by Cap Cities in 1986 for $350 million when the franchise had about 360,000 subscribers. Buffett was a central figure in the transaction. The Post Co.’s Cable One cable operations are based in Phoenix, Arizona, and have grown through acquisitions and new subscribers to about 667,000 (representing 48% of the 1,395,000 homes passed by the system), 213,900 subscriptions to digital video service and 289,000 subscriptions to cable modem service subscribers. The cable business, which has followed a strategy of buying large non-metropolitan systems, is vastly more profitable than when it was acquired.

Cable systems along the Gulf Coast were dealt a devastating blow by Hurricane Katrina in 2005.

KAPLAN: THE IMPORTANCE OF EDUCATION

In 1984, the Post Co. bought the test-preparation business Stanley H. Kaplan Company (now called the Kaplan Educational Center), from founder Stanley Kaplan for $33 million. Kaplan, who in 1958 founded a tutoring business in the basement of a laundromat, used to say his middle initial H stood for “Higher scores.” His autobiography, Test Pilot, was published in 2001. Kaplan Centers prepare students for licensing exams and admissions tests, including the revamped Scholastic Aptitude Test.

The Kaplan Company also owns Crimson and Brown Associates of Cambridge, Massachusetts, a collegiate recruiting firm that helps employers identify, interview, and hire hard-to-find candidates. In addition, Kaplan owns Score@Kaplan, a San Francisco firm that provides after-school educational services for children in grades K through 12 nationwide. Kaplan was formerly led by Jonathan Grayer, a Harvard Business School graduate who joined Kaplan in 1991. The 1996 Post Annual Report referred to Grayer as the “aging president” of Kaplan. He was 32 then.

In 2000, Kaplan, digging deeper into “Webucation,” launched KaplanCollege.com, a site offering 500 courses across nine professions. Kaplan also runs the world’s only accredited online law school, Concord Law, which graduated its first law student in 2002.

Kaplan bought Quest Education Group in 2000 for $177 million in cash. “Grayer says he called Graham during the heat of the takeover battle to get the okay for the bid. Within 30 minutes Graham called Buffett to receive the board’s blessing and the deed was done” (Forbes, May 14, 2001). In 2001, Kaplan bought Study Seminar for Financial Analysts of Canada.

In 2002, Kaplan bought the Concord School of Management, an international business school. Kaplan also owns

• Kaplan Test Prep and Admissions

• Kaplan Professional

• Score!

• Kaplan Higher Education

As of late 2002, Kaplan Test Prep accounted for 34% of Kaplan’s sales. Kaplan Professional accounted for 17%; Score! for 10%; and the fast-growing Kaplan Higher Education segment, 34%.

In late 2002, Kaplan bought RETS Technical Center. RETS is a career-oriented postsecondary school providing professional training. The campus-based network has expanded to 48 schools in 14 states. Founded in 1992, Score!, with 162 centers nationwide, provides after-school learning for children.

Kaplan’s growth has been explosive. Sales from 1992 to 2002 soared from $75 million to more then $600 million. Kaplan’s sales surpassed those of the Post newspapers in 2003; and in 2007, sales topped $2 billion, half of the Post’s annual sales of $4 billion. The Post has invested $950 million in Kaplan’s acquisitions including the original purchase of Kaplan.

In 2003, Kaplan bought The Financial Training Company for $89 million. A leader in the test preparation services for accounting and financial services professionals, the company has operations in the U.K. and Asia.

Later in 2003, Kaplan bought Koppel & Wiley, a provider of classroom-based Chartered Financial Analyst training programs in Europe; and Excel Exam Review, a provider of CFA(R) training content. They became part of Kaplan’s Schweser Study Program, the largest provider of training tools for the CFA(R) exam in the world.

Kaplan also bought CEI, which provides career-oriented degrees in the fields of technology and allied health. CEI is made up of two institutions—CEI Institute and CEI College—which have 10 campuses in Southern California.

Further, from Oxford University Press, Kaplan bought the test preparation books and content of Engineering Press, a publisher of test preparation titles for engineering licensing exams.

In 2004, Kaplan bought the Texas School of Business which provides training in the fields of allied health and business. Kaplan also bought Ohio’s Total Technical Institute, which offers training in the fields of technology, electronics, and allied health. Also in 2004, Kaplan bought Insurance Achievement, a publisher of study and exam preparation materials for advanced insurance designations. Insurance Achievement, based in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, became part of Kaplan’s Dearborn Financial Services.

Kaplan partnered with Ordinate Corp., in offering English programs to foreign workers who need to know English for employment in the U.S.

In 2005, Kaplan bought BISYS Educational Services, a provider of licensing education and compliance solutions for the financial services industry, and folded BISYS into its Dearborn group of companies.

Ever expanding its learning curve, Kaplan employed about 9,000 employees by 2005, more than half the total employees at the Post Company. Kaplan’s revenues then were 40% of the whole company’s.

Further, in 2006, Kaplan bought PMBR, based in Santa Monica, which provides tests for the bar exam; and in 2007, the Post bought CourseAdviser, Inc. of Wakefield, Massachusetts, an online generator of student leads for the post-secondary market.

Since then, Kaplan has bought EduNeering, the University of Miami Online High School; the financial training assets of FINSA, in Australia and China; and taken a majority stake in ACE, a higher education company.

AN EDUCATION AND MEDIA COMPANY

Donald Graham, in a meeting of Wall Street analysts on December 5, 2007, rebranded the company as an “education and media company.”

“It is likely that The Washington Post Co. of the future will be more of an education company and a little less of a media company every year,” Graham said.

The Post’s media subsidiary, Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive (WPNI), is responsible for about half of the company’s Internet-related efforts, which include Washingtonpost.com and Newsweek.com. The unit has a vast audience but struggles for profitability.

The Post Co. owned 28% of Cowles Media Company which publishes the Minneapolis Star Tribune and other properties that were sold to the McClatchy chain in 1997. It owned one half, as did The New York Times, of the International Herald Tribune newspaper published in Paris and printed in eight cities, which circulates both Post and Times stories in about 180 countries. In 2002, the Post sold its half of the Tribune to the Times for $65 million. Donald Graham, at a Shareholders’ Day in 2002, said the sale was a “painful subject” and that the Post had intended to operate the Tribune jointly; but the Times threatened to start a competitor as it wanted more of an international presence. The Post later announced an agreement with Dow Jones to distribute some of its news and columns in The Wall Street Journal’s European and Asian editions.

The Post Co. owns half of the Los Angeles Times-Washington Post News Service which supplies news, features, and commentary to more than 768 clients in 50 countries.

In March 1992, the Post Co. acquired an 80% stake in Gaithersburg Gazette, Inc., the parent firm of Gazette Newspapers which have 39 weekly newspapers in Maryland with a combined circulation of about 600,000.

In early 2001, Post’s Gazette Newpapers bought Southern Maryland Newspapers from Chesapeake Publishing Corp. of Elkton, Maryland. In all, it has five suburban newspapers, 34 free suburban weeklies, 12 military newspapers plus real estate and auto guides.

The Post even distributes The Wall Street Journal in Washington. It publishes the satirical newspaper, Onion, and also owns Arthur Frommer’s Budget Travel magazines.

Berkshire now owns about an 18% share of all the Post Co.’s prosperous businesses, up from the original 10% of the company Buffett bought in 1973. Over the years, with The Post Co. buying back a portion of its own stock, Buffett’s ownership percentage has bloomed.

LOOKING BACK

The Washington Post was founded at the end of the Reconstruction in 1877 by young Stilson Hutchins, a restless man originally from Whitefield, New Hampshire.

“That first edition of The Washington Post had four pages, each with seven columns, printed on rag paper,” wrote Chalmers Roberts in his book, In the Shadow of Power. It had a circulation of 10,000 and cost three cents.

As a journalist, Hutchins was on top of the breaking story that Thomas Edison was making headway with his invention of an electric lamp. He interviewed Edison on the last day of 1879; and on January 2, 1880, a front-page story by Hutchins began:

New York, January 1, 1880—I went over to Menlo Park (New Jersey) yesterday afternoon and evening to see Edison and his electric light. The workshop was crowded with people, who arrive and depart by almost every train. They are inquisitive and troublesome, but, notwithstanding the annoyance they frequently cause, they are treated with consideration and politeness. Edison is not only a great inventor, but has as much patience as Job.



In all about sixty lights are constantly maintained and others are being added daily. The first lights are still burning, having been in steady operation for twenty-two days. The little carbon horseshoe, as it is called, seems not to have lost an atom of its weight or abated a particle of its illuminating power. If it will last twenty-two days without deterioration or loss, there seems no reason why it should not last twenty-two years or an age. So far as the experiment has gone, it is literally indestructible. Mr. Edison considers this feature of his invention as perfected, and, as is well-known, it was the one over which he has spent the most time and which the world considered unattainable.



Hutchins was so taken with electricity, that he is considered largely responsible for the electrification of Washington, D.C.

Hutchins’ was the first of three ownerships before The Washington Post began its modern life in 1933, when Eugene Meyer bought it at auction in a bankruptcy sale at the depth of the Depression.

Attorney George E. Hamilton Jr., represented Meyer, the undisclosed principal who authorized his representative to bid as high as $2 million. He won the paper with a bid of $825,000.

The Post on Friday, June 2, 1933, carried the headline: “Washington Post sold for $825,000.”

In his book, Chalmers Roberts wrote: “Rumors of the real buyer’s identity floated about the capital, but Hamilton would disclose nothing ... On June 4 The [Washington] Star carried a Meyer denial to the AP story in New York that he was the buyer. There was a ten-day delay for the necessary court approval ... On Tuesday, June 13, The Post carried the front page headline over a two-column box headed, “Eugene Meyer announced as Washington Post buyer.”

Meyer dedicated his time, energy, and considerable fortune to making the Post viable. The Post rang up a long string of losses; but it was saved by Meyer’s integrity, hands-on management and constant financial support.

Citing several years of losses, Roberts wrote, “The Post’s deficits were massive: $323,588 for the last half of 1933 after Meyer took over; $1,191,597 in 1934; $1,279,262 in 1935; $857,156 in 1936; and $838,937 in 1937. ‘One year,’ Meyer later remarked to a friend, paying the Post’s losses ‘took more than my entire income.’ To another he said, ‘No one is rich enough to keep that up.’ But not only did Meyer keep on paying the losses, he plunged ahead to improve his paper.”

The losses continued through the early World War II years. After nine and a half years of losses under Meyer, the Post finally rang up profits of $247,451 from 1942-1945. In 1946, President Truman asked Meyer to be the first president of the World Bank.

Enter Philip Graham, who had married Meyer’s daughter, Katharine. Graham graduated 10th in a class of 400 at Harvard Law School in 1939, and had been editor of the Harvard Law Review and a clerk for U.S. Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter. Meyer was so impressed with the vitality and charm of Graham that he prepared to hand over the reins of the Post Co. to him.

In 1948, Meyer announced the transfer of voting stock to Philip and Katharine Graham saying that Philip Graham would hold 3,500 shares and his wife 1,500 shares of the 5,000 voting shares. Meyer explained to Graham, “You never want a man working for his wife” (Chalmers Roberts, In the Shadow of Power, p. 258).

Eugene Meyer and Philip Graham were very close, and Graham quickly became a brilliant leader of the Post Co. He set out to make the Post a journalistic and financial success and succeeded at both.

The real turning point for the Post came in 1954, when it bought the Times-Herald and became the sole morning paper in the nation’s capital. The purchase doubled its circulation and sent ad revenues jumping.

“The purchase capped Eugene Meyer’s two-decade gamble with the Post and it left no doubt that Philip Graham, now 39, would be a major figure in American journalism,” Roberts wrote.

At the time, Meyer said, “The real significance of this event is that it makes the paper safe for Donnie [his grandson].”

Philip Graham was a publisher bursting with ideas: Pushing the Post Co. into television in a big way; buying Newsweek in 1961; and buying an interest in Bowater Mersey Paper Co., the firm that supplies most of the paper’s newsprint. Graham also developed a close friendship with President John Kennedy. Everything was going his way. But then things went terribly wrong.

In 1957, Graham began suffering periodic symptoms from a manic-depressive illness and had to be hospitalized. On August 3, 1963, he was allowed to leave a psychiatric care facility, and, with his wife Katharine, drove to Glen Welby, their farm near Marshall, Virginia, for a weekend outing.

The Post reported the next day: “Shortly after 1 p.m. while Mrs. Graham was in her room upstairs, Mr. Graham killed himself with a .28-gauge sportsman’s shotgun. He was alone in a first-floor room.” Graham was 48.

Responsibility for the Post Co. fell immediately upon Mrs. Graham, who had worked at the paper as an editor, but whose interest in journalism and business was limited at the time. She found her main credentials were that her father had owned the paper, and her husband had run it.

“When my husband died I had three choices,” she said. “I could sell it. I could find somebody to run it. Or I could go to work. And that was no choice at all. I went to work. … It was simply inconceivable to me to dismantle all that my father and my husband had built with so much labor and love.”

Once asked if she wasn’t terrified, she replied, “congealed.” Nevertheless, she built the Post into one of the best newspapers in the country, one known for investigative reporting, stylish prose, and business success. She became the first woman to chair a Fortune 500 company.

Under her leadership, the newspaper and its reporters won 18 Pulitzer Prizes. One Pulitzer, however, had to be returned in 1981 because the winning entry turned out to be a fictitious story by Janet Cooke about a young drug user (“Jimmy’s World”).

Her first major change at the Post was to name self-confident Benjamin Bradlee as managing editor, moving longtime friend and managing editor Al Friendly upstairs to the London bureau. Bradlee, who later occasionally played tennis with Buffett, energized a highly talented and competitive newsroom.

Bradlee was one of the heroes of both the 1971 publication of the Pentagon Papers, the top-secret documents about Vietnam, and the Watergate scandal from 1972 to 1974.

Publishing the Pentagon Papers in 1971 gave the Post Co. plenty of worry. The decision to do so came in the midst of plans for the privately held company to make a multimillion-dollar public stock offering. Indeed, the day before the public offering, Bradlee asked Kay Graham to publish the Pentagon Papers story.

“The Justice Department had sent her a prepublication message threatening to prosecute the company, which could have resulted in the forfeiture of its broadcast licenses if convicted,” wrote Donald Graham in the company’s 1991 Annual Report in a tribute to his mother.

Bradlee argued nonpublication would make the Post appear cowardly and also said the Post could start running the story the next day or get a new executive editor (Newsweek, July 1, 1991). Mrs. Graham’s response to Bradlee was “Go ahead, go ahead, go ahead. Let’s go. Let’s publish.”

WATERGATE

The Post’s finest hour came with its coverage of Watergate. For the Post, Watergate began with a call from Joseph A. Califano Jr., then general counsel of the Democratic National Committee, to Howard Simons, the paper’s managing editor. In that call, Simons was told of a break-in at the party headquarters at the Watergate office building on July 17, 1972.

Simons put the paper to work immediately.

The Post ran a story the next day on page 1 of the 306-page Sunday Post with the headline: 5 Held in Plot to Bug Democrats’ Office Here.

Two of the eight reporters contributing to the lengthy account were Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein, a duo with a definite nose for news. A new era in investigative journalism was born that day. The name used for their source, “Deep Throat”—taken from the title of a pornographic movie of the time—epitomized the critical importance of confidential sources.

Later, some reporters on a medical story developed a source who came to be known as “Sore Throat.” That one never ranked as a classic.

A new age in journalism spawned a new age in counterattack as evidenced by Roberts’ account (pp. 437–8) of Nixon’s response to the Post’s reporting:

As the Nixon tapes would show, the attack on the Post had been planned at least as early as September 15, 1972. On that day, in a conversation between Haldeman and John Dean, the President had said of the Post, “It’s going to have its problems ... The main thing is the Post is going to have damnable, damnable problems out of this one. They have a television station ... and they’re going to have to get it renewed.” When Haldeman added, “They’ve got a radio station too,” Nixon went on, “Does that come up, too? The point is, when does it come up?” Dean replied, “I don’t know. But the practice of non-licensees filing on top of licensees has certainly gotten more ... active in this area.” And Nixon: “And it’s going to be God damn active here... Well, the game has to be played awfully rough.”



In January 1973, challenges were filed before the Federal Communications Commission against the renewal of the Post Co.’s two Florida television stations.

Mrs. Graham noted that all the challenges were filed by Nixon administration supporters; and in an affidavit, she said she believed the challenges were “a part of a White House-inspired effort to injure the ... company in retaliation for its Watergate coverage.”

The challengers denied the contention. In any event, the Post Co. kept its stations, but Post stock fell by nearly half. “During Watergate, friends of the Nixon administration filed challenges to our television licenses in Florida. These cost a fortune to defend and caused our stock to plummet,” Mrs. Graham said (The Wall Street Journal, March 20, 2000). As always, Buffett hung in there.

Woodward and Bernstein went on to author All the President’s Men. The movie starring Robert Redford (Woodward), Dustin Hoffman (Bernstein), and Jason Robards (Bradlee) made the Post even more famous.

Buffett was absorbed by the Watergate scandal, as were most Americans, and followed it closely on television and in the newspapers.

MOVING ON

Much later, in early 1998, the Post was the first to print the Monica Lewinsky story; and Newsweek reporter Michael Isikoff had the first reports of the resulting investigation. In 2006, Dana Priest won a Pulitzer for her stories that exposed secret CIA detention centers overseas; and in 2007, she and Anne Hull reported on the neglect of troops at Walter Reed Army Hospital.

All through the bear markets, the Watergate scandal, and the strike, Buffett never sold one share of Post Co. stock. For his patience, he was well paid.

For decades the Post had struggled in its competition with the Star; but with the purchase of the Times-Herald, it became a much stronger competitor, soon racing by the Star. In 1981, the Star folded, making the Post essentially a monopoly newspaper in one of the world’s most important cities, the U.S. capital.

For Buffett and Berkshire shareholders, the 1980s were boom times as Buffett rode the tiger of one of his great ideas: Monopoly newspapers are profitable, bullet-proof “toll-bridges” that advertisers have to pay to cross. Buffett seized on the monopoly concept earlier and with more dramatic results than any other investor.

When advertising customers can satisfy their buying needs only by crossing one particular toll bridge, where no other place is available to get a print message across, then the owner of this only-game-in-town bulletin board can do quite well financially.

Although the late 1970s and 1980s were great times for the Post Co., its annual meetings were next to unbearable, marred by unreasonable questions from Accuracy in Media and other advocates (questions often designed simply to embarrass Mrs. Graham and Donald Graham), and also dominated by harangues from corporate gadfly Evelyn Y. Davis.

One could go to a Post Co. annual meeting and hear several hours of political bickering and learn little about Post Co. businesses. The annual meeting aside, almost everything else at the Post Co. had the mark of great success during the 1980s. But by 1990, newspapers were facing the worst advertising environment in 20 years.

The recession of the early 1990s even caught up with Washington, D.C. With retailing and real estate in tailspins, the Post’s ad linage declined, earnings for the year fell, and Mrs. Graham was forced to write in the 1990 Annual Report that financial results were “very disappointing.” Donald Graham later called 1991 “a terrible year.”

In 1991, both Mrs. Graham and Bradlee retired from their main jobs at the Post and were contemplating writing their memoirs. Bradlee’s best-selling book, A Good Life: Newspapering and Other Adventures came out in 1995. In 1997, Mrs. Graham came out with her own bestseller, Personal History.

The short-term air pockets that triggered the well publicized nationwide recession in advertising outlasted Buffett’s expectations, but the Post Co. remains a mighty enterprise even though it has become increasingly apparent that newspapers are no longer the only advertising game in town.

With the advent of the 24-hour news environment and advertising taking a nosedive, big city newspapers were underpriced not only by small newspapers and magazines but also by direct mail campaigns, more cable television channels, and new technologies such as videotext.

Print ad sales, as with ads in most newspapers, continued a sharp decline. Don Graham tried to offset the trend with a heavy emphasis on Kaplan and the Internet.

Even with its savvy in journalism and business, The Post Co. is not perfect. In 1998, it sold its interest in Junglee, a facilitator of Internet commerce. “With impeccable timing, we sold most of the Amazon.com stock we received for our Junglee interest just days before Amazon tripled,” wrote Donald Graham in the Post’s 1998 Annual Report.

He also wrote, “Because of brilliant management of our pension funds provided in great part by Bill Ruane over the past 20-plus years, The Washington Post Company’s operating income now includes more than $60 million of pension credits. These earnings are real in that we will avoid spending that much of the company’s money in the future on retirement benefits.” The Post’s pension plan is overfunded by $1 billion, according to Tom Russo of the Lancaster, Pennsylvania, firm of Gardner, Russo & Gardner (Barron’s, September 13, 2002). The Post pension plans are invested with Ruane, Cunniff & Co. (86%) and Sandy Gottesmann (14%) of First Manhattan.

Graham added, “Shareholders also should know that late last year we invested $165 million in the stock of Berkshire Hathaway Inc. This was a late-breaking revelation. Had Messrs, Graham, and Spoon made the same investment when they assumed their present jobs in 1991, the investment would be worth almost $1.5 billion. Berkshire’s management needs no endorsement from us. Berkshire’s purchase of General Re and the increasing strength of Berkshire’s position in several industries attracted our interest. (Warren Buffett, our director, played no role whatever in our analysis or our decision to invest.) We hope to be long-time participants in the continued rise of this unique company.”

At the Post Shareholders’ Day November 10, 2000, Donald Graham was asked what mistakes of omission the Post had made over the years. He answered there were many, including not buying into cable earlier as well as not putting all their resources into Microsoft or Berkshire stock early on. He said if the Post had just bought Berkshire in the early 70s it could have “forgotten all the rest.”

The Post Co. and Buffett have treated one another well. Buffett was often invited to dinners at Mrs. Graham’s home. Such invitations for a formal dinner went only to the high and mighty. However, when Buffett was offered a gourmet meal, he passed it up for a hamburger, fries, and a sundae. “He has a limited palate,” Mrs. Graham once said.

The Buffett-Graham friendship went far beyond dinner. Occasionally Buffett will write an article for the paper; and when he first testified before Congress in connection with the Salomon scandal, Katharine Graham had a front row seat. Buffett was surrounded by reporters and photographers throughout his testimony and as he left the hearing room, they pursued him. Nevertheless, he eluded them and slipped into a limousine that took him to The Washington Post, where he met with the editorial board.

Buffett and the Post know all about scoops.

The story of the Post is one in which growth and value coincided. The Post was a perfect pitch.

In the spring of 2004, The Post Co. bought El Tiempo Latino, a leading Spanish language weekly newspaper in the greater Washington area. El Tiempo Latino was founded in 1991 by Armando Chapelli Jr., and is published on Fridays with a circulation of 45,000.

In 2004, Melinda French Gates, wife of Microsoft founder Bill Gates, was named to the Post Co. board. She left the Post board in late 2010. She has a B.A. in computer science and economics from Duke’s Fuqua School of Business. She joined Microsoft in 1987. In 1996, she retired as Microsoft’s General Manager of Information Products. She and her husband have three children.

In late 2004, the Post bought Microsoft’s online political and cultural magazine, Slate, for an undisclosed amount; although; some reports said the sale was between $15 and $20 million.

Slate was founded in Seattle in 1996 when former CNN commentator Michael Kinsley launched an experiment in online daily journalism. Kinsley left Slate in 2002, and now works at The Los Angeles Times. Microsoft has owned Slate for about 8 years.

Slate is known for its informed, sometimes sassy, opinions about politics and pop culture with articles ranging from “Social Insecurity” to “Michael Jackson’s ‘I’m Weird’ Defense.”

Washington Post CEO Donald Graham wrote a letter to The Wall Street Journal (April 23, 2007) defending a two-tier stock structure that exists at a number of newspaper companies. Graham wrote, in part:

The New York Times Co. will come under attack at its annual meeting this week. Those urging shareholders to withhold their vote from the company’s nominees for director point to a falling stock price, diminished earnings and a host of perceived sins by company management.



What should worry those who care about the New York Times [Co.] is not the nature of the criticism but the proposed remedy: the abolition of the two-tier stock structure that allows the Sulzberger family to elect 70% of the company’s board.



The Washington Post Co., of which I am the CEO, has a similar stock structure, so does Dow Jones & Co., the publisher of this newspaper, and so do quite a few other companies including Google Inc. (which proves that a two-tier stock structure doesn’t necessarily lead to an underperforming stock). ...



If the stock structure were eliminated, a line of buyers eager to purchase the company, would form within minutes. No one could say no. The line would include private equity firms, high-ego billionaires, international media companies lacking a famous property, and lots more.



The Post newspaper soldiers on, amidst ever-declining ad sales, yet the company continues to reap profits from Kaplan, the Internet, and its cable and TV properties.

Buffett was quoted in a Fortune story (August 6, 2007) about the Post as saying, “The present model—meaning print—isn’t going to work.... The Post has enormous national and international importance. That does not make it a good business.”

Musing about how to further the Post’s cause on the Internet, Buffett was quoted as saying, “The ideal combination would be if The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, and the Post had a joint website, and you couldn’t get any one individually. That, you could sell for a fair amount of money, and it would have one hell of a readership.”

KATHARINE WEYMOUTH

Katharine Weymouth, granddaughter of Katharine Graham and niece of Don Graham, became the publisher of The Washington Post newspaper in 2008 and immediately faced an industry in decline.

“The numbers suck in our business,” Weymouth told Condé Nast Portfolio (August, 2008).

Weymouth, a divorced mother of three children, is known for her pedigreed

education (which includes Harvard College, Oxford, and Stanford Law School) and her tall dancer-like frame, the result of a childhood spent in ballet classes. Weymouth picked former Wall Street Journal managing editor Marcus Brauchli to be the Post’s executive editor.

BARACK OBAMA PAYS A CALL

The Post made news when then President-elect Barack Obama visited the

editorial board and, along with Buffett and Donald Graham, walked around the newsroom and greeted staffers (The Washington Post, January 18, 2009).

Columnist Howard Kurtz described the scene as the most exciting thing in the newsroom since Brad Pitt visited to prepare for a movie he didn’t do. As Obama greeted 200 staffers, Buffett said, “Where are the sportswriters? I want to talk about the Redskins, Nationals, and Wizards.”

KAPLAN UNDER ASSAULT

The stocks of The Washington Post and other owners of for-profit schools were hit by concerns that a regulatory crackdown related to student loans might cut enrollment. In late 2010, the Post cut 770 jobs from its Kaplan unit.

BUFFETT’S POST BOARD-ERA ENDS

In early 2011, Buffett said he would leave the Post board when his term expired in May, but he added that Berkshire would not sell any Post shares. “We’re going to keep every share of stock we have. I would never sell a share of the Post,” Buffett was quoted as saying (The Wall Street Journal, January 20, 2011).

The Story of Warren Buffett



Post Hailing Lindbergh

Lindbergh’s historic Paris landing was hailed in coverage in

The Washington Post on May 22, 1927.

(Photos by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value The Washington Post



Katharine Graham’s

Personal History

(Photos by Mary Porter)



Katharine Graham’s Autograph

Were it signed to Buffett, it would no doubt be “warmly inscribed” and a terrific “association copy.”

Alas, it’s just a $300 signed copy.



Peter, Paul, and Mary in Concert

The Washington Post’s Donald Graham, left; Katharine Graham; and Ben Bradlee. Donald Graham once said of Buffett, “In finance, he’s the smartest guy I know. I don’t know who is second.” He has also said, “My mother realized that [Buffett] was the smartest businessman she had ever met” and that his input “has been worth billions to the company.”

(AP/Wide World Photos)

The Washington Post The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Washington Post

The Washington Post The Story of Warren Buffett



Award Winning

Katharine Graham is joined by Thornton Bradshaw, former RCA chairman, and Buffett in New York City on May 27, 1987. They are holding an award presented to Mrs. Graham by the Center for Communication.

(AP/Wide World Photos)



In Memory

The American flag flies at half-staff outside The Washington Post building in memory of Katharine Graham on July 17, 2001.

(AP/Wide World Photos)



(Photo by The Washington Post/Rich Lipski)

Two Ushers

Buffett and Gates served as ushers at Katharine Graham’s funeral at the National Cathedral in Washington, D.C., on July 23, 2001. Herb Allen, Mike Nichols, Jim Lehrer, Diane Sawyer, Barbara Walters, and Bob Woodward were also among the ushers. Robert McNamara and Vernon Jordan and her brother-in-law Senator Bob Graham of Florida were among the pallbearers.

Of Permanent Value The Washington Post

The Washington Post The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Washington Post



Jonathan Grayer

Grayer headed Kaplan for 17 years before leaving in 2008 when he was succeeded by Andy Rozen.

The Washington Post The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Washington Post

The Washington Post The Story of Warren Buffett



All The President’s Men

by Woodstein

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value The Washington Post



Original promotional program with Redford and Hoffman for the movie, All The President’s Men.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

The original Robert Redford and Dustin Hoffman in 1973



(AP/Wide World Photos)



(AP/Wide World Photos)

Deep Throat

The identity of “Deep Throat” was revealed by Vanity Fair magazine as W. Mark Felt, the No. 2 man at the FBI during the Watergate era. The Washington Post, scooped on its own story, confirmed that Felt was “Deep Throat” on May 31, 2005. At 5:12 p.m. on that day, after the Vanity Fair story ran, the word was out and the Post realized it. The Post hit the “send” button from WashingtonPost.com. The news flash said: Woodward Confirms Identity of ‘Deep Throat.’ Former FBI official W. Mark Felt was the source of leaked secrets about Nixon’s Watergate coverup, The Washington Post confirms after Felt’s admission (Alicia Shepard, Woodward and Bernstein, p. 263). The big story about the big source of the biggest story of all set up a scramble in the media world. Woodward and Bernstein said they planned a quick book based largely on what was already written in the event of Felt’s death. The writer of the Vanity Fair story, San Francisco lawyer John O’Connor, said that he and the Felt family were looking over book offers. Woodward banged out a story for the Post on June 2, 2005, about how as a young Navy officer carrying messages to the White House, he had accidentally met Felt there and pursued a friendship. The rest, as they say, is history. In 2003, Woodward and Bernstein, for $5 million, sold their Watergate notes to the University of Texas at Austin’s Ransom Center. The documents related to “Deep Throat,” which were held back at an undisclosed location in Washington D.C. until the time of “Deep Throat’s” death, were turned over to the University of Texas.



(AP/Photo)

The Washington Post The Story of Warren Buffett



Bob, this is a Book.

Bernstein, left, and Woodward are shown here in Washington D.C. shortly after they learned that “Deep Throat” had been identified. Maybe Woodward is saying: “Hey, Carl, I think we have a book to write.”

(AP/Photo)



“Deep Throat” Probed

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value The Washington Post

Post Buys Berkshire Stock

Maybe buying Berkshire via General Re will turn out to be a perfect pitch for the Post. Actually, the Post swung too early, but then so did Buffett when he bought into the Post.

In 1998, The Post bought about $124 million of General Re stock as a roundabout and cheap way to get Berkshire stock.

“It was a very good opportunity” [read pitch perfect], said John Morse, the CFO at the Post, according to a Bloomberg news story (November 19, 1998).

Because the deal had not yet closed, a small, but significant discount between General Re and Berkshire stock existed. For example, Berkshire closed at $59,000 on September 21, 1998. Buying an equivalent amount of Gen Re stock that day would have cost only $57,285. Therein lies an arbitrage bet, the risk being that the deal might not close.

Post officials said Buffett was not consulted about the investment. “He was not involved in that at all,” Morse was quoted. “We told him of our decision to do it after the fact.”

Of course, it wasn’t as though Buffett needed to be consulted. He is on the board and has been a friend of The Post for decades. And it’s not an investment idea about which Bill Ruane (on the Post board) or Katharine Graham or Donald Graham would be unaware.

Consulted or not, Buffett still came out ahead on the deal. That’s because with Berkshire’s 17% ownership of The Post, that percentage of Gen Re shares was indirectly repurchased on behalf of Berkshire. Thus, Berkshire was indirectly buying back its own stock via Gen Re at a discount.

The Post’s 10-K statement said: “At January 3, 1999, the company’s ownership of 747,100 shares of General Re Corporation (“General Re”) common stock and 20 shares of Berkshire Hathaway, Inc. (“Berkshire”) Class A common stock account for approximately 72 percent of the total fair value of the Company’s investments in marketable equity securities. The investment in General Re and Berkshire common stock was acquired by the Company throughout the third and fourth quarters of 1998 from the open market for a total cost of $164,955,000. The gross unrealized gain on the General Re and Berkshire common stock totaled $19,485,000 at January 3, 1999.”

It appears the Post added slightly to its Berkshire position in 1999. At year-end it owned 2,634 A shares and 9,845 B shares. By the end of 2007, The Post owned 3,316 A shares, or more than $400 million, having bought 350 shares in 2006. The Berkshire stake represented 90% of its equity holdings.



Melinda French Gates: Picking a Name Not in the Phone Book

(AP/Photo)

The Washington Post The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Washington Post



77





COCA-COLA’S DON KEOUGH


Shortly before Buffett would make stock market history by sinking a billion dollars into Coca-Cola stock, he took a call from then Coca-Coca President Don Keough.

“I asked how things were and I said, ‘Warren, are you buying a share or two of Coca-Cola stock?’

“He said yes and he said it enthusiastically,” recalled Keough.

“It wasn’t too long before the announcement that he [Warren] was buying when I called him. We knew somebody was buying the stock. We figured it out by deduction,” said Keough, indicating the conclusion was reached by folks at Coke who follow the stock’s trading patterns.

“As the stock started regaining its lost ground [after the 1987 stock market crash], an inordinate amount of activity came from a relatively obscure midwestern brokerage. [Former Coke Chairman Roberto] Goizueta and Keough were studying Coke’s stock activity one day in the fall of 1988, when Keough suddenly saw the light. ‘You know, it could be Warren Buffett,’” Keough told Goizueta (David Greising, I’d Like the World to Buy a Coke: The Life and Leadership of Roberto Goizueta, p. 176).

“We knew he had an interest in the Coca-Cola Company,” said Keough, admitting that one of the tips occurred when “Warren became America’s number-one fan of Cherry Coke, which we introduced in 1985.”

“He really understands the company. He’s a terrific board member. He knows the company. He knows the numbers. He’s an informed and stimulating director. He has a clear understanding of the inherent value of global trademarks.”

And what did Mr. Keough do after Mr. Buffett bought Coke stock? “I became a modest Berkshire shareholder after his purchase of Coca-Cola stock,” said Keough, who had had an opportunity to invest in the Buffett Partnership more than 30 years earlier but passed up Buffett’s invitation.

“I wish I had invested back then,” Keough said. Had he done so, Buffett would have turned the $5,000 he asked of Keough into something on the order of $60 million. Oh, well.

In 1958, Keough, the son of a Sioux City, Iowa, cattleman and an Irish-American mother, moved into the house directly across from Buffett on Farnam Street in Omaha.

For a while Keough, an award-winning debater from Creighton University, worked at a fledgling television station in Omaha, WOWT-TV, hosting a lunchtime show called Coffee Counter and announcing football games. Keough got to know Johnny Carson, who worked at the same station. Carson’s father, Homer “Kit” Carson, was a manager for Iowa-Nebraska Light and Power, a predecessor of Berkshire’s MidAmerican Energy. Keough and Johnny Carson, through their radio segments, became good friends. “You could tell even then that Carson had a great comedic future,” Keough said (Window, Creighton University, Fall 1993). Later Keough got to know an investment broker named Warren Buffett. Keough left his TV job to take an advertising job at Paxton and Gallagher, maker of Butter-Nut Coffee.

The Swanson family bought Paxton and Gallagher and sold the renamed Swanson Foods to Duncan Coffee Company, which in turn was purchased by the Coca-Cola Co.

The future Mr. Coca-Cola, who drinks his Coke in diet form, was one of many people Buffett solicited to join the Buffett Partnership. Although Keough was late investing with Buffett, he soldiers on today with his 5 million shares of Coke stock. He also was introduced early on to what would become another Berkshire investment. “My wife, Mickie, and I bought furniture from Mrs. Blumkin at the Nebraska Furniture Mart when we were married in Omaha.”

Keough says he can’t recall exactly how he met Buffett. “I don’t remember how we were introduced.… He was about 25 and I was about 30. He was exactly the same then as he is now. … What you see is what you get. He had the same values. His story really is not money. It’s values. People should know about his values. … What he said at the [Berkshire] annual meeting [in 1991] in his response to a question about choosing careers says it all. He said, ‘Enjoy your work and work for whom you admire.’”

Buffett has said Keough’s extraordinary personality is one reason he invested so heavily in Coca-Cola.

Mutual admiration abounds.

Keough, the marketing whiz, and the late Roberto Goizueta, the chemical engineer, began working together in the 1960s; both were on a management fast track. Goizueta joined Coke in 1954 after answering an ad for a bilingual chemist.

Both arrived as rivals to succeed J. Paul Austin on the evening of February 14, 1980, at a birthday party for then Coke Chairman Austin at The Four Seasons restaurant in Manhattan.

Keough told Goizueta, “Nobody knows how this is going to work out. The two of us are quite compatible, and we have different skills. So let’s sleep at night. Whoever comes out on top, let’s put the other one to work immediately.”

Goizueta was picked as chairman and chief executive officer, and he and Keough became one of the top management teams in American business. After retiring in 1993, Keough became chairman of the Allen & Co. investment banking firm, run by Coke board member Herbert Allen. The Allen offices in New York are at 711 Fifth Avenue, a Coke-owned building where the company has a few offices and where Keough spends his time when in town.

Goizueta, long a heavy smoker, died October 18, 1997, of complications from lung cancer.

At Goizueta’s death, the Atlanta Journal-Constitution (October 19, 1997) devoted an entire section to his life. Buffett was quoted as saying, “His greatest legacy is the way he so carefully selected and nurtured the future leadership of the company.”

Coca-Cola, in an announcement October 23, 2000, said Keough was rejoining the company as an adviser to senior management.

“Although he retired in 1993, I have stayed in close contact with him on a wide range of issues as have other members of our board,” former CEO Douglas Daft said in a press release.

In 2004, Daft said he would retire at the end of the year, and Keough returned to the board. To make way for the 77-year-old Keough to rejoin the board, Coke had to change its rule that directors couldn’t be elected after they reached 74. The age change also insured that Buffett, 73 at the time, could remain on the board.

Instead of advising Coke from the sidelines, Keough was back in the heart of the company for which he has had a lifelong love.

Clearly Keough doesn’t think much of the idea of retirement: “My idea of hell would be to go down to some watering hole, buy two pairs of pink pants, and wait for the cocktail hour” (Atlanta Journal-Constitution, February 22, 2004).

Maybe one reason working was preferable to retirement for Keough was because he considered and treated his working associates as family. One manager of an operating business bought by Berkshire recalls his meeting with Keough after the purchase and the Berkshire board member’s memorable words: “Welcome to the family.”

In 2008, Keough wrote a book entitled The Ten Commandments for Business Failure. The foreword was by a fellow who once lived across the street from him in Omaha—Buffett. In the acknowledgements, Keough says that Buffett is “the world’s greatest simplifier. Take complex economic theories or business problems, and in a biblical way, he makes easily understood parables out of them. He is everyone’s hero, including mine” (p. 189).



World’s Greatest Personality

Don “Drink Coca-Cola” Keough, pictured in 2003, is chairman of Allen & Company and a board member with Berkshire and Coca-Cola. Keough, once chairman of Notre Dame’s board of trustees, is known for receiving standing ovations as an after-dinner speaker. Grantland Rice wrote it of the Notre Dame backfield in 1924, but Keough could have spoken it: “Outlined against a blue-gray October sky, the Four Horsemen rode again.”

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Johnny Carson

(AP/Photo)

Of Permanent Value Coca-Cola’s Don Keough



Cover of Window Magazine

(Photo by Mary Porter)



A Young Don Keough



The Ten Commandments for Business Failure

by Don Keough

Souvenir Program for the Cecil B. DeMille Film The Ten Commandments

The biblical epic film starred Charlton Heston as Moses.





Don Keough at His Coca-Cola Desk

(Photos from Window magazine with permission)



78





THE COCA-COLA COMPANY


A brief announcement came over the Dow Jones news wire on March 15, 1989: Berkshire had bought 6.3% of the stock of The Coca-Cola Company! That stake, because of Coke’s own stock repurchases and Buffett’s additional buying in mid-1994, now represents more than 8.6% of the company. Berkshire owns 200 million shares of Coca-Cola, the most widely distributed product on the planet.

Berkshire owns more than twice as much of the pop-culture icon stock as the entire mutual fund industry—200 million shares versus 90 million (Barron’s, November 17, 1997). Coca-Cola is Berkshire’s holy water. Buffett calls the sugar and caffeine product the “nectar of the gods” as well as “juice of the gods.”

Coke, after the stock market crash of 1987, was a perfect pitch to the center of Buffett’s “circle of competence.” It was “two inches above the navel.” He swung big and hit a 500-foot home run high over the center field fence.

That’s more than a big stake by a 50-Billion-Pound Gorilla; that’s an investment from King Kong.

With Buffett’s Coke purchase, an era of permanent value was born for both Berkshire and Coke from what Buffett saw as the endless demand for Coke. Buffett, making his largest investment at that time, struck during Berkshire’s unusually long nonreporting period—from the quarter ending in September until March, when the annual earnings in the annual report are issued.

He had spent months in late 1988 and early 1989 secretly putting in buy orders and had just finished guzzling down a $1- billion-plus ocean-size helping of Coca-Cola. “Can’t Beat the Feeling.”

Buffett’s investment, “The Real Thing,” made him Coke’s largest shareholder. He was elected to the board and served until 2006.

In Coke’s 1997 Annual Report, chairman M. Douglas Ivester wrote of the astounding number of beverages the Coca-Cola companiy sold each day: “The pioneers who built this Company scarcely could have imagined it. About the time you are reading this letter, your Company will achieve an amazing milestone—sales of Coca-Cola and other Company products will exceed 1 billion servings per day. It took 22 years for us to sell the first billion servings of Coca-Cola. And now we’re selling a billion drinks a day.” That amounts to 2% of the daily beverage consumption on earth.

“I wish we had bought more,” Buffett has said, reminiscent of the view of an anonymous wit: “There are more important things in life than a little money, and one of them is a lot of money.”

Now Coke sells 1.7 billion servings a day to the world’s seven billion people. Berkshire’s ownership claim of those billion daily servings amounts to more than 100 million servings. “Coca-Cola is in the minds of billions of people. Royal Crown is in the minds of a couple of guys,” Buffett has said (Knoxville News-Sentinel, April 9, 2003).

Perhaps the first tip-off about Buffett’s interest in the world’s largest soft drink maker came in Berkshire’s 1985 Annual Report when he wrote that after 48 years of allegiance to another soft drink [Pepsi], he was switching to Cherry Coke. He even declared Cherry Coke “the official drink” of Berkshire’s annual meetings. That should have registered with Berkshire shareholders as a stock tip.

Kent Hanon, a teacher and actor in Omaha, recalls the days of Buffett’s allegiance to Pepsi. His mother, Elizabeth, was an early secretary to Buffett, and she remembers going across Farnam Street each afternoon to get Buffett a Pepsi. “It was a great source of amusement to my parents that Warren Buffett bought Coca-Cola, which he had totally refused to drink,” recalls Kent Hanon (Omaha World Herald, September 27, 1997).

In Buffett’s words, the switch happened when Don Keough sent him a trial sample of the formula for Cherry Coke very early on: “I loved it. I wrote him back saying he could save all his test-marketing money, send me a portion of what he’d spend otherwise and that it was going to be a great success.”

Keough’s individual test-marketing stunt was recorded also in a book by David Greising: “As Coca-Cola test marketed Cherry Coke in late 1984, Don Keough sent Buffett a case of the new drink” (David Greising, I’d Like the World to Buy a Coke: The Life and Leadership of Roberto Goizueta, p. 176).

Increasingly, Coke has been beset by a number of hurdles: the shift of consumers’ tastes to waters, teas, and juices; problems with bottlers; foreign government opposition; and international anti-Americanism. Friction with bottlers increased and Coke’s great strength, marketing, seemed to fall flat.

But long before things soured at Coke, Buffett told Forbes a key reason he bought Coke was that its stock price did not reflect the all-but-guaranteed growth in international sales in a world that is increasingly uniform in its tastes. Throughout the world, for more than a century, fountain clerks and/or machines have mixed an ounce of Coca-Cola syrup with six and a half ounces of carbonated water. No product is so universal.

Even the Queen of England drinks Coke. Greta Garbo, John F. Kennedy, the Beatles, and Fidel Castro were known Coke fans. Bill Clinton and Al Gore drink Coke as does super-lawyer David Boies. British Open champion John Daly, celebrating victory in 1995, turned down champagne for a Diet Coke. Bill Gates, a diet Coke drinker, has starred in an ad, scrounging for change to buy a Coke. New Jersey’s favorite son Bruce “Glory Days” Springsteen drinks Classic Coca-Cola—although in the 1980s, “The Boss” turned down a chance to do an ad for Coke.

The most widely recognized and esteemed brand names on earth, by far, are Coca-Cola and Coke. In a Financial World story (July 8, 1996), it was calculated that Coca-Cola’s brand name alone is worth more than $43 billion. In some countries, Coke has little competition.

Coca-Cola is the world’s second, most-widely recognized expression after “OK.”

In Coke, Sprite, Tab, and Fanta, Coke has four of the five top carbonated drinks in the world.

Buffett wannabe George Morgan tells the story of Buffett running into a youngster wearing a Coca-Cola outfit at a mall. Buffett asked him how much he paid for it. The youngster replied $75. “That’s a lot to pay to advertise someone else’s product,” said Buffett, even more convinced of Coke’s valuable franchise.

From Australia to Zimbabwe, from Omaha to Osaka, from the Great Wall of China to the Great Barrier Reef, millions of people are drinking more than a billion and a half servings a day. The sun never sets on Coca-Cola.

The company sells half of the soda pop consumed ON EARTH, more than twice as much as its nearest rival, PepsiCo. In the U.S., the Coke and Pepsi empires claim about three-fourths of the $50-billion-a-year soda business.

Coca-Cola USA accounts for 10% of all of America’s liquid consumption.

Every year Coke sells more than two billion gallons of soft drink syrup and concentrate to bottlers. Coke’s value may continue to rise because the drink is habit forming, a business trait Buffett likes.

Coke, selling 230 brands of drinks, supplies its syrups and concentrates to about 1,000 bottling partners in more than 200 countries representing 126 languages. Buffett’s stake in Coca-Cola stock is his master stroke. In many nations, “Coca-Cola” is synonymous with “U.S.A.”

Buffett pointed out some strengths of Coca-Cola that made it a good purchase: “If you run across one good idea for a business in your lifetime, you’re lucky, and fundamentally this is the best large business in the world. It has got the most powerful brand in the world. It sells for an extremely moderate price. It’s universally liked—the per capita consumption goes up almost every year in almost every country. There is no other product like it” (Fortune, May 31, 1993).

On May 15, 1950, Coca-Cola appeared on the cover of Time magazine (20 cents an issue then) over the title “World and Friend” with the drawing of a happy-faced, thirsty Earth drinking a Coke. Coca-Cola’s former Chairman, Cuban-born and Atlanta booster Roberto Goizueta, once said the “C” faucet in kitchen sinks should deliver Coke, not cold water.

Often saying, “God is in the details,” Goizueta knew something about growth. The only property he held onto after his immigration from Cuba’s Castro (having defected with his wife while on vacation in Miami in 1960) was 100 shares of Coca-Cola he had bought in a custodial account with $8,000 loaned to him by his father. Those shares, which he owned for the remainder of his life, were worth about $3 million. In the years he was chairman, he guided the growth of Coke from a market worth of $4 billion that of about $150 billion. Talk about liquid assets!

Goizueta, at the time of his death, was a Coke billionaire!

COKE’S MACHINE BREAKS DOWN

After the Goizueta era, some investors felt a confusion over Coca-Cola Zero, whether it referred to the stock price or to a new no-calorie drink.

After Goizueta’s death, M. Douglas Ivester served as Coke chairman for two and a half tumultuous years. Ivester shocked Wall Street on December 6, 1999, when he announced he would retire in April 2000. His tenure was marked by a downturn in many foreign markets (effective hedging became difficult as many foreign currencies plummeted), and a massive product recall in Europe. In June 1999, Coke products were pulled from shelves in Luxembourg and parts of France and the Netherlands in a health scare that began in Belgium when a number of children became ill after drinking Cokes. Coke said it found the contaminations were due to the carbon dioxide used in bottles made in a plant in Antwerp, Belgium, and to a fungicide found on the outside of cans made at another plant in Dunkirk, France. In the end, a Belgium authority concluded the cause was psychosomatic, the result of youngsters influenced by a bad odor.

Ivester’s time was also marred by a racial discrimination lawsuit in the U.S. and a failed buyout of France’s Pernod Ricard Orangina drinks brand. If these weren’t enough, Coke also had to scale back its proposed purchase of Cadbury Schweppes to win regulatory approval. A string of earning shortfalls finally led to a huge restructuring of the company involving 6,000 layoffs and big writedowns of business in such places as Russia, India, and Vietnam.

Fortune (January 10, 2000) reported that Coke and directors Buffett and Herbert Allen, who had become a large Coke shareholder, met with Ivester in Chicago, December 1, 1999. (Coke under Goizueta bought Columbia Pictures where Allen was chairman in 1982. Columbia was later sold to Sony in 1989.) Buffett and Allen told Ivester they had lost confidence in his leadership. Ivester returned to Atlanta, called an emergency board meeting and quit.

As recounted in The Real Thing by Constance L. Hays (pp. 309–310), the three men met in a hangar in Chicago. Ivester was in town to meet with executives of McDonald’s, Coke’s biggest customer. Days before, Allen had called to ask Ivester if he could meet with him and Buffett.

“Moments into the meeting, it was clear that they were not there to pay him compliments. They never sat down, never even removed their overcoats. In tones frostier than the air outside, they told him that they had lost confidence in him.

“They made it clear that they wanted him to leave the Coca-Cola Company. It was something of a gamble. There had been no vote by the full board of directors, and if Ivester had decided to challenge them, they could have been humiliated before their fellow directors. But given information like this from two shareholders with so much clout, not many company chairmen would choose to stand and fight. And Ivester did not want to tear the company apart. …

“The three of them said goodbye and went their separate ways, each to his own jet and each holding separate opinions about the effect their brief conversation would have on the Coca-Cola Company, the place they all worshipped.”

Thirty-year Coke veteran Douglas Daft, a former math teacher, was called on to lead Coke, and Daft soon named Jack Stahl president.

Former senior Coca-Cola executive E. Neville Isdell was named chairman and CEO of the company on May 4, 2004. During the first years of his long career at Coke, he led a push into dozens of foreign markets and later ran the world’s second-largest Coke bottling company.

In 2005, Coke agreed to make internal reforms and accept a cease-and-desist order under a legal settlement with the SEC over a long-running investigation that centered on Coke asking bottlers in Japan between 1997 and 1999 to make excess purchases of concentrate to inflate sales.

Before Coke’s severe stumble in the late 1990s, its return on equity was 39%. It rose each year to 61.3% until 1997, dropped to 45.1% in 1998, and sank to 27.1% in Coke’s tumultuous “Bummer of ’99.” Coke slogged through the next decade, even so by 2010 Coke appeared reinvigorated as perhaps the largest supply chain on earth with its 450 brands selling 1.7 billion servings of Coke products a day.

All along, just what has Coke been selling? Berkshire’s vice chairman, Charles Munger, has quoted Keough as saying, “The business of The Coca-Cola Company is to create and maintain conditioned reflexes” (Outstanding Investor Digest, December 29, 1997). Coke is simply selling its brand of refreshment—nothing so vital as food or energy, just refreshment. And although some might say it’s just a sugar water company peddling tooth decay, let’s stick with the refreshment idea. Over the years, Coke has offered so many moments of tasty refreshment it has become entrenched as the world’s leading thirst quencher.

Buffett’s original investment in mere cans of Coke came to $1,023,920,000. For that money, he bought for Berkshire 23,350,000 shares of Coca-Cola stock, which split 2-for-1 in 1990, giving Berkshire 46,700,000 shares. With another 2-for-1 split in 1992, it had 93,400,000 shares. Buffett’s mid-1994 refills boosted Berkshire’s stock to exactly 100 million shares. That’s a big round number that became 200 million with the 2-for-1 stock split in 1996.

The day after Berkshire’s first Coke announcement, Buffett told The Wall Street Journal reporter Michael J. McCarthy (March 16, 1989), that the purchase of Coke was “the ultimate case of putting your money where your mouth is.”

“Coke is exactly the kind of company I like,” Buffett told him. “I like products I can understand. I don’t know what a transistor is, for example.” Further, he said, “More and more in recent years, their superb decision-making and the focus of their strategy have emerged more clearly to me.”

The story suggested that analysts saw Buffett’s move as protection against recession. “There could be 10 recessions between now and the time we sell our Coke stock. Our favorite holding period is forever,” Buffett replied.

The secret formula for Coca-Cola, Merchandise 7x, is rumored to be a mix of orange, lemon, cinnamon, and other ingredients (Fortune, August 14, 2000). The formula is passed by word of mouth almost as if it were the ritualistic cant of a secret fraternal order (David Greising, I’d Like the World to Buy a Coke: The Life and Leadership of Roberto Goizueta, p. 42).

Emory University in Atlanta, whose business school is named after Goizueta, owns about 40 million shares of Coke; its dividends have gone to build the campus and to fund scholarships and professorships at the well-endowed school.

Back in 1922, tobacco farmers in Quincy, Florida, plowed profit from a bumper crop into Coca-Cola stock at the urging of local banker Mark Monroe. “Coke had just come public and Daddy liked the taste,” said Julia Woodward, Monroe’s daughter. “Plus, he figured the stock would be good collateral because folks would always have a nickel to buy a bottle” (Bloomberg News Service, December 13, 1996). At the time of that publication, the descendants of the farmers who heeded the banker owned 7.5 million shares of Coke, which, adjusted for splits, cost them 2 cents a share. The same 25 Coke millionaires have generously shared their largesse with their affluent town located near Tallahassee.

Remember, Buffett began his business career when he was six years old by

buying six-packs of Coke for a quarter at his grandfather’s Buffett & Son family grocery store and selling the Cokes around the neighborhood for five cents a drink. He found margins to be good.

Despite making pocket money as a Coke salesman, he was drinking Pepsi-Cola and would not change his taste habits for almost half a century before he, too, joined the ranks of “Cokeaholics.” Buffett has said “his eyeballs connected with his brain” in the summer of 1988, and he began buying Coke stock all the way through March 1989. Coke itself was buying back shares so there were two huge buyers of Coke stock in the marketplace.

What Buffett saw and what made him thirst for Coke, was the world’s greatest brand name. The Coca-Cola name was being carried for zero on the balance sheet of a company with stunning international possibilities for profit growth and efficient global advertising. Buffett discovered—and it was right there in front of everybody’s eyes—a worldwide, seemingly bulletproof franchise.

Coca-Cola is the primary supplier for many of the major fast food chains, not only McDonald’s, but also Wendy’s, Burger King, Pizza Inn, and many Arby’s restaurants. Where McDonald’s goes, so goes Coke.

Delta Airlines, Continental Airlines, US Airways, and AirTran serve Coca-Cola as well.

Its vending business covers the world. Coke machines are not only readily available in the U.S., but also all over Europe. Coke machines are even present at the Berkshire-owned Borsheims jewelry store and Nebraska Furniture Mart in Omaha.

About 70% of Coke’s sales and about 80% of its profits come from its vastly expanding overseas operations. By contrast, Pepsi derives about 70% of its sales and 80% of its income in the U.S.

When the Berlin Wall fell in November 1989, Coke made an immediate foray into East Germany, setting up vending machines by the thousands. Delivery trucks gave away thousands of cans of Cokes. By early 1991, Coke was buying bottling and distribution plants all over Germany. East Germans knew of Coke from television even before the Berlin Wall came down, and Coke is even more popular than soft drink beverages made by the old East German government.

In early 1991, Coke officials were saying East Germans were drinking a per capita average of 30 servings a year and that the company was aiming to match West Germany’s per capita rate of 190 servings within a few years. Coke quickly expanded operations in East Germany. German unification has been a boon to both Pepsi, with strong operations in a number of Eastern European countries, and to Coke, with its strong operations long established in Europe.

Coca-Cola has consolidated the company’s European bottling network, including the sale of franchises in France, Belgium, and Britain to Coca-Cola Enterprises, Coke’s largest bottler.

Coke makes more money in Japan than in the United States because of much higher margins. Coke’s army of vending machines, which totals more than 760,000 of the two million soft drink machines in Japan, helps Coke claim about 30% of the soft drink market there. Coke’s Georgia brand of canned coffee is also a huge seller there.

“Our international opportunity is obvious,” said Coke’s 1989 Annual Report. “As a market develops, as any market develops, people drink more soft drinks. It’s only a matter of time. And the time it takes us to develop a market is growing shorter.”

The opportunity for Coca-Cola overseas is apparent because foreigners consume only a fraction as much soda pop as do Americans. Although the mature U.S. market consumes 395 servings per person each year, the average person worldwide consumes 64 servings. The U.S. per capita consumption is many times the worldwide average. The gap is now being filled to Coke’s and Berkshire’s advantages.

Along the way, Coca-Cola has been making huge investments in bottlers around the world. In Europe particularly, Coca-Cola is consolidating many of its bottling operations to capitalize on the industry deregulation expected from the economic unity of the European community.

Since bottling is a high, fixed-cost business, manufacturing and distributing products from fewer locations will enable Coca-Cola to enjoy significant economies of scale and solidify its position as the low-cost soft drink producer. The financial folks at Coca-Cola seem to have their heads on straight, making careful hedges to international currency exposures and making good use of what little debt they have.

Business Week (November 12, 1990) described one aspect of Coke’s use of debt this way:

Coca-Cola shows how leverage can be played like a fine instrument. In 1986, the once debt-averse Coke borrowed $2.5 billion to buy up many of its bottlers. Then it sold 51% of the new bottling unit to the public. Coke moved the acquisition debt to the balance sheet of the new unit, which in turn used the proceeds of the offering to help slash its debt. The result: Coke wound up with 49% of a $3.9 billion company—and gained marketing clout by consolidating once-independent bottlers.



Here may be the most stunning of all the remarkable statistics about Coca-Cola, again noted in its 1989 Annual Report: “The Coca-Cola Company began to transform itself into a global enterprise in the early 1920s. For more than 60 years, we have been developing business relationships and investing in a system that today carries an estimated replacement cost of more than $100 billion.”

One hundred billion dollars!

Let’s say you wanted to enter the soft drink business and match Coke. Forget it. It can’t be done. You can’t raise $100 billion. Buffett can’t raise $100 billion.

Speaking of $100 billion, Buffett says, “If you gave me $100 billion and said take away the soft drink leadership of Coca-Cola in the world, I’d give it back to you and say it can’t be done” (Fortune, May 31, 1993).

The 1995 Coca-Cola Annual Report says, “If our Company burned to the ground, we’d have no trouble borrowing the money to rebuild, based on the strength of our trademarks alone.”

No brand name is totally immune from competition, as GM and IBM found out. A handful of Japanese tigers took huge bites out of GM and zillions of ants did damage to IBM. In the late 1990s, Coke’s growth slowed. But if there’s one impregnable business franchise on earth, it’s Coca-Cola. It’s little wonder that in Berkshire’s 1990 Annual Report, Buffett says he regards Coca-Cola as “the most valuable franchise in the world.”

When Buffett bought Coca-Cola stock, it was trading at only 12 times earnings.

Buffett gave a number of reasons for buying, and others supplied their own reasons; but in the end, it may be more than just a list of reasons.

“It’s like when you marry a girl,” Buffett said. “Is it her eyes? Her personality? It’s a whole bunch of things you can’t separate. As we get older we learn that the true test of love is, “Would I mind being financially destroyed by this person?”

When Buffett courted Coke, he did so in a quiet but huge way. For months, he had three brokers at the other end of his phones picking off whatever large blocks of Coke stock they could find.

About a week after the March 1989 announcement, Atlanta Constitution business writer Melissa Turner interviewed Buffett at his office in Omaha. She asked him why he hadn’t bought sooner. He replied: “You wonder what pushes the needle, don’t you? Must have just dawned on me.” Perhaps this is what James Joyce meant when he stated, “Ineluctable modality of the visible.”

He also posed a hypothetical situation: “Let’s say you were going away for 10 years and you wanted to make one investment and you know everything you know now, and you couldn’t change it while you’re gone. What would you think about?”

He added, “If I came up with anything in terms of certainty, where I knew the market was going to continue to grow, where I knew the leader was going to continue to be the leader—I mean worldwide—and where I knew there would be big unit growth, I just don’t know anything like Coke.”

Pausing for a sip of Cherry Coke, Buffett continued, “I’d be relatively sure that when I came back, they’d be doing a hell of a lot more business than they are doing now.”

He told her that Hershey Foods would also be here but that humanity wouldn’t raise its intake of Hershey bars as it will Coke.

“But people are going to drink eight servings of something every day, and history shows that once they are exposed to it [Coke], and I’m living proof, they like drinking it.”

She reported that Buffett’s portable office refrigerator is stocked full and that three unopened Cherry Coke 12-packs are on the counter waiting to be chilled.

“I drink five a day and that’s 750 calories, which means really a pound every five days and 70 pounds a year …” he told Turner. At the Berkshire annual meeting in 1992, he gave things a slightly different spin: “I drink five Cokes a day. That’s 750 calories. I would have lost 70 pounds a year if I didn’t drink them. Really, it’s been a lifesaver.”

Five Cokes a day? A fib? A white lie from Mr. Squeaky Clean? Does he drink five Cokes a day? “He drinks eight to ten a day,” according to Deep Throat, who sees Buffett almost every day.

Buffett told Turner that the night before their chat, it was so hot in his house that he’d hopped out of bed at 2 a.m. and gone downstairs to the refrigerator. After guzzling a Cherry Coke, he felt a lot better and went back to bed.

Shortly after Buffett completed his huge Coke purchase, he flew to Coke’s headquarters in Atlanta, and took Goizueta and Keough to lunch.

So where did Buffett, Goizueta, and Keough go for lunch? The Varsity restaurant.

Located across from the Georgia Tech campus and Coke’s North Avenue headquarters, the Varsity is a popular, low-priced, fast-food restaurant billed as the World’s Largest Drive-In. The trio went to the Varsity at the request of Buffett, whose culinary interests are largely along the lines of straight Crisco washed down with a Cherry Coke. The Varsity, which serves 30,000 customers on a football weekend, does not serve Crisco, but the “oily, salty, crunchy, truly onion-y rings” are sensational.

Buffett, Goizueta, and Keough did not just pop in. “I called,” Keough remembers. Gordon Muir, personnel director of the restaurant, recalled the visit: “We knew they were coming … Buffett came in and I met him briefly. You could never tell he was rich.”

Muir’s mother, Nancy Simms, owner of the restaurant that her father founded in 1928, sat with Buffett, Goizueta, and Keough at a round table by a window with a perfect view of Coca-Cola’s world headquarters several blocks away. The Varsity is the world’s biggest nonchain server of Coca-Cola. It’s as if Coke were piped from Coke headquarters.

“Our colors are red and white and so I put a checked red and white tablecloth on the table and put some red begonias in a Varsity carry-out box on the table,” Mrs. Simms said. “They are all down-to-earth, people-oriented people… He [Buffett] ordered hot dogs, onion rings, and fries. He just loved them… We ate on paper plates … They brought a six-pack of Cherry Cokes with them. That’s what he likes.”

“They stayed about an hour or an hour and a half. He talked about his businesses, about See’s and Nebraska Furniture Mart. He said he likes to buy businesses with good managements and then let them run things as they always have.

“There is something in his personality that comes out that says he’s a unique and fun person,” she said, adding, “I was hoping he’d buy me out with his last billion.”

Sale of The Varsity to Buffett has been kidded about, but Buffett’s reply was, “She’s too smart to sell.”

Such notable people as Jimmy Carter, George Bush Sr., and Bill Clinton have come in to The Varsity in search of votes. Elvis Presley was a big fan. Former heavyweight boxing champion Evander Holyfield, now a Coke spokesman, has dropped in, as have Burt Reynolds, the late Lucille Ball, and the late Arthur Godfrey. At one point, Nipsey Russell worked there as a car hop.

Buffett made his trip to Atlanta about the time he was named to Coke’s prestigious board.

After the Berkshire annual meeting in April 1989, Buffett dropped by Borsheims jewelry store and was surrounded by a band of shareholders. He had completed his $1-billion purchase of Coca-Cola stock and was asked if it was to be made a permanent holding. It had not been listed as one in the annual report.

Replied Buffett, “Well, I don’t want to move it to that category too fast.” But it wasn’t very long before he was calling it a permanent holding. There was little doubt it was headed toward being a huge holding of permanent value for Berkshire.

Coca-Cola has been a part of people’s lives for more than 125 years. The world’s product with the best-known trademark originated on May 8, 1886, when, according to legend, pharmacist Dr. John Stith Pemberton first made the syrup for Coca-Cola in a three-legged brass pot in his backyard at 107 Marietta Street in Atlanta.

He carried a jug of the new product down the street to Jacobs’ Pharmacy, one of Atlanta’s leading soda fountains (located not far from today’s Underground Atlanta area), where it was sold for a nickel a glass. Willis Venable was the first person to sell Coca-Cola. In its first year, Coke sales averaged nine drinks a day. Total sales for the pharmacy’s first year were $50. The year’s expenses were $73.96. Pemberton took a loss.

It wasn’t long before the drink was known as “Delicious and Refreshing.”

Pemberton placed an ad for Coca-Cola in the May 29, 1886, edition of the Atlanta Journal, claiming the drink was “Delicious, Refreshing, Exhilarating, Invigorating.”

On November 15, 1886, again according to legend, a man with a hangover asked for something that would ease his headache. Pemberton had touted his drink as a cure for a headache. Whether by design or accident, carbonated water was added with syrup, producing a drink that eased the customer’s headache (Elizabeth Candler Graham [great-great-granddaughter of Atlanta businessman Asa G. Candler, who bought the Coca-Cola formula from Pemberton and other shareholders] and Ralph Roberts,The Real Ones, p. 6).

Mrs. Graham wrote that Asa Candler had sought a cure for headaches all his life after suffering an accident as a child when he fell out of a loaded wagon and a wheel ran over his head.

“One of Pemberton’s goals in formulating Coca-Cola was to present a cure for headaches. During almost all of its first decade of life, Coca-Cola was considered a medicine. Candler himself advertised it in the 1890s as ‘The Wonderful Nerve and Brain Tonic and Remarkable Therapeutic Agent.’ ”

In 1887, a patent was filed for a product listed as “Coca-Cola Syrup and Extract.”

Thinking that two C’s, derived from two of the drink’s ingredients—flavoring extracts from the coca leaf and the cola nut—would look nice together

in advertising, Pemberton’s bookkeeper, Frank M. Robinson, with an ear for alliteration, suggested the name and penned “Coca-Cola” in the flowing Spencerian script now world famous.

Pemberton also started Coca-Cola’s push into advertising, making it one of the first American companies to make substantial use of it.

His early ad efforts began when he painted squares of oilcloth to hang from

drugstore awnings. One oilcloth sign over Jacob’s store said “Drink Coca-Cola.”

In that first year, Pemberton sold 25 gallons, which he shipped in bright red

wooden kegs. Red has been the distinctive color associated with the drink ever since.

By 1891, Asa G. Candler had acquired complete ownership of Coca-Cola for $2,300. “He essentially bought the whole Coca-Cola Company for $2,000. And that may be the smartest purchase in the history of the world,” Buffett said at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1997. Within four years, Candler’s merchandising skill helped extend availability of Coca-Cola to every state.

Coca-Cola held its first annual meeting in 1892 in Atlanta. Four shareholders were present. Annual sales were $49,676.30; the balance sheet carried $74,898.12 in assets. Cash on hand was $11.42.

Looking for a way to serve beverages at a picnic, candy merchant Joseph A. Biedenharn of Vicksburg, Mississippi, became the first person to bottle Coca-Cola, using syrup shipped from Atlanta. His 1894 innovation was a marketing concept that led to wider distribution of the beverage.

In 1899, large-scale bottling became possible. Joseph B. Whitehead and Benjamin F. Thomas of Chattanooga, Tennessee, landed the exclusive right to bottle and sell Coca-Cola to much of the United States. The contract launched Coca-Cola’s independent bottling system that remains the foundation of the company’s soft-drink operations.

In 1919, the company was sold to a group of investors headed by Ernest Woodruff for $25 million. His son, Robert W. Woodruff, became president of the company in 1923. For more than six decades his leadership took the business to new heights.

“If you’re right about the business, that’s really the thing,” Buffett said at the Berkshire annual meeting in 1992. A classic case he said—noting the pun—is that you could have bought a share of Coca-Cola in 1919 for $40 a share. “A year later it was $19.50,” Buffett said. “Sugar prices went up and you lost half your money. Today that $40, if you had reinvested all dividends, is worth $1.8 million [more than $5 million in 1998] and that’s with depressions and wars. How much more fruitful it is to invest in a wonderful business.”

A Fortune story in December 1938 gave a glowing account of Coca-Cola, saying it was “not only one company whose 1937 net doubled 1929’s, it is a thousand bottlers, a hundred thousand fountain owners, a million dealers—united by the profit motive.” The article went on to paint an astounding picture of what had been accomplished by the Coca-Cola Company:

In July 1931, Fortune recounted the history of the Coca-Cola Co. from

its beginnings in Atlanta in 1886 and told something of its present management. Since then the performance of the company has become even more impressive and at the same time the policies of the management have become far more explicit than they were. This article will therefore attempt to give an idea of the methods whereby more than five and a half billion drinks of Coca-Cola—an average of nearly three drinks for every man, woman, and child in the entire world—were sold last year for a total price to the public of $283,000,000, the end result of a process that began by putting some $16,000,000 worth of raw materials with a minimum of labor through plants worth about $9,000,000. And it will try to show why the Coca-Cola Co., with such apparently trifling facilities, is valued by the stock market at well over half a billion dollars.



Buffett said at the Berkshire annual meeting in 1998 that Coca-Cola’s repurchase of its stock, even at 40 times earnings, is a good use of the company’s capital. “It sounds like a very high price, when you name it in terms of P/E to buy back stock at that kind of number,” Buffett said. Still, “it’s the best large business in the world. I approve of Coke’s repurchases. I’d rather have them repurchase at 15 times earnings, but it’s a very efficient way of using capital.”

Berkshire has done even better than Coke. Berkshire’s annual rise in stock price since Buffett took over is between 25% and 30%, whereas Coke’s average annual rise is less than 20%. But, as Buffett says, Coke has been through depressions and wars. Berkshire under Buffett has yet to live through a world war. Coke survived two of them.

Among Woodruff’s many contributions during those early years were the six-pack and open-top cooler, vending, dispensing equipment, displays and promotions. Under him, commercially successful Coca-Cola eventually became an institution the world over.

Coca-Cola already had gone international in the 1890s by branching out to Canada and Cuba. Coke continued to branch out in 1928, when it began its association with the Olympics. An American freighter arrived in Amsterdam carrying the United States Olympic team and 1,000 cases of Coca-Cola. In the 1920s, it penetrated Europe and even amid World War II, it opened 64 bottling plants abroad with government help.

In 1941, as the United States entered World War II, Woodruff decreed that, “every man in uniform gets a bottle of Coca-Cola for five cents, wherever he is and whatever it costs the company.”

As Mark Pendergrast, author of For God, Country & Coca-Cola, wrote in an article in The New York Times (August 15, 1993), successful companies need dedicated consumers, “people like the World War II soldier who wrote home that ‘the most important question in amphibious landings is whether the Coke machine goes ashore in the first or second wave.’ ”

The presence of Coca-Cola not only lifted troop morale, it also gave foreigners their first taste of Coke and paved the way for future bottling operations overseas. Even after the troops left, Coke stayed, establishing its own beachhead as one of the first American products widely available overseas. Naturally this increased the value of its name.

The trademark Coca-Cola was registered with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office in 1893, followed by Coke in 1945. The bottle so familiar to consumers was designed by Root Glass Co. of Terre Haute, Indiana, in 1916.

In 1982, The Coca-Cola Co. introduced Diet Coke, marking the first extension of the company’s trademark to another product. Today, Diet Coke is the nation’s top one-calorie soft drink and the third best-selling soft drink of any kind. Cherry Coke, Buffett’s particular favorite, was rolled out in 1985, a year most famous for the introduction of New Coke. That improbable move will be discussed later in the chapter. Diet Cherry Coke came out in 1986.

Through the years, other drinks have joined the powerful line of Coke products. Sprite was introduced in 1960 and has now become the world’s number one lemon-lime soft drink. In addition to Sprite, Coca-Cola’s brands include Mr. Pibb, Mello Yello, Fanta, Tab, Fresca, Powerade, Five Alive, Fruitopia, Hi-C, and Bacardi Tropical fruit mixers. Coke also owns the Minute Maid Company, the leading maker of juices and juice drinks, as well as Planet Java coffee and Simply Orange, a non-concentrate orange juice. The Houston Astros’ stadium changed its name from Enron Field to the Minute Maid Park in June 2002. Coke bought the Odwalla juice company in 2002 for $181 million. The name Odwalla comes from a character in the song “Illistrum” by Malachi Favors as performed by the Art Ensemble of Chicago.

Over the years, Coke has shed extra businesses to concentrate on being a worldwide soft drink company. In 1999, Coke came out with Dasani, a bottled water product, which was pulled from European markets in 2004 after a recall in the U.K. when Coke’s tests on the product found excessive levels of bromate. Coke has a number of bottled water products such as Ciel in Mexico and Bonaqua in Russia. Recent new products have been Vanilla Coke and Minute Maid Light Lemonade.

Coca-Cola and Groupe Danone formed a joint venture in 2002 to market and distribute several of Danone’s bottled spring-water brands, namely Dannon and Sparkletts. This venture lifted Coke’s position in the fastest-growing segment of the beverage industry.

In 2005, Coke bought out Danone’s 49% stake in the bottled-water venture in North America. Under a separate deal, Coke planned to market Danone’s premium Evian brand in North America.

In 1990, Coke opened its $15-million museum in Atlanta called the World of Coca-Cola, located next to Underground Atlanta. Since its opening, the 10 million visitors have even included Tibetan monks. In 2007, Coke opened a $96-million new World of Coca-Cola. Roughly the size of 11/2football fields, the museum expects a million paying visitors a year ($16 for an adult, $14 fo seniors, $12 for youth, toddlers free).

The World of Coca-Cola exhibits include the original patent for Coke, a 1930s soda fountain, Coke’s well-known Santa Claus ads, and a gift shop. Among the 1,200 artifacts displayed is the prototype of the famous 61/2-ounce curvy bottle. Wider than the one that was actually adopted, the bottle is one of only two in existence and worth about $10,000. Almost 200 flags that line the lobby show the markets where Coke is sold.

As you move through the exhibits, you encounter bathing beauties, sports heroes, and movie stars who have made Coke’s advertising popular through the years. Cardboard cutouts feature such celebrities as Jean Harlow and Cary Grant.

In addition to the displays of print advertising, a retrospective look at Coke’s television commercials is provided. Probably to the delight of Pepsi fans, a 1969 commercial features Ray Charles, who later pitched Pepsi’s popular ads—“You Got the Right One, Baby. Uh Huh.”

Each visitor gets a complimentary Coke served from a futuristic soda fountain. The nearby 1930s-style soda fountain was the setting for the photo of the board of directors for Coca-Cola’s 1990 Annual Report.

In 2002, Coke agreed that the proposed Georgia Aquarium could be built on company property near Centennial Olympic Park. Coke had planned to relocate its World of Coca-Cola museum to the same site. (Some surmise Buffett and Coke are planning a CokeWorld on the Moon, a Disney-like concept, which, if successful, could be exported to other orbiting cosmic bodies.)

Coca-Cola gave $10 million to help build a jazz facility at New York’s Lincoln Center. Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola, which honors jazz great John Birks “Dizzy” Gillespie, opened in 2004.

Although Coke itself has only about 10,000 employees in the U.S. and about 23,000 outside the U.S., about one million people have employment in some connection with Coke’s products worldwide.

Coca-Cola, so admired for its marketing skills, committed the ultimate marketing fiasco in 1985 when it changed its famous “7x” formula, which had been under lock and key in an Atlanta bank vault for 99 years. Over the years, the formula has been tinkered with at times but only to accommodate better forms of the original ingredients or better ways of processing them. This change was radical—a whole “new” Coke.

In the research leading up to the introduction of New Coke, one question was never asked: “How would you feel if we took your Coke away?” (David Greising, I’d Like the World to Buy a Coke: The Life and Leadership of Roberto Goizueta, p. 112) One focus group participant, however, summed things up this way: “What do you mean you’re taking away my f-cking Coca-Cola?” Others were less polite (ibid., p. 114).

Public outcry over the Black Tuesday announcement was swift and massive. The public relations disaster was immortalized by songwriter George Pickard, who recorded “Coke Was It.”

Three months later, the company brought back the original formula as Coca-Cola Classic and also kept New Coke. “Coke Are It,” said some. The fantastic episode worked in Coke’s favor as its overall market share bubbled to 40% from 37.5%. The day Coke announced it was bringing back its original formula, ABC News interrupted General Hospital with the news flash, and 18,000 gleeful Coke fans lit up Coke’s switchboard in Atlanta.

The museum display, by way of explanation, quotes then Coke president Keough: “Some critics will say Coca-Cola made a marketing mistake. Some cynics will say that we planned the whole thing. The truth is we are not that dumb and we are not that smart.” Speaking of being both smart and dumb, a director of Trust Company of Georgia once said, “Our dumbness in not being smart enough to diversify has been the smartest thing any dumb people ever did” (Frederick Allen, Secret Formula, p. 422).

It’s not unusual for Coca-Cola to come up with great marketing ideas. In 1923, it introduced a marketing revolution with the carryout six-pack container. But in 1990, its ill-conceived MagiCan promotion was ended after paper money failed to pop out of a few of the special cans.

All along, Coke has continued to, in Buffett’s words, “blanket the world.”

Throughout the 20th century, Coke has played a part in national celebrations, sports events, and global happenings. Coke has been linked to world’s fairs and national expositions since 1905.

Coca-Cola has been the official soft drink of the Super Bowl, the National Football League and its teams.

Only an alien would not have foreseen that Coke was planning a massive marketing campaign at the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta, a city where, as an Associated Press reporter once wrote, “four out of five dentists recommend their patients rinse with Coca-Cola.” Indeed, Coke’s “The World Together—Always” ads started appearing on Atlanta billboards in early 1994. Coca-Cola is the longest-running and largest corporate sponsor of the Olympics.

To assist in the event, Coca-Cola was aware that Evander Holyfield, fittingly of Atlanta, could make a knockout ad. Indeed, in November 1990, Coke and Pepsi were vying for Holyfield’s endorsement. Knockout for Coke. Holyfield signed on with Coke for a six-year agreement—an agreement billed as “The Real Thing” signing with “The Real Deal.” The agreement was probably for a real cost, too, but the amount was not disclosed.

It was no accident that Holyfield warmed up for his fight with big George Foreman April 19, 1991, wearing a red Coca-Cola Classic T-shirt, conveniently visible to fans watching the fight on cable television.

The contract called for Holyfield to appear in advertising for company products as well as making personal appearances on behalf of the company. Holyfield worked with the company on its Olympic Games activities.

Curiously, Holyfield pulled a Buffett-like investment, scoring a financial upper cut, when he bought more than a million dollars worth of Coke stock in early 1991 (Forbes, December 23, 1991). So Holyfield may have taken Buffett for one round, but there has been no conjecture about how Buffett would fare, even for a round, in the boxing ring against Holyfield. Mike Tyson himself didn’t fare well against “The Real Deal” in 1996 or 1997, although both increased their net worth enough to afford a few shares of Coke.

Many sports figures have done well with Coke investments.

Baseball’s Ty Cobb began investing in 1908, and did very well on the stock. Another investor was German boxer Max Schmeling, best known for his win and then loss to Joe Louis. After World War II, Schmeling needed money and took the winnings from his last bouts to buy the Coca-Cola franchise in Germany. He became wealthy and lived to be 99.

Other athletes have also endorsed Coke. The early 1980s saw the “Mean Joe Greene” Coke ad. As the lineman from the world champion Pittsburgh Steelers limped out of a stadium, he was trailed by a timid young fan carrying a bottle of Coca-Cola.

The boy offered his bottle to Mean Joe, who refused at first, but on second thought, downed the bottle without a pause. Refreshed, he straightened up, flashed a smile, and tossed his jersey to the youngster. It remains the highest-rated Super Bowl commercial ever. The ad was featured in the movie The Miracle.

In an effort to recapture some of that old glory, Coke tapped baseball player Cal Ripken for a Coke Classic ad in 2001.

Ripken, Wynton Marsalis, Donald Sutherland, Jon Bon Jovi, and Muhammad Ali made surprise appearances at Coke’s annual meeting in New York City in 2002.

Other celebrities who have endorsed Coke or Diet Coke are Sugar Ray Leonard, Elton John, and Ted Turner, whose CNN empire is not far from the Coke headquarters in Atlanta. Coke has ads featuring Jakob Dylan of the Wallflowers and pop singer Christina Aguilera, while Pepsi took with Britney Spears. Coke has called on Penelope Cruz, Courteney Cox Arquette, and Lance Armstrong for teen-focused ads for Coke Classic.

Perhaps no ad beats the one aired during Super Bowl XXIV when Coke premiered its “Hilltop Reunion,” the new version of one of the most famous television commercials of all time with “I’d Like to Buy the World a Coke.” In 1971, the company’s Hilltop commercial brought together young people from around the world to the Italian countryside near Rome for the expression of world unity and, incidentally, to advertise Coke. The response to the ad was so overwhelming, the company pressed 45-rpm versions of it.

To satisfy an increasing number of requests from disc jockeys, the company put out a second, slightly reworded version, “I’d Like to Teach the World to Sing.” Renditions of “I’d Like to Teach the World to Sing” propelled its way to the pop music charts, selling a million copies by the end of the year.

Many original cast members and their children were located for a new, 60-second spot in 1990. Like the original spot, the contemporary version focused on the simple but striking imagery of people from around the world joining together on a mountaintop to offer a message of hope.

Finding the (no longer) young blonde British woman who opened the 1971 spot with the lyric “I’d like to buy the world a home and furnish it with love …” is a story in itself. Her name was Linda Higson, but old files incorrectly listed her as “Hipson,” which temporarily foiled detectives, including Pinkerton’s best, who were scouring Europe for the missing woman.

When production was set to begin in Italy, she still had not been found. As a last resort, an advertisement was placed in the classified section of several international and British newspapers. (Buffett has long proclaimed the “billboard” benefits of newspapers.) The newspaper ad read this way: “Linda Hipson where are you? If you’re the Linda Hipson who was in the Coca-Cola commercial 20 years ago, please call U.S. (212)-984-2611. We’d love to hear you sing again.”

In Stockholm, a friend of Ms. Higson’s was waiting at the airport and came upon the ad in the International Herald Tribune. The similarity of the names, he figured, was enough. He called Linda in Cheshire, England. Linda—like E.T. phoning home—called McCann Erickson in New York, and Coke’s ad agency called the producers in Rome. As the central character was on her way to Italy, “Hilltop Reunion” was quickly redesigned around her appearance. Linda Higson Neary, now married with four daughters, again opened the 1990s version of the commercial, this time with daughter Kelly, who celebrated her 10th birthday on location. Coke got a great plug out of it.

The “Hilltop” and “Mean Joe Greene” ads went over far better with the public than did the ads at the turn of the century, one of which featured a wheelchair-bound grandmother getting irate after being told there was no Coke at a party.

AMERICAN IDOL

Coke advertises on the mega-hit American Idol with millions watching at one time as Randy Jackson, Jennifer Lopez, and Steven Tyler judge the potential singing stars in the search for the next Diana Ross.

Buffett has called Coke his favorite stock. Five months after he announced the Coke investment, Buffett filed a statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission for clearance to more than double his stake to up to 15% of Coke’s common stock. J. Verne McKenzie, Berkshire’s chief financial officer at the time, said, “This does not say there are plans now to buy,” noting that purchase plans would be made based on stock price and market conditions. “This gives us a flexibility to buy to match our flexibility to sell … There are no plans to sell now.”

Suggestion: Keep your eye on KO, Coke’s stock symbol. Even Buffett’s grandson, Howie, owns a few shares.

In 2000, Coke, celebrating its 50th anniversary of television advertising, said it would donate its entire collection of television commercials to the Library

of Congress. The gift of more than 20,000 ads is the largest donation of corporate advertising in the library’s 200-year history. The collection includes the 1979 “Mean Joe Greene” spot as well as scenes cut from the 1971 “Hilltop” commercial.

When Coke’s stock price was slammed by the international financial crisis of the summer of 1998, Buffett stood steady: “In given countries at given times there will be hiccups. But that doesn’t take your eye off where you want to be 10 or 15 years from now, which is to have everybody drinking nothing but Coke,” (The New York Times, November 1, 1998)

Buffett related a story about taking his grandson out for a pizza at an Omaha restaurant and discovered the place served Pepsi, not Coke.

“I mentioned it to Atlanta, and World War III broke out. They’re now serving Coke.”

On December 11, 1998, Cadbury Schweppes, the world’s No. 3 soda maker, agreed to sell most of its soft-drink businesses outside the U.S. to Coca-Cola for about $1.85 billion. However, the deal went through only partially. The agreement included Schweppes, Dr Pepper, Canada Dry, and the Crush brand in a number of countries.

After Coca-Cola’s annual meeting in 1999, Ivester and Buffett signed autographs. Buffett, when asked if he was happy with his Coke investment, said, “We’ll have it 10 years from now, 20 years from now and 30 years from now” (The Wall Street Journal, April 22, 1999).

In 2000, Buffett was sticking by Coke, but not by a deal for Coke to buy Quaker Oats in order to get its profitable Gatorade drink (invented at the University of Florida as fuel for the Gators). Because Buffett was cool toward the deal, the purchase did not go through.

“Giving up 101/2% of the Coca-Cola Company was just too much for what we would get,” Buffett told The Wall Street Journal (November 30, 2000). He estimated that Gatorade would increase Coke’s worldwide sales only less than 2% while at the same time saddling Coke with Quaker Oats’ slow-growing food business. He said if the food business was later sold, it would have created a big tax bill for Coke.

In 2002, Coke and Groupe Danone, owner of the Evian water brand, agreed for Coke to market Evian in North America. In 2003, Coke introduced a root beer float in a bottled drink called “Barq’s Floatz.”

Also in 2002, Coke said it would no longer provide earnings estimates because the practice distracts from long-term focus on the business itself. Berkshire, The Washington Post and Coke—companies where Buffett was on the board—do not provide the earnings estimates. That’s called the Buffett effect.

Coca-Cola unveiled one of the world’s biggest billboards—a 99-foot-wide neon sign in London that reacts to weather and onlookers on the ground. Located in Piccadilly Circus in the heart of London, the first message lit up saying, “Hello London” in the company’s trademark red and white colors. It’s the biggest billboard in Britain and the widest in the world, larger even than the Coca-Cola sign over Tokyo’s Ginza shopping district. The interactive sign, with modern technology, built-in cameras, and a heat-sensitive weather station, can respond to and give information about weather and react to the movements of people.

____________________

The California Public Employees Retirement System (CALPERS), the biggest U.S. pension fund, said in 2004 it planned to withhold its vote to reelect Buffett to Coca-Cola’s board. It said it perceived that Buffett and others had conflicting relationships because some Berkshire subsidiaries do business with Coke, and some directors on Coke’s audit committee allowed the company’s auditor to perform non-audit work. It was reported through a spokesman that Buffett had no comment. Herb Allen, a Coke director, wrote the following letter to the The Wall Street Journal (April 15, 2004), defending Buffett:

I was always sorry that I missed the Salem witch trials. Then, as if by magic, I just got to see a little bit of that old show.



In the original, reasonably stupid people accused reasonably smart people and gifted people of being witches and casting spells. Then they burned them. In the replay, an outfit called Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS) accused Warren Buffett of conflicts of interest and sought to remove him from the board of Coca-Cola. Up until the geniuses at ISS said it, nobody knew that Warren was really a witch. Thank God those folks are here to save those of us who actually have a share in the Coca-Cola Company.



You see, ISS doesn’t. That means they claim to be independent. It means to me that they have nothing to lose. I do. I’m a shareholder and a director of Coke. Mr. Buffett is also a little bit of an owner. His company owns about 10% of Coke. He put up his money and took a chance, something that ISS hasn’t done. In addition to putting his money where his mouth is, Mr. Buffett has always stood for shareholders’ rights. He has never before been accused of a conflict of interest.



Now, there’s always a first. Maybe ISS has a strong point that Mr. Buffett’s vote on the board can be swayed because a company that he has probably forgot that he owned has a small contract with Coke that could add up to as much as three cents of his $50 billion fortune. Maybe ISS should come to the annual meeting and tell him that to his face. Maybe they should buy some stock so that they would have that privilege. Maybe they should explain to the rest of the owners that Mr. Buffett’s departure from the board against his will would cause a decline in the stock. If it dropped five to 10 points, ISS would be responsible for a loss to the owners of more than $12 billion. Maybe they should underwrite that potential loss.



Or, maybe, they should thank Warren for the selfless service and brilliant guidance that he’s provided to a succession of managements over 20 years. They could do that and then pick up their matches and stakes and still have time for another fire. After all, they have nothing to lose.



Buffett was reelected to the board with 84% of the vote, but, in 2006, announced he would not seek reelection to the board.

In 2005, Coca-Cola bought Russia’s No. 2 juice maker, Multon & Co., for about $650 million. In 2007, Coke bought Fuze Beverage, a popular maker of vitamin-enhanced juices, teas, and energy drinks in a move to increase its lineup of noncarbonated drinks. Fuze, founded in 2001, is known for its fruit-flavored drinks that come in clunky glass bottles. Also, in 2007, Coke bought Energy Brands Inc., also known as Glaceau, for $4.1 billion in cash. Privately held Glaceau of Whitestone, New York, is a maker of Vitaminwater, a brand that helped pioneer “enhanced water” as one of the hottest categories in the beverage industry. New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady has endorsed Glaceau’s Smartwater drink.

On February 25, 2010, Coca-Cola announced it had agreed to buy the bulk of its largest bottler, Coca-Cola Enterprises.

PRIVATE E-MAIL STANDS BY COKE

An e-mail message, traveling along the information superhighway, found its way into public hands as a result of a Microsoft antitrust case, and proved Buffett to be just the same in private as he is in public.

Back in 1997, Microsoft executive Jeff Raikes asked Buffett to consider making an investment in the software company.

Buffett’s e-mail was unique in that he rarely looked at his e-mails at that time. It shows he has a sense of humor about Nebraska football and is staunch in his defense of businesses with moats. It even shows he is human, as there are a few typos:

hi, jeff;

i have so few friends who use e-mail that I only look for it once a

week or so (and usually find nothing) so excsue the slowness in responding.

I am also reasonably fast at typing but poor in the accuracy department

and fine it easier just to plow ahead rather than correct, knowing i am

always writing to those who will find a little deciphering an interesting

but easy challenge.

I am afraid you have the Husker-Husky situation correctly handicapped.

We need a miracle and it’s unlikely to happen in a stadium in which Frost

will not be able to hear a word he shouts. I hope Osborne has had him

working on hand signals all summer.

Your analysis of Microsoft, why i should invesdt in it, and why I dont

could not be more on the money. In effect the company has a royalty on a

communication stream that can do nothing but grow.It’s as if you were

getting paid for every gallon of water starting in a small stream but with

added amounts received as tributaries turned the stream into an Amazon.

The toughest question is how hard to push prices and I wrote a note to

Bill on that after our December meeting last year. Bell should have

anticipated Bill and let someone else put in the phone infrastructure while

he collected by the minute and distance (and even importance of the call if

he could have figured a wait to monitor it) in perpetuity.

Coke is now getting a royalty on swallows; probably 7.2 billion a day

if these average gulp is one ounce. I feel 100% sure (perhaps mistakenly)

that I know the odds of this continuing-again 100% as long as cola doesnt

cause cancer. Bill has an even better royalty-one which I would never bet

against but i dont feel i am capable of assessing probabilities about,

except to the extent that with a gun to my head and forced to make a guess,

i would go with it rather than against. But to calibratre whether my

certainty is 80% or 55%, say, for a 20-year run would be folly. If I had

to make such decisions, i would do my best but I prefer to structure

investing as a no-called-strikes game and just wait for the fat one/

I watched Ted Williams on cable the other day and he referred to a

book called the science of hitting which i then ran down. It has a drawing

of the batters box in it that he had referred to on the show with lots of

little squares in it, all parts of the strike zone. In his favorite spot,

the box showed .400 reflecting what he felt he would hit if he only swung

at pitches in that area. Low and outsided, but still in the strike zone, he

got down to .260. Of course, if he had two strikes on him, he was going to

swing at that .260 pitch but otherwise he waited for one in the “happy

zone” as he put it. I think the same approach makes sense in investing.

Your happy zone, because of the business experience you have had,

what you see every day, your natural talents, etc. is going to be different than

mine. I am sure, moreover that you can hit balls better in my happy zone

than i can in yours just because they are fatter pitches in general.

Lets talk more about this when we get together. Aas a beginner I

always feel that when i send off any e-mail, it is going to vanish into the

ether and i would hate to have that happen with everything I know. GO

HUSKERS—warren



1916 Coca-Cola Elaine Tray

The young woman smiling here is one of the 20th century’s most enduring advertising images.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Fountain of Youth

Buffett sips on a Cherry Coke while signing autographs at Borsheims during the Berkshire shareholders’ weekend in 2001. Buffett has been known to hand out Cokes to trick-or-treaters at Halloween.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value The Coca-Cola Company



David Greising’s I’d Like the World to Buy a Coke

(Photo by Mary Porter)



Diet Coke Drinker

Bill Gates, Buffett’s bridge buddy, has a diet Coke during Berkshire’s annual meeting weekend in 2010.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



The Good Old Days

Former Coca-Cola chairman and CEO M. Douglas Ivester, left, and the late Yale-educated Coca-Cola chairman Roberto Goizueta toast in a 1996 photo.

(Photo by Phil Skinner

The Atlanta Journal-Constitution)

The Coca-Cola Company The Story of Warren Buffett



Herb Allen

Host Herb Allen walking to the annual Allen & Co. media conference on July 23, 2003, in Sun Valley, Idaho.

(AP/Photo)



I’ll Drink to That!

Former chairman and CEO Douglas Daft, right, and and his appointed president and chief operating officer Jack Stahl enjoy a Coke together. Stahl left the company in 2001 when a new management structure was created with four business units: Americas, Asia; Europe/Africa, and New Business Ventures. Stahl became CEO of Revlon in 2002. In 2004 Daft retired.

(Photo courtesy of

The Atlanta Journal-Constitution/Ben Gray)



The Real Thing by Constance L. Hays

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value The Coca-Cola Company



The Modern Era

On May 4, 2004, E. Neville Isdell, a long-time Coca-Cola manager with deep international experience, was named to run the company as chairman of the board and chief executive officer. He was born June 8, 1943, in Downpatrick, Northern Ireland. Isdell has houses in Atlanta, Barbados, and France. Upon taking the top Coke job, Isdell said, “This is a mountain I need to climb.” Early in the Isdell era, Coke settled a five-year antitrust case with the European Union.

(AP World

Wide Photo)



Muhtar Kent Is It

Muhtar Kent, left, named president and chief operating officer of Coca-Cola in 2006, is shown here with Neville Isdell on July 13, 2006, at the annual Allen & Co. media conference in Sun Valley, Idaho.

(AP/Photo)



Muhtar Kent

Muhtar Kent became CEO July 1, 2008. Isdell remained chairman until Coke’s annual meeting in April 2009. Muhtar took on that role that year.

The Coca-Cola Company The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Coca-Cola Company

Bring Back the 1950s

Coca-Cola’s headquarters is in Atlanta, Georgia, the home of the 1996 Olympics. Above is the famous Varsity restaurant.



(Photo by

Andrew Kilpatrick)

The Coca-Cola Company The Story of Warren Buffett



Hitting the Wall at the Varsity

A wall at The Varsity has photos of its famous visitors including Bill Clinton, George Bush Sr., and former Coke executives Roberto Goizueta and Doug Ivester.

(Photo by Andrew Kilpatrick)

Of Permanent Value The Coca-Cola Company

BEN GRAHAM ON SUGAR STOCKS IN 1920

To become a raging genius about the sugar situation in 1920, see Ben Graham’s article in the Magazine of Wall Street (April 3, 1920) in which he examines five sugar stocks of the time, concluding that Cuban-American Sugar was the best one to buy.

The Coca-Cola Company The Story of Warren Buffett



For God, Country & Coca-Cola

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Ad in McCall’s Magazine in July 1920

(Reprinted with permission of The Coca-Cola Company.)



Of Permanent Value The Coca-Cola Company



Coke Is It

A 1934 Coca-Cola tray shows film stars Maureen O’Sullivan and Johnny Weissmuller of the original Tarzan movie.

(Photo by

Mary Porter)



Blanketing the World

Large Coca-Cola bottles were on display in Atlanta at the 1996 Olympics.

(Photo by

Tommy Terrell)



Secret Formula

by Frederick Allen

(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Coca-Cola Company The Story of Warren Buffett



Coke Salesman

Max Schmeling, as world heavyweight boxing champion, poses at his training camp in Long Island City, New York, on June 17, 1932.

(AP/Photo)



Evander Holyfield

(AP/Wide World Photo)



(AP/Wide World Photos)

Cal “Every Day” Ripken



“I Am the Greatest”

Boxing legend Muhammad Ali hands off the Olympic torch in front of a map showing the torch’s journey during a ceremony at Centennial Olympic Park in Atlanta on December 4, 2001. Ali was hired by Coca-Cola to become involved in community and marketing efforts to promote its products worldwide.

(AP Photo/

Gregory Smith)



Jakob Dylan

(AP/Wide World Photos)



Christina Aguilera

She is beautiful in every

single way.

(AP/Wide World Photos)

Of Permanent Value The Coca-Cola Company

The Wind

Jill Silverman of New York City has a story about Buffett, Coke and a children’s book she wrote featuring Coca-Cola. She and her husband, Josh, have been Berkshire shareholders since 1994.

In 1996, they visited some friends in Italy and discovered that their two-year-old son Marco wanted a Coke every time he saw the red and white logo. Jill wrote a short children’s book about a “wind” that brought Josh and Jill and Coca-Cola to young Marco.

Jill sent the story to Buffett who replied immediately: “I really enjoyed your book about Marco. In fact, it’s so good I’ve sent it along to Doug Ivester, the CEO of Coke. I’m enclosing a little something for Marco (not as good as a Coke, however) and maybe the ‘wind’ can deliver it to him at some appropriate time.

“Come up and say hello at one of the weekend events prior to the annual meeting. Sincerely, Warren E. Buffett.”

The gift to Marco was a note saying, “Hi Marco—keep drinking Coca-Cola. Warren E. Buffett.”

(Note: Clearly this was an early hint that Berkshire would one day go into the wind business.)



Berkshire’s

Liquid Assets

Berkshire shareholders Celia and Bob Sullivan, of Springfield, Massachusetts, at Berkshire annual meeting festivities in 1999, with their favorite beverage. Bob says, “I can’t believe I drank the whole bottle.”

(Photo courtesy of Bob Sullivan)



Third Chimpanzees

Great minds pour their Cokes alike at Borsheims on April 29, 2001.

One small Coke… one giant Leap.…



(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)

The Coca-Cola Company The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by

Sanjeev Prasad)

No Comment from the Fashion Police

Buffett wore his Polar Bear tie at Gorat’s in 2003.

Of Permanent Value The Coca-Cola Company



A Global Brand

This “Trink” Coca-Cola sign is in the Munich, Germany, train station.

(Photo by Jordan Jacobs)



Tom Brady



Coke in a Prague Restaurant

Coke is well established in Europe.

(Photo by Jordan Jacobs)

The Coca-Cola Company The Story of Warren Buffett



Coca-Cola Memorabilia

This collage of Coke memorabilia is located at a Dairy Queen in Monahans, Texas.

Coke’s Coach Paul “Bear” Bryant Commemorative bottle

“If you get knocked down, get up.” (Bear Bryant)

Bryant, who played on the 1934 Alabama team that famously beat Stanford in the Rose Bowl with Dixie Howell firing at will to ends Don Hutson and Bryant, once said: “I would have gone out there and killed myself for Alabama that day.”



(Photo by Mary Porter)



(Photos by Vickie Barnes)

Coca-Cola Slogans

1886 Drink Coca-Cola

1904 Delicious and Refreshing

1905 Coca-Cola Revives and Sustains

1906 The Great National Temperance Beverage

1917 Three Million a Day

1922 Thirst Knows No Season

1925 Six Million a Day

1927 Around the Corner from Everywhere

1929 The Pause That Refreshes

1932 Ice-Cold Sunshine

1938 The Best Friend Thirst Ever Had

1939 Coca-Cola Goes Along

1942 Wherever You Are, Whatever You Do,

Wherever You May Be, When You Think

of Refreshment, Think Ice-Cold Coca-Cola

1942 The Only Thing Like Coca-Cola is Coca-Cola

Itself. It’s the Real Thing

1948 Where There’s Coke, There’s Hospitality

1949 Coca-Cola … Along the Highway to Anywhere

1952 What You Want Is a Coke

1956 Coca-Cola … Making Good Things Taste Better

1957 Sign of Good Taste

1958 The Cold, Crisp Taste of Coke

1959 Be Really Refreshed

1963 Things Go Better with Coke

1969 It’s the Real Thing

1971 I’d Like to Buy the World a Coke

1975 Look up America

1976 Coke Adds Life

1979 Have a Coke and a Smile

1982 Coke Is It!

1985 We’ve Got a Taste for You (Coca-Cola and Coca-Cola Classic)

America’s Real Choice

1986 Catch the Wave (Coca-Cola) Red, White

and You (Coca-Cola Classic)

1989 Can’t Beat the Feeling

1990 You Can’t Beat the Real Thing

1993 Always Coca-Cola

2000 Coca-Cola Enjoy

2001 Life Tastes Good (yanked after September 11, 2001)

2003 Coca-Cola … Real

2005 Make It Real

2006 The Coke Side of Life

2009 Open Happiness

Of Permanent Value The Coca-Cola Company

Testing the Brand

Munger has a Coke during Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2001.



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



79





WRITING COKE PUTS


When brand-name stocks, including Coca-Cola, took a hammering after Philip Morris’ April 2, 1993, “Marlboro Friday” announcement that it was lowering prices by 20% for its Marlboro cigarettes to better compete with generic cigarettes, Buffett did something unusual.

In April 1993, with Coke trading in the low 40s, despite his general distaste for options, he wrote (sold) out-of-the-money put options for $1.50 apiece to buy three million Coca-Cola shares. The options expired December 17, 1993, and were exercisable until then at about $35 a share.

This meant he agreed to buy up to three million shares of Coke at about $35 a share. In effect, the bet was that the price would not fall below a specific price. If the price fell below $35 a share—which it didn’t—he would have had to buy Coke at a price that was more than the open market price.

At the Berkshire annual meeting in April 1993, Buffett confirmed the move and said he had added another two million shares in a similar move. This meant that Buffett got $7.5 million in cash up front. Consequently, had the stock gone down from the roughly $40 range, where it was then trading, to roughly $35 a share, he would have had to buy five million shares of Coke at roughly that $35 price. Since Buffett had already received $1.50 a share, his effective cost would have been about $33.50.

Had Coke fallen below that price, Buffett would have had an unrealized loss.

His only risk under this put contract was that if Coke stock dropped below $33.50 in December, he would have had to pay $35 for the stock, rather than whatever lower price Coke was selling for in the stock market at the time. If the stock were lower, he might also have bought more Coke stock anyway, because he was willing to buy Coke stock at $35 a share.

For Buffett, it was pretty much a win-win situation, a case of getting your cash and having your Coke stock, too. The options worked and Buffett pocketed the $7.5 million. Word of advice: Don’t try this at home, unless you’re an experienced investor.

“I’ve bought and sold options for 40 years,” Buffett said (The Washington Post, April 9, 2002).

By buying put options on the S&P 500 in 2002, he bet the S&P would be below 1,150 on June 3, 2002. It was. So the move worked, bringing Berkshire $60 million. Maybe it’s the beginning of the next billion.

BUFFETT’S VIEW TO EXPENSE OPTIONS

In 2002, Coke took a lead, as did The Washington Post Company, in saying they would treat stock options as an expense, a practice long advocated by Buffett. Buffett explained his stand (Associated Press, July 14, 2002): “I think corporate America has decided they better level with owners. And any form of attempting to play with the numbers or to record profits that don’t exist or revenues that don’t exist is just not going to sit well with investors.”

For years Buffett has argued that stock options are an expense just as surely as advertising or any other expenses. Since 1985, Buffett has said so in his annual reports:

1985: Once granted, the option is blind to individual performance. Because it is irrevocable and unconditional (so long as a manager stays in the company), the sluggard receives rewards from his options precisely as does the star. A managerial Rip Van Winkle, ready to doze for ten years, could not wish for a better “incentive” system.

1992: For decades, much of the business world has waged war against accounting rule makers, trying to keep the costs of stock options from being reflected in the profits of the corporations that issue them.

Typically, executives have argued that options are hard to value and that therefore their costs should be ignored.

(But) it is both silly and cynical to say that an important item of cost should not be recognized simply because it can’t be quantified with pinpoint precision.... After all, no manager or auditor knows how long a 747 is going to last, which means he also does not know what the yearly depreciation charge for the plane should be. No one knows with any certainty what a bank’s annual loan loss charge ought to be....

Does this mean that these important items of cost should be ignored simply because they can’t be quantified with absolute accuracy? Of course not.

Options are just not that difficult to value.... In fact, since I’m in the mood for offers, I’ll make one to any executive who is granted a restricted option, even though it may be out of the money: On the day of issue, Berkshire will pay him or her a substantial sum for the right to any future gain he or she realizes on the option. So if you find a CEO who says his newly-issued options have little or no value, tell him to try us out. In truth, we have far more confidence in our ability to determine an appropriate price to pay for an option than we have in our ability to determine the proper depreciation rate for our corporate jet.

1997: When Berkshire acquires an option-issuing company, we promptly substitute a cash compensation plan having an economic value equivalent to that of the previous option plan. The acquiree’s true compensation cost is thereby brought out of the closet and charged, as it should be, against earnings.

1998: Whatever the merits of options may be, their accounting treatment is outrageous. Think for a moment of that $190 million we are going to spend for advertising at GEICO this year. Suppose that instead of paying cash for our ads, we paid the media in ten-year, at-the-market Berkshire options. Would anyone then care to argue that Berkshire had not borne a cost for advertising, or should not be charged this cost on its books?

2001: Though Enron has become the symbol for shareholder abuse, there is no shortage of egregious conduct elsewhere in corporate America. One story I’ve heard illustrates the all-too-common attitude of managers toward owners: A gorgeous woman slinks up to a CEO at a party and through moist lips purrs, “I’ll do anything—anything—you want. Just tell me what you would like.” With no hesitation, he replies. “Reprice my options.”

A story in The Wall Street Journal (July 16, 2002) stated where Buffett’s above-board management style positioned him in the eys of beholders: “During the technology bubble of the 1990s, Mr. Buffett fell out of fashion because of his disinclination to invest in companies whose earnings trajectory he couldn’t foresee. But in an age when that bubble is burst, when shareholders of Enron Corp. and WorldCom Inc. feel robbed by management, and when a climate of suspicion exists even for executives of squeaky-clean corporations, the executive best-known for honest treatment of shareholders is suddenly more fashionable than ever.”

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Writing Coke Puts



80





NEW WORLD OF COCA-COLA


The new World of Coca-Cola opened in Atlanta in May 2007 and quickly became a top tourist attraction, drawing 1.2 million visitors in its first year. The first World of Coca-Cola museum was half the size of the new one and, during its 17 years of existence, drew 13 million visitors. It closed April 2007.

The new Coke monument includes a movie in the “Secret Formula 4-D Theater,” a movie ride where viewers don 3-D glasses and, as a fourth dimension, sit in vibrating seats while air and mist are sprayed on them during the show. An eccentric scientist and an assistant embark on a journey to discover Coke’s secret formula. They discover it, partially, in “universal availability.” Talk about travels in space and time!

Memorabilia abound throughout the $96-million facility. Among the more than 1,200 artifacts are the Coca-Cola couch from the TV show American Idol, a 1939 Chevrolet delivery truck from Argentina, and a Pop Culture Gallery.

Joan Crawford and Clark Gable greet visitors from a 74-year-old ad. A bottling line fills keepsake bottles before visitors’ eyes. And, of course, the museum has samples of about 70 drinks to taste test through five tasting stations arranged geographically. Naturally, a free Coke is offered, and a gift shop at the end of the tour is happy to serve you. Cost of the tour is $16 for adults and $12 for youth; children 2 years old and under are free.

One old item of memorabilia is an ad for a five-cent coke. Remember those days?

The five millionth visitor was welcomed on Martin Luther King Jr.’s birthday on 2012. She was KoEun “Emma” Lee from Duluth, Georgia. The high school senior, originally from South Korea, was showered with a balloon drop and gifts of all kinds. Since the opening, guests from six continents, more than 75 countries, and all 50 U.S. States have visited.



Tall Drink

The new World of Coca-Cola opened in Atlanta in 2007 to large crowds. A 27-foot tall Coke

bottle is lodged in a 90-foot-high glass tower.

(Photo by Andrew Kilpatrick)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Coca-Cola Painting

Hanging in the museum is a painting depicting some of the many faces of Coca-Cola through the years.



Coke for Five Cents

An ad for Drink Coca-Cola 5¢ is a nostalgic item at the new World of Coca-Cola.

(Photo by Andrew Kilpatrick)



(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

Of Permanent Value New World of Coke



81





TURNING $2 MILLION INTO $2 TRILLION


Let’s say you were to imagine that it is still 1884, and you had 15 minutes to plausibly explain how to go into the beverage business and turn $2 million into $2 trillion. You are secretly aided by your 1996 knowledge of all the progress of The Coca-Cola Company has made over the years. Even with the help of this vast foresight, can you persuasively lay out the right business plan under 1884 conditions? And, if you can’t do it well, what are the educational implications?

These are the questions Berkshire Vice Chairman Charles Munger posed on July 20, 1996, to a group that included CEOs and educators. Munger’s talk—regarded as one of the most brilliant ever given about business—was, according to Munger himself—not well received.

The title of my talk is “Practical thought about practical thought?”—with a question mark at the end.

In a long career I have assimilated various ultrasimple general notions that I find helpful in solving problems. Five of these helpful notions I will now describe. After that I will present to you a problem of extreme scale. Indeed, the problem will involve turning start-up capital of two million dollars into two trillion dollars, a sum large enough to represent a practical achievement. Then I will try to solve the problem, assisted by my helpful general notions. Following that, I will suggest that there are important educational implications in my demonstration. I will so finish because my objective is educational, my game today being a search for better methods of thought.

The first helpful notion is that it is usually best to simplify problems by deciding big “no-brainer” questions first.

The second helpful notion mimics Galileo’s conclusion that scientific reality is often revealed only by math, as if math were the language of God. Galileo’s attitude also works well in messy practical life. Without numerical fluency in the part of life most of us inhabit, you are like a one-legged man in an ass-kicking contest.

The third helpful notion is that it is not enough to think problems through forward. You must also think in reverse, much like the rustic who wanted to know where he was going to die so that he’d never go there. Indeed, many problems can’t be solved forward. And that is why the great algebraist, Carl Jacobi, so often said: “Invert, always invert.” And why Pythagoras thought in reverse to prove that the square root of two was an irrational number.

The fourth helpful notion is that the best and most practical wisdom is elementary academic wisdom. But there is one extremely important qualification: You must think in a multidisciplinary manner. You must routinely use all the easy-to-learn concepts from the freshman course in every basic subject. Where elementary ideas will serve, your problem solving must not be limited, as academia and many business bureaucracies are limited, by extreme Balkanization into disciplines and subdisciplines, with strong taboos against any venture outside assigned territory. Instead, you must do your multidisciplinary thinking in accord with Ben Franklin’s prescription in Poor Richard: “If you want it done, go. If not send.”

If, in your thinking, you rely entirely on others, often through purchase of professional advice, whenever outside a small territory of your own, you will suffer much calamity. And it is not just difficulties in complex coordination that will do you in. You will also suffer from the reality evoked by the Shavian character who said: “In the last analysis, every profession is a conspiracy against the laity.” Indeed, a Shavian character for once, understated the horrors of something Shaw didn’t like. It is not usually the conscious malfeasance of your narrow professional adviser that does you in. Instead, your troubles come from his subconscious bias. His cognition will often be impaired, for your purposes, by financial incentives different from yours. And he will also suffer from the psychological defect caught by the proverb: “To a man with a hammer, every problem looks like a nail.”

The fifth helpful notion is that really big effects, lalapalooza effects will often come only from large combinations of factors. For instance, tuberculosis was tamed, at least for a long time, only by routine combined use in each case of three different drugs. And other lalapalooza effects, like the flight of an airplane, follow a similar pattern.

It is now time to present my practical problem. And here is the problem:

It is 1884 in Atlanta. You are brought, along with 20 others like you, before a rich and eccentric Atlanta citizen named Glotz. Both you and Glotz share two characteristics: first, you routinely use in problem solving the five helpful notions, and second, you know all the elementary ideas in all the basic college courses, as taught in 1996. However, all discoverers and all examples demonstrating these elementary ideas come from dates transposed back before 1884. Glotz knows nothing about anything that has happened after 1884, and you must pretend that you share his ignorance.

Glotz offers to invest two million 1884 dollars, yet take only half the equity for a Glotz Charitable Foundation, in a new corporation organized to go into the non-alcoholic beverage business and remain in that business only, forever. Glotz wants to use a name that has somehow charmed him: Coca-Cola.

The other half of the new corporation’s equity will go to the man who most plausibly demonstrates that his business plan will cause Glotz’s foundation to be worth a trillion dollars 150 years later, in the money of the later time, 2034, despite paying out a large part of its earnings each year as a dividend. This will make the whole new corporation worth two trillion dollars, even after paying out many billions of dollars in dividends.

You have 15 minutes to make your pitch. What do you say to Glotz?

And here is my solution, my pitch to Glotz, using only the helpful notions and what every bright college sophomore should now know.

Well Glotz, the big “no-brainer” decisions that, to simplify our problem, should be made first are as follows: First, we are never going to create something worth two trillion dollars by selling some generic beverage. Therefore we must make your name “Coca-Cola,” into a strong, legally protected trademark. Second, we can get to two trillion dollars only by starting in Atlanta, then succeeding in the rest of the United States, then rapidly succeeding with our new beverage all over the world. This will require powerful elemental forces. And the right place to find such powerful elemental forces is in the subject matter of elementary academic courses.

We will next use numerical fluency to ascertain what our target implies. We can guess reasonably that by 2034 there will be about eight billion beverage consumers in the world. On average, each of these consumers will be much more prosperous in real terms than the average consumer of 1884. Each consumer is composed mostly of water and must ingest about 64 ounces of water per day. This is eight eight-ounce servings. Thus, if our new beverage and other imitative beverages in our new market, can flavor and otherwise improve only 25% of ingested water worldwide, and we can occupy half of the new world market, we can sell 2.92 trillion eight-ounce servings in 2034. And if we can then net four cents per serving, we will earn $117 billion. This will be enough, if our business is still growing at a good rate, to make it easily worth two trillion dollars.

A big question, of course, is whether four cents per serving is a reasonable profit target for 2034. And the answer is yes, if we can create a beverage with strong universal appeal. One hundred and fifty years is a long time. The dollar, like the Roman [Greek] drachma, will almost surely suffer monetary depreciation. Concurrently, real purchasing power of the average beverage consumer in the world will go way up for reasons well explained by Adam Smith. Moreover, the customer’s proclivity to inexpensively improve his experience while ingesting water will go up considerably faster. Meanwhile, as technology improves, the cost of our simple product, in units of constant purchasing power, will go down. All four factors will work together in favor of our four-cents-per-serving profit target. Worldwide beverage-purchasing power in dollars will probably multiply by a factor of at least 40 over 150 years. Thinking in reverse, this makes our profit-per-serving target, under 1884 conditions, a mere one fortieth of four cents or one tenth of a cent per serving. This is an easy-to-exceed target as we start out if our new product has universal appeal.

That decided, we must next solve the problem of invention to create universal appeal. There are two intertwined challenges of large scale: First, over 150 years we must cause a new-beverage market to assimilate about one fourth of the world’s water ingestion. Second, we must so operate that half the new market is ours, while all our competitors combined are left to share the remaining half. These results are lalapalooza results. Accordingly, we must attack our problem by causing every favorable factor we can think of to work for us. Plainly, only a powerful combination of many factors is likely to cause the lalapalooza consequences we desire. Fortunately, the solution to these intertwined problems turns out to be fairly easy, if one has stayed awake in all the freshman courses.

Let us start by exploring the consequences of our simplifying “no-brainer” decision that we must rely on a strong trademark. This conclusion automatically leads to an understanding of the essence of our business in proper elementary academic terms. We can see from the introductory course in psychology that, in essence, we are going into the business of creating and maintaining conditioned reflexes. The “Coca-Cola” trade name and trade dress will act as the stimuli, and the purchase and ingestion of our beverage will be the desired responses.

And how does one create and maintain conditioned reflexes? Well, the psychology text gives two answers: (1) by operant conditioning, using rewards, and (2) by classical conditioning, often called Pavlovian conditioning to honor the great Russian scientist. And, since we want a lalapalooza result, we must use both conditioning techniques—and all we can invent to enhance effects from each technique.

The operant-conditioning part of our problem is easy to solve, we need only (1) maximize rewards of our beverage’s ingestion, and (2) minimize possibilities that desired reflexes, once created by us, will be extinguished through operant conditioning by proprietors of competing products.

For operant conditioning rewards, there are only a few categories we will find practical:

(1) Food value in calories or other inputs;

(2) Flavor, texture, and aroma acting as stimuli to consumption under neural pre-programming of man through Darwinian natural selection;

(3) Stimulus, as by sugar or caffeine;

(4) Cooling effect when man is too hot or warming effect when man is too cool.

Wanting a lalapalooza result, we will naturally include rewards in all the categories.

To start out, it is easy to decide to design our beverage for consumption cold. There is much less opportunity, without ingesting beverage, to counteract excessive heat, compared with excessive cold. Moreover, with excessive heat, much liquid must be consumed, and the reverse is not true. It is also easy to decide to include both sugar and caffeine. After all, tea, coffee and lemonade are already widely consumed. And it is also clear that we must be fanatic about characteristics that will maximize human pleasure while taking in the sugared water and caffeine we will provide. And, to counteract possibilities that desired operant-conditioned reflexes, once created by us, will be extinguished by operant conditioning employing competing products, there is also an obvious answer: we will make it a permanent obsession in our company that our beverage, as fast as practicable, will at all times be available everywhere throughout the world. After all, a competing product, if it is never tried, can’t act as a reward creating a conflicting habit. Every spouse knows that.

We must next consider the Pavlovian conditioning we must also use. In Pavlovian conditioning powerful effects come from mere association. The neural system of Pavlov’s dog causes it to salivate at the bell it can’t eat. And the brain of man yearns for the type of beverage held by the pretty woman he can’t have. And so, Glotz, we must use every sort of decent, honorable Pavlovian conditioning we can think of. For as long as we are in business, our beverage and its promotion must be associated in consumer minds with all other things consumers like or admire.

Such extensive Pavlovian conditioning will cost a lot of money, particularly for advertising. We will spend big money as far ahead as we can imagine. But the money will be effectively spent. As we expand fast in our new-beverage market, our competitors will face gross disadvantages of scale in buying advertising to create the Pavlovian conditioning they need. And this outcome, along with other volume-creates-power effects, should help us gain and hold at least 50% of the new market everywhere. Indeed, provided buyers are scattered, our higher volumes will give us very extreme cost advantages in distribution.

Moreover, Pavlovian effects from mere association will help us choose the flavor, texture and color of our new beverage. Considering Pavlovian effects, we will have wisely chosen the exotic and expensive-sounding name “Coca-Cola,” instead of a pedestrian name like “Glotz’s Sugared, Caffeinated Water.” For similar Pavlovian reasons, it will be wise to have our beverage look pretty much like wine, instead of sugared water. And so we will artificially color our beverage if it comes out clear. And we will carbonate our water, making our product seem like champagne, or some other expensive beverage, while also making its flavor better and imitation harder to arrange for competing products. And, because we are going to attach so many expensive psychological effects to our flavor, that flavor should be different from any other standard flavor so that we maximize difficulties for competitors and give no accidental same-flavor benefit to any existing product.

What else, from the psychology textbook, can help our new business? Well, there is that powerful “monkey-see, monkey-do” aspect of human nature that psychologists often call “social proof.” Social proof, imitative consumption triggered by mere sight of consumption, will not only help induce trial of our beverage, it will also bolster perceived rewards from consumption. We will always take this powerful social-proof factor into account as we design advertising and sales promotion and as we forego present profit to enhance present and future consumption. More than with most other products, increased selling power will come from each increase in sales.

We can now see, Glotz, that by combining (1) much Pavlovian conditioning, (2) powerful social-proof effects, and (3) a wonderful-tasting, energy-giving, stimulating and desirably-cold beverage that causes much operant conditioning, we are going to get sales that speed up for a long time by reason of the huge mixture of factors we have chosen. Therefore, we are going to start something like an autocatalytic reaction in chemistry, precisely the sort of multi-factor-triggered lalapalooza effect we need.

The logistics and the distribution strategy of our business will be simple. There are only two practical ways to sell our beverage: (1) as syrup to fountains and restaurants, and (2) as a complete carbonated-water product in containers. Wanting lalapalooza results, we will naturally do it both ways. And, wanting huge Pavlovian and social-proof effects, we will always spend on advertising and sales promotion, per serving, over 40% of the fountain price for syrup needed to make the serving.

A few syrup-making plants can serve the world. However, to avoid needless shipping of mere space and water, we will need many bottling plants scattered over the world. We will maximize profits if (like early General Electric with light bulbs) we always set the first-sale price, either (1) for fountain syrup, or (2) for any container of our complete product. The best way to arrange this desirable profit-maximizing control is to make any independent bottler we need a subcontractor, not a vendee of syrup, and certainly not a vendee of syrup under a perpetual franchise specifying a syrup price frozen forever at its starting level.

Being unable to get a patent or copyright on our superimportant flavor, we will work obsessively to keep our formula secret. We will make a big hoopla over our secrecy, which will enhance Pavlovian effects. Eventually food-chemical engineering will advance so that our flavor can be copied with near exactitude. But, by that time, we will be so far ahead, with such strong trademarks and complete, “always available” worldwide distribution, that good flavor copying won’t bar us from our objective. Moreover, the advances in food chemistry that help competitors will almost surely be accompanied by technological advances that will help us, including refrigeration, better transportation, and, for dieters, ability to insert a sugar taste without inserting sugar’s calories. Also, there will be related beverage opportunities we will seize.

This brings us to a final reality check for our business plan. We will, once more, think in reverse like Jacobi. What must we avoid because we don’t want it? Four answers seem clear:

First we must avoid the protective, cloying, stop-consumption effects of aftertaste that are a standard part of physiology, developed through Darwinian evolution to enhance the replication of man’s genes by forcing a generally helpful moderation on the gene carrier. To serve our ends, on hot days a consumer must be able to drink container after container of our product with almost no impediment from aftertaste. We will find a wonderful no-aftertaste flavor by trial and error and will thereby solve this problem.

Second, we must avoid ever losing even half of our powerful trademarked name. It will cost us mightily, for instance, if our sloppiness should ever allow sale of any other kind of “Cola,” for instance, a “Peppy Cola”. If there is ever a “Peppy Cola,” we will be the proprietor of the brand.

Third, with so much success coming, we must avoid bad effects from envy, given a prominent place in the Ten Commandments because envy is so much a part of human nature. The best way to avoid envy, recognized by Aristotle, is to plainly deserve the success we get. We will be fanatic about product quality, quality of product presentation, and reasonableness of prices, considering the harmless pleasure we will provide.

Fourth, after our trademarked flavor dominates our new market, we must avoid making any huge and sudden change in our flavor. Even if a new flavor performs better in blind taste tests, changing to that new flavor would be a foolish thing to do. This follows because, under such conditions, our old flavor will be so entrenched in consumer preference by psychological effects that a big flavor change would do us little good, and it would do immense harm by triggering in consumers the standard deprival super-reaction syndrome that makes “take-aways” so hard to get in any type of negotiation and helps make most gamblers so irrational. Moreover, such a large flavor change would allow a competitor, by copying our old flavor, to take advantage of both (1) the hostile consumer super-reaction to deprival and (2) the huge love of our original flavor created by our previous work.

Well, that is my solution to my own problem of turning two million dollars into two trillion dollars, even after paying out billions of dollars in dividends. I think it would have won with Glotz in 1884 and should convince you more than you expected at the outset. After all, the correct strategies are clear after being related to elementary academic ideas brought into play by the helpful notions.

How consistent is my solution with the history of the real Coca-Cola Company? Well, as late as 1896, 12 years after the fictional Glotz was to start vigorously with two million 1884 dollars, the real Coca-Cola Company had a net worth under $150 thousand and earnings of about zero. And thereafter the real Coca-Cola Company did lose half its trademark and did grant perpetual bottling franchises at fixed syrup prices. And some of the bottlers were not very effective and couldn’t easily be changed. And the real Coca-Cola Company, with this system, did lose much pricing control that would have improved results, had it been retained. Yet, even so, the real Coca-Cola Company followed so much of the plan given to Glotz that it is now worth about $125 billion and will have to increase its value at only 8% per year until 2034 to reach a value of two trillion dollars. And it can hit an annual physical volume target of 2.92 trillion servings if servings grow until 2034 at only 6% per year, a result consistent with much past experience and leaving plenty of plain-water ingestion for Coca-Cola to replace after 2034. So I would guess that the fictional Glotz, starting earlier and stronger and avoiding the worst errors, would have easily hit his two trillion dollar target. And he would have done it well before 2034.

This brings me, at last, to the main purpose of my talk. Large educational implications exist, if my answer to Glotz’s problem is roughly right and you make one more assumption I believe true—that most Ph.D. educators, even psychology professors and business school deans, would not have given the same simple answer I did. And, if I am right in these two ways, this would indicate that our civilization now keeps in place a great many educators who can’t satisfactorily explain Coca-Cola, even in retrospect, and even after watching it closely all their lives. This is not a satisfactory state of affairs.

Moreover—and this result is even more extreme—the brilliant and effective executives who, surrounded by business school and law school graduates, have run The Coca-Cola Company with glorious success in recent years, also did not understand elementary psychology well enough to predict and avoid the “New Coke” fiasco, which dangerously threatened their company. That people so talented, surrounded by professional advisers from the best universities, should thus demonstrate a huge gap in their education is also not a satisfactory state of affairs.

Such extreme ignorance, in both the high reaches of academia and the high reaches of business, is a lalapalooza effect of a negative sort, demonstrating grave defects in academia. Because the bad effect is lalapalooza, we should expect to find intertwined, multiple academic causes. I suspect at least two such causes.

First, academic psychology, while it is admirable and useful as a list of ingenious and important experiments, lacks interdisciplinary synthesis. In particular, not enough attention is given to lalapalooza effects coming from combinations of psychological tendencies. This creates a situation reminding one of a rustic teacher who tries to simplify school work by rounding Pi to an even three. And it violates Einstein’s injunction that “everything should be made as simple as possible—but no more simple.” In general, psychology is laid out and misunderstood as electromagnetism would now be misunderstood if physics had produced many brilliant experimenters like Michael Faraday and no grand synthesizer like James Clerk Maxwell.

And, second, there is a truly horrible lack of synthesis blending psychology and other academic subjects. But only an interdisciplinary approach will correctly deal with reality—in academia as with The Coca-Cola Company.

In short, academic psychology departments are immensely more important and useful than other academic departments think. And, at the same time, the psychology departments are worse than most of their inhabitants think. It is, of course, normal for self appraisal to be more positive than external appraisal. Indeed, a problem of this sort may have given you your speaker today. But the size of this psychology-department gap is preposterously large. In fact, the gap is so enormous that one very eminent university (Chicago) at one time simply abolished its psychology department, perhaps with an undisclosed hope of later creating a better version.

In such a state of affairs, many years ago and with much that was plainly wrong already present, the “New Coke” fiasco occurred, wherein Coke’s executives came to the brink of destroying the most valuable trademark in the world. The academically correct reaction to this immense and well-publicized fiasco would have been the sort of reaction Boeing would display if three of its new airplanes crashed in a single week. After all, product integrity is involved in each case, and the plain educational failure was immense.

But almost no such responsible Boeing-like reaction has come from academia. Instead academia, by and large, continues in its Balkanized way to tolerate psychology professors who mis-teach psychology, non-psychology professors who fail to consider psychological effects obviously crucial in their subject matter, and professional schools that carefully preserve psychological ignorance coming in with each entering class and are proud of their inadequacies.

Even though this regrettable blindness and lassitude is now the normal academic result, are there exceptions providing hope that disgraceful shortcomings of the educational establishment will eventually be corrected? Here, my answer is a very optimistic yes.

For instance, consider the recent behavior of the economics department of the University of Chicago. Over the last decade, this department has enjoyed a near monopoly of the Nobel prizes in economics, largely by getting good predictions out of “free market” models postulating man’s rationality. And what is the reaction of this department, after winning so steadily with its rational-man approach?

Well, it just invited into a precious slot amid its company of greats a wise and witty Cornell economist, Richard Thaler. And it has done this because Thaler pokes fun at much that is holy at the University of Chicago. Indeed, Thaler believes, with me, that people are often massively irrational in ways, predicted by psychology, that must be taken into account in microeconomics.

In so behaving, the University of Chicago is imitating Darwin, who spent much of his long life thinking in reverse as he tried to disprove his own hardest-won and best-loved ideas. And so long as there are parts of academia that keep alive its best values by thinking in reverse like Darwin, we can confidently expect that silly educational practices will eventually be replaced by better ones, exactly as Carl Jacobi might have predicted.

This will happen because the Darwinian approach, with its habitual objectivity taken on as a sort of hair shirt, is a mighty approach. Indeed, no less a figure than Einstein said that one of the four causes of his achievement was “self criticism,” ranking right up there alongside curiosity, concentration, and perseverance.

And, to further appreciate the power of self criticism, consider where lies the grave of that very ungifted undergraduate, Charles Darwin. It is in Westminster Abbey, right next to the headstone of Isaac Newton, perhaps the most gifted student who ever lived, honored on that headstone in eight Latin words constituting the most eloquent praise in all graveyard print: Hic depositum est, quod mortale fruit Isaaci Newtoni—“Here lies that which was mortal of Isaac Newton.”

A civilization that so places a dead Darwin will eventually develop and integrate psychology in a proper and practical fashion that greatly increases skills of all sorts. But all of us who have dollops of power and see the light should help the process along. There is a lot at stake. If, in many high places, a universal product as successful as Coca-Cola is not properly understood and explained, it can’t bode well for our competency in dealing with much else that is important.

Of course, those of you with 50% of net worth in Coca-Cola stock, occurring because you tried to invest 10% after thinking like I did in making my pitch to Glotz, can ignore my message about psychology as too elementary for useful transmission to you. But I am not so sure that this reaction is wise for the rest of you. The situation reminds me of the old-time Warner & Swasey ad that was a favorite of mine: “The company that needs a new machine tool, and hasn’t bought it, is already paying for it.”

(With permission of Charles Munger)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Turning $2 Million into $2 Trillion

Turning $2 Million into $2 Trillion The Story of Warren Buffett



Plato

Munger drinks to Coke’s future.

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

Of Permanent Value Turning $2 Million into $2 Trillion

Turning $2 Million into $2 Trillion The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Turning $2 Million into $2 Trillion



82





MIDNIGHT AT MCDONALD’S


At just about midnight between October 1 and 2, 1995, Warren Buffett walked into a McDonald’s in Hong Kong and placed his order: Big Mac, fries, and a Coke.

“He was walking back from the counter when I saw him,” said Mark Langdon of Omaha. “I had seen him before. I jumped up and basically used the Omaha connection to introduce myself. He stopped and chatted and then set his tray down at my table. He looked around and said, ‘I have some friends here and I don’t want to miss them.’

“My brother and I had heard that Buffett had been in China with [Microsoft Chairman] Bill Gates,” Langdon said. “Then Bill Gates walked up, and Warren introduced Gates to me and my brother Fred. I had to scrape my jaw off the floor.

“Buffett said to Fred and me, ‘This is Bill Gates,’ like you have to do that,” Langdon said of the introduction.

Then Gates’s wife, Melinda, and Gates’s father, Bill Gates, Sr., came over to the table. “It was crazy,” said Langdon, then a 33-year-old application analyst with Applied Communications Inc. in Omaha, a company which writes software for the transfer of electronic funds.

Buffett explained to Gates that it was companies like Applied Communications that kept Omaha’s jobless rate so low.

“The six of us sat at the table for about 20 minutes,” Langdon said.

The brothers met in China as Mark was returning from Jakarta and Fred, 35, was returning from Omaha and headed to Kobe, Japan where he is an engineer with Procter & Gamble.

“We had been sightseeing all day and came back to the hotel. We watched TV and fell asleep and woke up hungry so we went to McDonald’s,” Langdon said.

Buffett’s party was preparing to leave for home the next day after their trip through China, and Buffett explained they had come to McDonald’s “to get some familiar food.”

As the six ate, Buffett made a point of the familiarity and consistency of McDonald’s servings worldwide. Langdon felt that Buffett was, to some extent, analyzing the meal as well as eating it.

“He picked up the bun a little and looked at the bun and the meat and said, ‘The bun is the same [whether in the U.S. or Asia], the meat is the same and the fries are the same. And the price is about the same,’ ” Langdon reported.

Buffett said his group also ate at McDonald’s in Beijing during their trip to China.

“I knew he was a Coke junkie, so I asked him, ‘What do you think of the Coke?’ Buffett joked, “It might be a slightly richer mixture for my taste, but it’ll do.’”

“I was talking to him like any other person. It was hard to believe these were the two richest people in the world,” Langdon said.

Buffett, he said, was dressed in a white polo shirt bearing a small insignia: “Nebraska 1994 National Champions.” Gates was in a button-down shirt. Both wore casual pants. “I knew Buffett was this way [casual], but I didn’t know Gates was. He was kind of the same way.”

Langdon was struck that they had no apparant bodyguards and that Buffett and Gates were out at midnight and that nobody recognized them.

“I saw just one gentleman turn and look a couple of times.” said Langdon, adding that most people in McDonald’s that night were Asian.

The Buffett group was staying at the famous old Peninsula Hotel but never said how they had traveled from the hotel to McDonald’s. “I saw no evidence of a driver,” Langdon said.

Gates and Fred Langdon talked about the Internet, but the main thing Mark Langdon recalled about Gates was that he ate two Big Macs. He devoured his and then another one that his wife brought over. “He inhaled them,” Langdon said.

Buffett paid for the meals with McDonald’s gift certificates and gave the Langdon brothers certificates that were left over. Buffett said, “They gave us these,” without saying exactly who gave them to him. After Buffett handed over the gift certificates, he cracked, “You don’t have any frequent flier coupons, do you?”

Langdon said he had heard the rumors that Buffett was buying McDonald’s stock but could not confirm from the late night meal with him. “My brother and I did come away with the impression, just vibes, that Buffett and Gates both were interested in McDonald’s. The two of them were talking about McDonald’s,” Langdon recalled.

Buffett built a stake of more than 30 million shares in McDonald’s in the mid-’90s, but sold the stake in 1997 and 1998.

In 2002, a whopper of a rumor surfaced that Buffett might bid for Diageo’s Burger King which was on the block. In an ad, Phil Sokolof, a wealthy neighbor of Buffett’s, urged Buffett not to buy Burger King for health reasons. In a rare denial, Buffett said he had no plans to buy Burger King, adding, “I stop there occasionally for a hamburger and that’s as close as I’ve gotten.”

One ivy leaguer read the headline and concluded that Burger King was now going to have a buffet.

Milk-shake mixer salesman Ray Kroc, made a deal with his best customer, the McDonald brothers in Southern California, to franchise their popular hamburger business offering french fries, soft drinks, milk-shakes, and 15-cent hamburgers. McCapitalism caught on as the car culture of the country got moving. Kroc, who actually once played piano in a bordello, transformed the Golden Arches into a worldwide symbol.

BREAKING NEWS FACTOID

In a 2009 nod to capitalism, a line formed for the opening of the first McDonald’s in Iraq. The line reportedly extended five miles.

The Story of Warren Buffett



You Deserve a Break at Midnight

Buffett and Gates had a late night dinner at this McDonald’s near the Peninsula Hotel in Hong Kong.

(Photo by Terri Maxwell)



“He Was Walking Back

from the Counter.”

Mark Langdon of Omaha had a late night dinner at McDonald’s with Buffett and Gates.

(Photo by

LaVerne Ramsey)

Of Permanent Value Midnight at McDonald’s

McDonald’s Behind the Arches

by John F. Love



(Photo by Mary Porter)



83





THE WALT DISNEY COMPANY


“There is more treasure in books than in all the pirate’s loot on Treasure Island and at the bottom of the Spanish Main… and best of all, you can enjoy these riches every day of your life.” (Walt Disney)

After holding more than 51 million shares of the Walt Disney Co., worth more than $1.5 billion at the end of 1998, Berkshire showed no shares of Disney at the end of 1999. This meant it apparently sold down below its $750 million cutoff for listing its large holdings. It turned out Berkshire sold most of its Disney in late 1999 and early 2000. By early 2001, Berkshire had sold all its Disney shares.

After the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the Bass family (Disney’s largest shareholder) unloaded 135 million Disney shares; so Disney, in turn, tried to interest Buffett in a big stake. Disney Chairman Michael Eisner said Buffett was torn because the price was the lowest in years but declined to invest because he was dealing with the effect of the terrorist attacks on Berkshire’s insurance interests (The Wall Street Journal, October 5, 2001).

THE DISNEY/CAP CITIES MERGER

“Walt Disney, Capital Cities agree to merger”—Dow Jones news wire, 7:56 a.m., July 31, 1995. The jokes started flying immediately: “I knew Cap Cities was a Mickey Mouse operation” … “My new boss is Mickey Mouse.” Headlines read, “The Mouse that Roared” or “The Mouse that Scored.” Underneath the jokes, the largest merger of entertainment and media companies in history was being launched.

It was a big day for everyone. Disney Chairman Michael Eisner, Cap Cities/ABC Chairman Tom Murphy, and Buffett held a press conference to talk about the $19 billion merger being paid for in Disney stock and cash. By the way, Murphy has said a key to Eisner’s success is that Eisner is “a boy in a man’s body.”

The deal got cracking at investment banker Allen & Co.’s annual summer getaway for media executives in Sun Valley, Idaho. Eisner and Murphy had talked before about a possible deal; but Murphy wanted Mouse House stock, and Eisner wanted to offer cash. Soil for such deals had been watered by expectations that Congress would remove some restrictions on TV ownership. It may sound “goofy,” but here’s how the megadeal occurred: Eisner, bumping into Buffett on his way to a golf game with Murphy, asked Buffett if Cap Cities was for sale. Buffett said, “I think so, let’s ask Murphy.”

Here’s Eisner’s version of the event from his book, Work in Progress (p. 363–364):

I was still digesting the conversation [with Larry Tisch about the possibility of buying CBS] when I looked up and saw Warren Buffett coming toward me. He, too, stopped to tell me how impressed he had been by our presentation.



“The funniest thing just happened,” I told him. “I ran into Larry Tisch and we ended up talking about our buying CBS. Unless, of course, you want to sell us Cap Cities for cash.” I was hoping that the possibility of Disney’s buying CBS might make Buffett, the largest shareholder in Cap Cities, more eager to sell the company.



“Sounds good to me,” he said without hesitation, “Why don’t we go talk to Tom about it?” He was referring to Tom Murphy.



“I don’t know where he is,” I said.



“I’m just going to meet him,” Buffett told me. “We have a date to play golf with Bill Gates. Why don’t you walk over with me?”



When we caught up with Murphy, Buffett made the pitch for me. “Michael wants to pay cash for Cap Cities,” he said. “I think he’s right. Any time we ever bought anything at Berkshire that worked out, it was in cash. What do you think, Tom?”



Murphy seemed slightly taken aback. Just three months had passed since our last negotiation ended unsuccessfully. “I’d have to think about it,” he said. We talked some more about the deal and I slipped in, as casually as possible, the story about what had just occurred with Tisch. Murphy knew that we were seriously interested in a network, and that CBS was in play. Whatever doubts he still had about selling Cap Cities, Disney remained one of the few potential buyers with whom he felt comfortable.



Eisner later told Murphy that both companies were running on all cylinders. The two men came to terms in a few weeks after Murphy consulted with Buffett and Eisner consulted with Sid Bass, a big Disney shareholder. A contract was drawn up over a three-day period.

Investment bankers had only a slight hand in the merger. The deal was presented to the Cap Cities board on July 30th. It was approved the next morning, and the merger was announced.

The deal was for Disney to buy Cap Cities (now ABC Inc. in the Mouse House empire) for about $127 a share in cash and stock. ABC Inc. is headed by Robert Iger, now Disney’s CEO and married to broadcaster Willow Bay.

Murphy joined the Disney board; and Buffett was back in an investment he had touched on in the 1960s, having bought 5% of Disney in 1966, although he sold the stake in 1967 for $6 million, scoring a nice gain. It was a huge mistake.

Buffett has said: “In the 1960s, the entire Walt Disney Company was selling for only $80 million. At that time, they put $17 million into their pirate ride. So the company was selling at only five times the rides. We took a stake for $5 million and sold it a year later for $6 million. Had we kept it, that $5 million would have been worth over a billion dollars in the mid-1990s.”

The Disney/Cap Cities merger was the second-largest ever at that point, after only the takeover of RJR Nabisco. It created the largest entertainment and media company in the world at the time; but in the late 1990s, Time Warner surpassed Disney as Disney slumped. Two weeks after the merger announcement, Michael Ovitz of Creative Artists Agency was named Disney’s president. He lasted only 14 months in the job.

Disney had sales of more than $10 billion a year reaped from its theme parks, movies, music, books, stores, sports, and other properties such as Disney Interactive, Disney Cruise Line, and GO.com. Cap Cities brought in more than $6 billion a year from its ABC television network, 225 affiliate stations, and a range of other media properties such as the globe-spanning ESPN sports channel which is worth more than $10 billion. “An estimated 80 million people a day are touched in some way by Disney” (Barron’s, July 26, 1999). Launched in 1979, ESPN has grown into a valuable asset to which 88 million households subscribe and which had $12 billion in subscriber-fee sales and $688 million in ad sales in 2003.

How did it come to pass that one of the great business mergers in all history ran through a fellow from Omaha, a man still widely unknown?

Michael Eisner asked Buffett about whether such a deal was possible and probably figured the deal was done when Buffett again replied, “Sure, but you should go find Tom [Murphy].”

Michael found Tom who got with Warren and the triumvirate marched off into the “Wonderful World of Disney.”

Later at a celebration held in Phoenix, Arizona, to celebrate the merger, Buffett brought hundreds of Cap Cities and Disney executives to their feet when he and his wife appeared on stage in full costume—as Mickey and Minnie Mouse.

Buffett said: “I thought I would prepare a little by checking out the Academy Awards to see how they did it. I would at this time like to thank my hairstylist, my wardrobe consultant and, of course, my personal trainer.”

While Wall Street waited to hear whether Buffett would take Disney stock or cash as a result of the merger, Buffett donned mouse ears and sang:

Shall we go for stock or cash?



Paper money turns to trash.



Stocks, however, sometimes crash.



Shall we go for stock or cash?



Cosmic quandary and not a trail of breadcrumbs to be found.

His magical decision was made known on March 7, 1996. Buffett walked into Harris Trust in New York on March 5th, and handed a trust officer two envelopes.

“Envelope No. 1 was stock worth, gulp, $2.5 billion: Berkshire’s 20 million shares of Capital Cities/ABC, being delivered to that company’s purchaser, Walt Disney Co. In envelope No. 2, sealed and marked, ‘Do not open until 4:30 p.m. on March 7,’ were Buffett’s wishes—kept secret from even the management of Disney and Cap Cities” (Carol Loomis, Fortune, April 1, 1996).

Buffett asked for as much stock as possible. With the stock he received and with some additional purchases in the open market, Buffett wound up with about 31/2% of Disney’s shares. Suddenly he was a large shareholder in another of the greatest brand-name companies on earth.

When Buffett gave a talk to Harvard Business School on March 21, 1996, he was asked why he liked Disney stock.

He replied, “The mouse doesn’t have an agent.”

At Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1996, Buffett continued, “The mouse is yours. He’s not in there renegotiating every day or every month saying: ‘Look how much more famous I’ve become in China.’ If you own the mouse, you own the mouse.”

CAPITAL CITIES/ABC

One day in 1985, Buffett was in Washington, when he got an urgent call from his office telling him to get in touch with his friend Cap Cities Communications Chairman Tom Murphy. Murphy said he needed advice about financing a $3.5 billion purchase of giant American Broadcasting Companies Inc. At the time, the Cap Cities acquisition of ABC-TV, which was announced on March 18, 1985, was the largest media purchase in history.

That night, Peter Jennings began World News Tonight with, “To paraphrase Pogo, we have seen the news and it is us” (Marc Gunther, The House That Roone Built, p. 214).

Neither Murphy nor Buffett thought at first that Buffett would be personally involved in the acquisition, but the Wizard of Omaha quickly became a key figure. His role in the huge business combination probably helped Wall Street give its nod to the deal as the stock prices of both companies shot up.

Without putting pen to paper, Buffett agreed to invest $517.5 million in cash to buy three million shares of Cap Cities at $172.50 a share. (That’s before a 10-for-1 stock split in 1994.) This raised the money that contributed to the merger which spawned Cap Cities/ABC Inc., in January 1986.

Buffett’s part of the deal wrapped up one mid-afternoon in March 1985. “It took about 30 seconds to work. It’s all in a page or two,” Buffett said of his investment (Regardie’s, February 1986).

Two hours later, Buffett was engrossed in a six-hour bridge game with three New York friends, putting the deal out of his mind.

“I don’t think about anything else when I play bridge,” he told Omaha–World Herald’s Robert Dorr.

The call from Murphy came as a result of a long friendship with Buffett. Buffett has always had high regard for Murphy, whom he calls “Murph,” and says of him, “I think he is the top manager in the U.S.” (Fortune, April 15, 1985). Murphy has returned the compliment by saying of Buffett, “If I were around him all the time, I’d have a huge inferiority complex. … He’s one of the greatest friends. He will try and do anything he can to help you. Without him, I wouldn’t have been able to buy ABC” (USA Today, September 18, 1991).

In November 1986, Buffett told Channels magazine West Coast editor Patricia Bauer, “I love being associated with Murph. I literally do not work with anyone I don’t like. I’m fortunate to be able to spend the rest of my life working with people that I like and admire. And here’s Murph up at the top of that list with a terribly interesting business.”

By getting involved in the Cap Cities/ABC deal, did Buffett plan to shape opinion or tell ABC what programs to air? “No,” he told Bauer, “I’m not the right guy to ask about those things.” He said it again at the Berkshire annual meeting in 1991: “I’m a director of Cap Cities/ABC, but they don’t ask me for my suggestions on shows. That’s not my end of the game.”

At another Berkshire annual meeting (1987), Buffett was asked if he thought there was too much sex on television. “I don’t see anything wrong with sex on television, but there ought to be a few shows where the gal says no.”

Buffett met Murphy in the late 1960s when a former Harvard Business School classmate of Murphy’s seated them together at a lunch in New York. Murphy was so taken with Buffett that he invited him to be on the board of Cap Cities. Buffett declined but the two remained fast friends.

ABC’s magisterial chairman Leonard Goldenson founded ABC in 1953, and ran it until 1986 when at 79, he decided that Murphy and Murphy’s number two man, Daniel Burke who died in 2011, would be the right men to run his company. Burke was a Harvard MBA via the University of Vermont and military service. He also owned the Portland, Maine Sea Dogs minor league baseball team. In graduate school Murphy was a roommate of Daniel’s other brother, James Burke, who was later chairman of Johnson & Johnson.

Murphy and Burke were known as cost-cutters. An oft-repeated story tells that at the old Cap Cities when an Albany station needed repainting, Murphy had only the sides facing the main road spruced up (Marc Gunther, The House that Roone Built, p. 214).

Buffett once said of Cap Cities: “They had a little bankrupt UHF station in Albany. They ran it out of a home for retired nuns. And it was very appropriate because they had to pray every day.”

Goldenson’s autobiography, Beating the Odds, appeared in 1991. Buffett wrote a foreword saying, “Business management can be viewed as a three-act play—the dream, the execution, and the passing of the baton. Leonard Goldenson will be remembered as a master of all three.”

Buffett told of a phone call from Murphy who said, “Pal, you’re not going to believe this. I’ve just bought ABC. You’ve got to come and tell me how I’m going to pay for it.” Buffett did just that, telling Murphy he needed “a 900-pound gorilla” investor to keep raiders at bay, and then kicked in $517 million.

A problem still loomed. An FCC “cross-ownership” rule existed that banned a company from owning a television station and a newspaper in the same town. Buffett told Murphy he did not want to sell The Buffalo News which meant Cap Cities had to sell a television station. The Goldenson book states Buffett told Murphy he was committed to The Buffalo News: “I promised the people there that I would never sell it. I told them, when they wrote my obituary it would say, ‘He owns The Buffalo News.’ ”

“This deal popped up three weeks ago. Four weeks ago I had no idea it was about to happen,” New York Times reporter Vartanig G. Vartan quoted Buffett (March 20, 1985). Buffett summarized to Atlanta Constitution business writer Melissa Turner (April 2, 1989) the final conversation that clinched Buffett’s investment: “I was up there on a Thursday morning. I said, ‘How many shares do you want me to buy?’ He said, ‘What do you say?’ I said, ‘How’s three million?’ He said, ‘Fine.’ I said ‘What price should I pay?’ He said, ‘What do you think?’ I said, ‘$172.50.’ He said, ‘Done.’ ”

To shareholders at the time, Buffett inserted just one paragraph in his 1985

Annual Report—a subsequent event note explaining the agreement had come a week after his annual report had gone to the typographer but shortly before production.

Buffett became a director of Cap Cities. He also agreed to vote with management for 11 years as long as either Tom Murphy or Daniel Burke was in charge. It turned out that the decision to buy Cap Cities reversed a previous one Buffett made in the late 1970s to sell the very same stock.

His explanation: “Of course some of you probably wonder why we are now buying Cap Cities at $172.50 per share given that this author, in a characteristic burst of brilliance, sold Berkshire’s holdings in the same company at $43 per share in 1978-80. Anticipating your question, I spent a lot of time working on a snappy answer that would reconcile these acts.

“A little more time please.”



Cinderella

This version (1950) was adapted from one of Disney’s favorite films.

(Photo by Mary Porter)



Walt Disney Biography

“He spent hours decorating the margins of his textbooks with pictures and then entertaining his classmates by riffling them to make them move” (p. 29).

(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Story of Warren Buffett



The Former Head Mouseketeer

Disney’s Michael Eisner at the Berkshire annual meeting in 1998

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value The Wslt Disney Company



Walt Disney Letterhead

Walt Disney letterhead for the original 1937 release of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs

The Walt Disney Company The Story of Warren Buffett



“The Mouse Doesn’t Have an Agent”

Buffett and his wife Susie celebrate as Mickey and Minnie Mouse with Disney CEO Michael Eisner (left) and Michael Ovitz at a Cap Cities management meeting in Phoenix, Arizona, about the time of the Disney-Cap Cities merger.

(Photo by Maria Melin-ABC)

Of Permanent Value The Wslt Disney Company



(AP/Wide World Photos)

Hearings on (Financial) Obesity

Former Cap Cities Chairman Tom Murphy, left, and former CBS Chairman Laurence Tisch are friends of Buffett. Buffett calls Murphy “Murph” and Murphy calls Buffett a “400-pound gorilla.” Later, Buffett would grow into a Forty Billion Pound Gorilla.



84





DIVERSIFIED RETAILING


Way back in time and space, long before Buffett was making billion dollar investments, he fished in far smaller investment streams—bringing those small streams together into a river of income and ultimately into an ocean of assets. Toward the end of 1978, Diversified Retailing merged into Berkshire.

Buffett, long the largest shareholder of Berkshire, was by this time also the majority stockholder in Diversified, holding 56% of it’s stock. He began buying Diversified stock not long after he started buying Berkshire stock.

Buffett became Diversified’s CEO in 1966. By 1976, he was chairman of both companies and owned about 36% of Berkshire and 52% of Diversified. At the time, Berkshire’s main offices were in New Bedford, Massachusetts; while those of Diversified were in Baltimore, Maryland.

Buffett has joked that with Diversified he was “trying to buy a second-class business at a third-class price, but it was a fourth-class department store at a third-class price” (Vintage Buffett: Warren Buffett Shares His Wealth video, October 14, 2003).

Incorporated in 1966, Diversified was the parent of Associated Retail Stores, Inc. a chain of more than 80 stores. Diversified also owned a large amount of Berkshire stock as well as Blue Chip Stamps stock.

Associated was based in New York and acquired by Diversified in 1967. Its stores operated in 11 states under the names York, Amy’s, Goodwin’s Gaytime, Fashion Outlet, Madison’s, Yorkster, Lanes, and Tops and Bottoms. The Gap, it was not!

In one of its few business sales, Berkshire sold Associated Retail Stores to Joseph Norban, Inc., of New York in 1987. Surprisingly, Buffett’s early retailing efforts never were winners. In the 1970s, he owned shares of Munsingwear which were unspectacular.

In the proposed merger of Berkshire and Diversified, Buffett and his wife agreed to vote for the merger only if a majority of the other shareholders did. With this combination, Buffett was trying to bring the far-flung elements of his financial empire under one house: Berkshire.

In the negotiations, Berkshire was represented by Malcolm G. Chace, Jr., Berkshire’s former chairman. Diversified was represented by David S. (Sandy) Gottesman, a director of Diversified who would become one of Buffett’s close friends and a wealthy Berkshire shareholder.

Gottesman, because of his large ownership in Diversified, emerged from the Berkshire-Diversified merger with 17,977 shares of Berkshire.

A number of people at First Manhattan in New York City, the investment firm headed by Gottesman, had also been Diversified investors and came away collectively owning another 13,158 Berkshire shares.

It is traditional for Gottesman to stand up at the end of Berkshire’s annual meetings and eloquently thank Buffett on behalf of shareholders for his stewardship. As Gottesman gushes forth, his ebullience is no small wonder. Buffett usually looks bemused or embarrassed. One year he responded to Gottesman’s outpourings by saying nothing; another year, he just said, “Well, thank you, Sandy.”

Because Buffett owned big positions in both Berkshire and Diversified, the negotiations took place without him and were conducted by independent directors of each corporation.

The following is the explanation of the merger as it appeared in the proxy statement:

Berkshire and its subsidiaries are engaged in the underwriting of property and casualty insurance throughout the United States, in the manufacture and sale of woven textiles in the United States and Canada, and, through a subsidiary which Berkshire is required to divest by 1981, in the commercial banking business in Rockford, Illinois. Berkshire and its subsidiaries additionally maintain long-term investments in a number of other businesses.… Berkshire owns approximately 18.8% of the outstanding common stock of Blue Chip, whose shares are traded in the over-the-counter market. And Berkshire’s insurance subsidiaries hold in their investment portfolios approximately 22.6% of Blue Chip’s outstanding common stock.



Blue Chip, in turn, owned a number of businesses such as See’s Candies, The Buffalo News, and Wesco. Wesco once owned 22% of Detroit International Bridge Co., which operates the Ambassador Bridge, the toll bridge between Detroit, Michigan, and Windsor, Ontario. Berkshire no longer has any ownership in the bridge.

Here’s what the proxy statement said about Diversified:

Diversified is a holding company which renders financial and operating advice to Associated Retail Stores, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary engaged in retailing of popular-price women’s and children’s apparel, to Associated’s wholly owned subsidiary, Columbia Insurance Company, which is engaged in the fire and casualty insurance business primarily through accepting portions of reinsurance contracts from Berkshire’s insurance subsidiaries, and to Southern Casualty Insurance Company, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Columbia engaged in Louisiana in providing workers’ compensation insurance, almost exclusively to the forest products industry. In the opinion of Diversified’s management, Diversified’s most significant asset, other than its Berkshire stock, is its beneficial ownership of approximately 16.3% of the outstanding common stock of Blue Chip.



The merger called for little management change; although Munger, who had become chairman of Blue Chip in 1976 and was director of Diversified, was to serve as a director of Berkshire.

For years, Buffett had wanted to combine the two companies. He particularly wanted to bring together the two corporations’ holdings of Blue Chip, in order to simplify the corporate structure under Berkshire.

With the merger, Berkshire owned 58% of Blue Chip; and Buffett and his family owned another 13% of the stock. It was not until 1983 that Blue Chip was fully merged into Berkshire. At the time, Buffett and Munger joked about calling the new company Buffett and Munger, Strictly from Hunger (Fortune, February 19, 2001).

The intricate arrangement meant Buffett invested on behalf of Berkshire, Diversified, and Blue Chip. In 1972, Blue Chip began buying Wesco stock. To complicate things, Wesco entered a merger agreement which was later called off. It questioned the prices Blue Chip was paying for Wesco. Buffett and Munger were also trying to merge Diversified into Berkshire. The Securities and Exchange Commission launched an investigation into Berkshire, Blue Chip, and Buffett as well.

Buffett had to explain the whole puzzle to the SEC. In 1976, the matter was

settled without admitting or denying guilt. Because the SEC found that the Wesco shareholders had been hurt by Blue Chip’s trades, they were paid $115,000.

That little stream merging with other little streams is turning into a mighty river. The charts below show the premerger and postmerger ownerships.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Diversified Retailing

Pre-Merger Post-Merger

Diversified Retailing

Company, Inc. and

Subsidiaries

36%

Blue Chip Stamps

Warren E. Buffett

16%

56%

Berkshire Hathaway

Inc. and Subsidiaries

18%

41%

36%

Warren E. Buffett

Berkshire Hathaway

Inc. and Subsidiaries

Blue Chip Stamps

47%

58%

13%



85





BLUE CHIP STAMPS


Blue Chip of California began as a trading stamp business. In the late 1960s, Berkshire, and separately Munger, began accumulating its stock. In 1973, Blue Chip bought Wesco Financial Corp.; and by 1983, Berkshire owned 60% of the company. Over the years, Buffett bought such businesses as See’s Candy Shops and The Buffalo News through Blue Chip Stamps. Both companies would prove to be Berkshire cash cows.

When Buffett began buying the stock in 1968, its float was about $60 million in outstanding, unredeemed stamps. In 1972, Buffett took $25 million of the money and bought See’s, which had annual sales then of $35 million.

In 1977, Buffett, through Blue Chip, bought The Buffalo News from the estate of Mrs. Edward H. Butler, Jr., for about $33 million.

When Buffett was 46 years old, he owned about $35 million worth of Berkshire stock and about $10 million worth of Blue Chip stock (according to May 1977 Fortune magazine in which Buffett wrote an article about how inflation swindles the equity investor).

In 1983, Blue Chip, headed by Munger, was entirely merged into Berkshire. Blue Chip offered two kinds of promotional services: Those used by businesses to attract or retain customers, and those used by businesses to motivate their employees.

In the 1950s and 1960s, trading stamps such as Green Stamps, Blue and Gold, and Blue Chip were given by merchants as incentives to customers. Retailers deposited money with Blue Chip for the stamps. For each dollar spent, shoppers were given a certain number of stamps which they posted into books that could be redeemed later for a variety of items.

The backbone of this industry had long been the Sperry and Hutchison S&H Green Stamps, one of the first trading stamp companies. In its heyday Frederick Beinecke, one of the owners, helped build a rare-book collection of western Americana for Yale, his alma mater. Later the Beinecke family underwrote the construction of the great rare-book library at Yale that bears their name (Nicholas A. Basbanes, Patience & Fortitude, p. 317). A Gutenberg Bible is on permanent display.

S&H became hugely successful but unwisely only allowed a single store in an area to offer the stamps. A group of retailers who wanted to offer the same incentives formed Blue Chip Stamp Company (Janet Lowe, Damn Right! p. 111). Blue Chip started its trading stamp business in 1956. For years, it was a successful business and became the largest trading stamp company in California.

Buffett, Munger, and Rick Guerin wound up controlling Blue Chip using its float to buy new businesses such as Wesco. Although the stamp business is still in existence, it has withered considerably. Yet Blue Chip has managed to shrink sales profitably. Got that?

Blue Chip sales hit a peak of more than $124 million in 1970, then dropped to little more than $9 million in 1982, and then to $50,000 in 2003. Buffett has said that’s due to the “old Buffett touch.” Adding, “We’ll get the rest of the way.” Sales in 2007 were about $20,000, but the assets of Blue Chips, because it owns Wesco, are about $2 billion. How weird is that?

At the 1994 Berkshire Annual Meeting, Munger said of the more than 99% decline: “We’re waiting for a bounce.”

Most of the decline occurred in the early 1970s when many supermarkets converted to discount merchandising; and service stations, facing their first major gas shortage, decided they didn’t need trading stamps for promotion.

The stamp business was dealt an all-but-fatal blow when a supermarket chain that accounted for 51% of trading stamp revenues discontinued the stamps in 1982. The only benefit the stamp business offered was some continuing float, the cash received in advance of need, which was invested.

Blue Chip Motivation, operating as a separate division, struggled in a competitive environment which offered motivational programs for organizations. It used awards of merchandise and travel to stimulate sales and productivity, promote attendance and safety, and otherwise motivate employees. In the 1983 Blue Chip Annual Report, Munger wrote:

We began the 1970s with a single business, trading stamps, which was destined to decline to a small fraction of its former size, and a portfolio of securities, offsetting stamp redemption liability, which had been selected by previous owners and would have led to a disastrous result if held through the present time. (The portfolio, for instance, contained a substantial amount of very long-term, low-coupon municipal bonds of issuers with declining credit ratings.)



We began the 1980s with five constituent businesses instead of one. In order of acquisition they are: (1) trading stamps and other promotional services, (2) See’s Candy Shops, Incorporated, (3) Mutual Savings, (4) Buffalo Evening News, and (5) Precision Steel.



Munger says the businesses have two things in common: Good management and resistance to inflation.

The second of these two common characteristics gets more important every year as inflation continues. Many businesses, once good investments when inflation was low, are now, under inflationary conditions, unable to produce much, if any, cash even when physical volume is constant …



Inflation is a very effective form of indirect taxation on capital represented by holdings of common stock. We know of no countermeasure.… But, even so, we think a habit of always thinking about and trying to serve shareholders’ interests in real terms, instead of rationalizing growth of managed assets regardless of real effects on shareholders, is quite useful and may fairly be expected of corporate managements.



He signed off by saying:

This may well be the last annual report our shareholders will ever receive from Blue Chip Stamps as a separate corporation, because work is in progress on a proposal that our corporation be merged with Berkshire Hathaway Inc., long a 59.6%-owner of Blue Chip Stamps.



After Berkshire itself, Buffett was the company’s second-largest shareholder. Munger owned 2.2% of Blue Chip. Berkshire had 986,509 shares outstanding held by about 1,900 shareholders, and Blue Chip had 5,178,770 shares outstanding held by about 1,500 shareholders.

At Wesco’s annual meeting in 1993, Munger kidded Bob Bird about his managerial record at Blue Chip. He said Bird had helped take sales of Blue Chip from $120 million a year down to $300,000 a year. “This is a managerial record that not everybody would be proud of.” Munger added, “Even so, there is some success. If you trace Blue Chip stock, it’s way over a billion dollars now.”

When Buffett and Munger bought the stock in 1968 and 1969, it was worth about $40 million.

Buffett, Munger, and Guerin had a tangle of stakes in Blue Chip. “The organization of it all was a little too disorganized for the tastes of the SEC. There was also a legal question.

“The SEC’s concern was whether Blue Chip had unlawfully manipulated the stock of Wesco in some way” (Janet Lowe, Damn Right! p. 116).

Wesco planned a merger in 1973, but Buffett and Munger felt it was selling out too cheaply and tried to stop it. Munger visited with Louis Vincente; and Buffett visited with Elizabeth Peters, Wesco’s largest shareholder. The merger was called off and Wesco stock dropped. Buffett and Munger loaded up on the stock; but instead of paying the lower prices, they paid the higher price prevailing before the merger fell through because they felt responsible for the stock’s decline. An SEC lawyer who asked Buffett why he cared what Wesco’s management thought, got Buffett’s reply, “It’s important how the Wesco management feels about us.”

“We decided in some quixotic moment that it is the right way to behave,” Munger said (Warren Boroson, Pick Stocks Like Warren Buffett, p. 118). Because the SEC thought something was rotten in Denmark, they wanted to look fair to Vincente and Peters, Munger explained.

Munger wanted to buy more shares of Wesco to fight off the merger, but Buffett did not. Munger prevailed and for six weeks, Blue Chip bought every Wesco share it could find, accumulating 17.7% of the company.

In order for shareholders to vote down the merger, Buffett and Munger had to persuade San Francisco heiress and Napa Valley vineyard owner Elizabeth Peters and her family to go along.

Buffett talked Peters into voting against the merger. At that point, Buffett and Munger could legally buy up to 80% of the company; and they began doing so at about $17 a share, knowing the stock would decline.

In 1976, after a two-year investigation, the SEC charged that Blue Chip had propped up the price of Wesco by insisting on buying shares at a higher than market price.

The SEC had been tracking all the criss-crossed ownerships and thought some manipulation might be going on. The case was settled by Blue Chip giving Wesco shareholders $115,000 (Janet Lowe, Damn Right! pp. 114–5).

In the end Wesco was consolidated with Blue Chip and eventually merged into Berkshire.

At the Berkshire shareholder meeting in 1993, Munger said:

Years ago, before Warren and I bought any stock, Blue Chip Stamps mailed minor amounts of Blue Chip stock out to filling station operators as a class action settlement of some kind. My wife told the guy where she gets her car washed to hold onto it. Well, the other day he dragged her out of the car and kissed her. So maybe we should buy into another dying business.



In 1997, some former Blue Chip shareholders sued Berkshire, saying their shares had become lost in transfer agent records. They were unaware of the merger between Blue Chip and Berkshire in 1983, which made them Berkshire shareholders; and they had later been damaged by having their Berkshire shares transferred to various states under escheat laws. But escheats are reversible. Each of the suing shareholders had been able to recover about $31,000 per “lost” Berkshire share by reversing escheats to the State of California; therefore, most or all these shareholders had thus been lucky that they had become “lost.” This forced their retention of Berkshire shares during a long holding period while the share price increased by over thirtyfold to the roughly $31,000

per share they recovered. Late in 1997, the court threw out this shareholders’ litigation against Berkshire, ruling that the litigation was barred by the applicable statute of limitations.

In an interview (Forbes, November 1, 1974) Buffett said of buying stocks, “Draw a circle around the businesses you understand and then eliminate those that fail to qualify on the basis of value, good management and limited exposure to hard times. No high technology, no multicompanies. I don’t understand them. Buy into a company because you want to own it, not because you want the stock to go up. A water company is pretty simple,” he said, adding that Blue Chip had a 5% interest in San Jose Water Works.

Blue Chip was an example of Buffett buying on the cheap when the difficulty of making much money from inherently weak businesses dawned on him.

So in his early days, Buffett made big mistakes with three companies: Berkshire, Diversified, and Blue Chip. Once they were all merged, instead of “three mistakes,” it was “one pile.” All this, Buffett has said, was “a terrible base” on which to build Berkshire. But who is complaining now?

In Berkshire’s 2006 Annual Report, Buffett summed up the Blue Chip story:

In 1970, indeed, about 60 billion of our stamps were licked by savers, pasted into books, and taken to Blue Chip redemption stores. Our catalog of rewards was 116 pages thick and chock full of tantalizing items. When I was told that even certain brothels and mortuaries gave stamps to their patrons, I felt I had finally found a sure thing.



Well, not quite. From the day Charlie and I stepped into the Blue Chip picture, the business went straight downhill. By 1980, sales had fallen to $19.4 million. And, by 1990, sales were bumping along at $1.5 million. No quitter, I redoubled my managerial efforts.



Sales then fell another 98%. Last year, in Berkshire’s $98 billion of revenues, all of $25,920 (no zeros omitted) came from Blue Chip. Ever hopeful, Charlie and I soldier on.





(Photo by Mary Porter)

A Bargain

Blue Chip Savings Book Signed by Charles Munger

The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by

Robert Miles)

These Blue Chip books were a series given to Bob Miles by Dave Gold, founder and

chairman of 99 Cents Only stores. They were collected by Gold’s father, Bob.



(Photo courtesy of Sherrie Gregory)

Dinah Shore Says

An S&H Green Stamp catalog from about 1963 sports the popular Dinah Shore on the cover



Of Permanent Value Blue Chip Staps

Blue Chip Stamps The Story of Warren Buffett

MILESTONES FOR S&H

1896 S&H introduces Green Stamps, America’s loyalty and rewards currency of choice.

1964 The S&H catalog becomes the largest single publication in the U.S. S&H prints 3 times as many stamps as the U.S. Post Office, and enough catalogs to circle the earth 11/2 times.

1999 S&H invents Greenpoints—the new incentive—and rewards

currency for the digital economy.

Dying Business

Creates Riches

Blue Chip Stamps headquarters in Los Angeles. The stamp business was virtually wiped out, but its investments in See’s Candies and The Buffalo News brought sweet and newsworthy riches. Who needs blue, green, gold, or other rainbow-colored stamps these days, anyway? Now we get American Express Bonus Points!



(Photo by Andrew Kilpatrick)

Of Permanent Value Blue Chip Staps



(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

Blue Chip

Annual Report for 1982



86





WESCO


News broke on August 26, 2010, that Berkshire may buy the rest of Wesco that it does not already own, that is, the remaining 19.9% of the company’s shares which amounted to about 1.4 million shares. The offer in Class B Berkshire shares and cash would be at Wesco’s book value of about $353 a share, or whatever the book value is when the transaction is completed.

The filing disclosed that Bill Gates owns 1.26% of Wesco’s shares.

In a letter to Wesco’s board, Buffett said Berkshire had no interest in buying the shares at a higher price then what was offered. Also, the letter said Berkshire had no interest in selling its stock to a third party.

Wesco Financial Corp., has no employees itself, but reimburses its parent Blue Chip for seven employees. The seven employee figure is down from 1,600 over the years. Wesco was described by The Wall Street Journal (April 17, 1990), as a “tourist-class ticket” way to invest in a Berkshire-like way. This was because Wesco, which has many of the same investments as Berkshire, trades in a price range of three digits rather than six. With no Berkshire B shares then outstanding, Wesco could be thought of as a poor man’s Berkshire.

Wesco of Pasadena, California, is 80.1% owned by Berkshire through Blue Chip Stamps, which bought Wesco in 1973. Buffett and Munger convinced Elizabeth Caspers Peters, the daughter of Wesco’s founder, to cancel a merger which enabled them to buy the company. Mrs. Peters asked that some Wesco shares remain publicly traded.

Would Berkshire ever buy the remaining Wesco stock? “Chances are low, but not nil,” Wesco Chairman Charles Munger said at Wesco’s Annual Meeting in 1997.

In 1996, Wesco paid about $80 million for Kansas Bankers Surety Company, an insurer of community banks. Munger wrote in the 1997 Wesco Annual Report, “KBS is run by Donald Towle, Chairman, assisted by 13 dedicated officers and employees.” (See Kansas Bankers chapter.)

In 2000, Wesco bought CORT Business Services, a large furniture rental company based in Fairfax, Virginia. (See CORT chapter.)

Back in 1979, Wesco had bought Precision Steel, a steel service center and branded metal specialty products firm, for about $15 million. With locations in Franklin Park, Illinois, and Charlotte, North Carolina, the company earned $1.2 million in 2006.

Precision, founded by George C. Tinsley in 1940, began as a supplier of precision steel in the Chicago area. It started in a rented office space of 5,000 square feet. World War II made the first years difficult because of the resulting metal shortage. After the war years, steel became more plentiful; and the company grew. The company, headed by Terry Piper, is again facing tough times along with the entire steel industry. Munger said in Wesco’s 2000 Annual Report, “Generally, the U.S. steel business was a disaster in 2000.”

In 1969, Wesco also purchased Mutual Savings and Loan Assoc. in Pasadena, California. Mutual Savings was cofounded in 1925, by Rudolph W. Caspers, the father of William T. Caspers. Bill Caspers, a Wesco director, died in 1999. His sister, Elizabeth Caspers Peters, remains a Wesco director.

In early 2000, Salomon’s former chairman, Robert Denham, was named to the Wesco board. He is also on the Lucent and U.S. Trust company boards; and in 2003, he was elected chairman of the Financial Accounting Foundation that oversees the nation’s accounting standard setters. Denham was chairman of Salomon from 1992 to 1997.

For years, a small loyal band of shareholders met in the lower level of Mutual’s nine-story building for the Wesco annual meeting.

In the 1992 Wesco Annual Report, Munger wrote, “We have decided that Mutual Savings will shortly give up its status as a regulated savings and loan association. To achieve this objective, Mutual Savings is negotiating to sell to another financial institution” (Cenfed Financial).

As a result, about $300 million in capital was transferred to Wes-FIC (Wesco-Financial Insurance Co.), which is the headquarters of Berkshire’s National Indemnity in Omaha. That doubled the capital of Wes-FIC, which writes super-cat insurance policies with Berkshire’s insurance group, one of the world’s largest insurance organizations in terms of capital, stronger even than Lloyd’s of London.

“Why shouldn’t we do more of what works well for us and what’s less complicated?” Munger asked (Omaha World-Herald, April 22, 1993). Munger noted that the move would have resulted in a cost savings in less-regulated environment. The plan also included transferring Mutual Savings real estate to a newly formed Wesco subsidiary. Afterwards, Mutual Savings retained a majority of its former assets such as its Freddie Mac stock and was merged into Wesco’s subsidiary, Wesco-Financial Insurance Co., regulated by the Nebraska Department of Insurance. Munger contended, “After all, there are practical advantages in moving hundreds of millions of dollars of assets (at market value) from a high-cost, low-flexibility environment to a low-cost, high-flexibility environment.… After Wes-FIC’s capital and claims-paying capacity have been greatly augmented by the merger into Wes-FIC of Mutual Savings, Wes-FIC plans, through subcontracts with the Berkshire Hathaway Insurance Group, to enter the business of super-catastrophe (“super-cat”) reinsurance.”

So Wesco left the heavily regulated S&L industry and joined up with Berkshire to boldly enter the more profitable arena of reinsurance. “It [S&L] took up time disproportionate to the capital involved,” Munger said.

In November 1993, Wesco said that although its Wes-FIC unit had planned to enter the super-cat business, a flood of capital into the reinsurance market had resulted in lower prices, and Berkshire might not have enough extra business to give to the unit. Wesco said it would seek other insurance opportunities.

“But what are the predictions of man!” Munger wrote in Wesco’s 1993 Annual Report. He said that in February 1994, Wes-FIC was offered five unusual super-cat reinsurance participations by National Indemnity.

Wesco’s headquarters is not far from Cypress Insurance Corp. of Pasadena, California, one of Berkshire’s insurance businesses that sometimes does some business with Wes-FIC. Buffett has no office at Wesco, but he is a director of Wes-FIC. Munger wrote in Wesco’s 1996 Annual Report that Wes-FIC, which carries a rare AAA rating from Standard & Poor’s, wrote only 1% of its statutory surplus compared to an industry average of about 113% in 1995.

He added, “On super-cat reinsurance accepted by Wes-FIC to date [March 7, 1995] there has been no loss whatsoever that we know of. Our accounting policy requires contract expiration before super-cat underwriting profit is recognized. Needless to say, we would not have similar reticence to report losses before contract expirations. Our super-cat accounting is not intentionally super conservative, although it may amount to ‘best-practice’ accounting.”

Wes-FIC has sometimes reinsured some of the book of the workers’ compensation insurance business of Cypress. Cypress has written some insurance business for See’s. … More synergy at Berkshire.

Starting January 1, 2008, in an agreement with Berkshire’s National Indemnity Co. (NICO), Wes-FIC assumed 10% of NICO’s quota-share reinsurance of Swiss Re. Wes-FIC, thereby, assumed 2% of all Swiss Re’s property-casualty risks for five years on the same terms as NICO.

Berkshire owns about 5.7 million of the Wesco’s 7.1 million shares. The stock is thinly traded with an average of 1,300 shares a day changing hands on the American Stock Exchange. Many of the other shares are held by the Caspers and Peters families, who have family members on Wesco’s board.

In many ways Wesco, which has about 5,000 shareholders, is indeed something of a baby Berkshire, holding some of the same securities as Berkshire. It owns positions in American Express, Coca-Cola, and Wells Fargo stock. Its main holding was 28.8 million shares of Freddie Mac, which was bought in 1988 with a price tag of $71.7 million. The entire Freddie Mac position was sold in 2000.

In the 1995 Wesco Annual Report, Munger had written of the Freddie Mac position: “For us, at least, our experience in shifting from savings and loan operation to ownership of Freddie Mac shares tends to confirm a long held notion that being prepared, on a few occasions in a lifetime, to act promptly in scale in doing some simple thing will often be enough to make the financial results of that lifetime quite satisfactory.”

As a result of a foreclosure in 1966, Wesco owned about 22 acres of oceanfront property near Santa Barbara, California, originally on the books at $2 million. The land was slowly developed for about 32 houses and recreation facilities, causing a grossly unsatisfactory return, far below interest levels on government bonds. Other properties include several buildings in a small shopping center in Upland, California, which leases to small businesses.

About the time Mutual Savings was sold to Cenfed, Wesco organized MS Property Company, a real estate subsidiary that was slowly selling some of Mutual’s old troubled assets. “Wesco still retains a recently formed real estate subsidiary that, mostly, it does not want,” Munger wrote in the 1994 Wesco Annual Report.

Wesco’s Chief Financial Officer Jeffrey Jacobson portrays Wesco as a company where nothing fancy happens, where management just tries to keep things in the middle of the road. In short, things are on track.

During the long work of trying to make something of the Santa Barbara property, Jacobson said, “We’re starting to sell some of the units. A number of the houses have been built.”

Munger and his wife took a fancy to the land. They paid Mutual Savings $2.1 million in cash for two lots in the Montecito real estate development just south of Santa Barbara where they built a palatial home overlooking the Pacific Ocean. The home is impeccably appointed. Except for the display of several magazine covers featuring Munger, there is little to suggest that this is his home. Tucked back in a small study is a New Yorker cartoon saying: “In Charlie’s hands, wealth just never seems obscene no matter how big it gets.” His spacious library is home for such books as a set of World Books, Encyclopedia Britannica, volumes by Learned Hand, Graham Greene, Charles Dickens, and Mark Twain. Also on the shelves are The Last Lion, The Age of Federalism, The Life of Herbert Hoover, Eleanor Roosevelt, Citizen Turner, and Bonfire of the Vanities. A statue of Munger’s hero, Benjamin Franklin, also graces the room.

At Wesco’s meeting in 2000, Munger recommended reading The Selfish Gene, a book about evolution by Richard Dawkins.

Buffett has dubbed the house “Munger’s Folly.” Others call the area “Mungerville,” because a number of Munger’s friends also live there, including Otis Booth, Roy Tolles, Chuck Rickershauser, and Roy Olson.

“He keeps a low profile,” Jacobson said of Munger, adding that Munger has lots of irons in the fire. Not only is he Chairman of the Board of Good Samaritan Hospital in Los Angeles, he’s also chairman of the Daily Journal Corp., an over-the-counter firm that publishes the Los Angeles Daily Journal, a sort of Wall Street Journal for the area’s legal profession.

While talking about the poor market in 2001, Munger said of the Wesco Annual Meeting, “What you’ve seen recently is just a tea party. In ’73-’74 in Jeff Jacobson’s prominent Southern California Country Club, there was a waiting list of people wanting to get out of their membership.”

Each year Munger writes to Wesco’s small band of shareholders in much the same vein that Buffett does: No pulling of punches. Usually heavy criticism and sarcasm are expressed about such things as the S&L crisis or leveraged buyout operators. Still, Wesco has not enjoyed fast growth, nor has it found enough of the right acquisitions. In Wesco’s 1989 report, Munger said it has been difficult for Wesco to find good acquisition candidates, and he likened that search to catching muskies.

“To Wesco, as a non-LBO operator, the good-corporate-acquisition game was always tough. And that game in each recent year has become more like fishing for muskies at Leech Lake in Minnesota, where the writer’s earliest business partner, Ed Hoskins, had the following conversation with his Indian guide:

Are any muskies caught in this lake?



More muskies are caught in this lake than in any other lake in Minnesota. This lake is famous for muskies.



How long have you been fishing here?



19 years.



And how many muskies have you caught?’



None.



Munger said: “Wesco continues to try more to profit from always remembering the obvious than from grasping the esoteric. It is remarkable how much long-term advantage people like us have gotten by trying to be consistently not stupid, instead of trying to be very intelligent. There must be some wisdom in the folk saying, ‘It’s the strong swimmers who drown.’ ”

In a stinging 1989 letter from Munger, Wesco resigned from the United States League of Savings in protest of the league’s reluctance to call for proper reforms in light of the national S&L crisis. Wrote Munger: “It is not unfair to liken the situation now facing Congress to cancer and to liken the League to a significant carcinogenic agent. And, like cancer, our present troubles will recur if Congress lacks the wisdom and courage to excise elements which caused the troubles.”

Wesco is a steady, if unglamorous, part of Berkshire and perhaps can be thought of as having the safety and steady return of a money market account. In fact, a Berkshire shareholder once suggested to Munger he might want to turn Wesco into a money market account. Munger did not totally dismiss the idea.

That does not suggest he is about to liquidate, but then Munger has no problem with cash in the bank earning sure money either. Munger has always thought that high-quality businesses and stocks will carry the day. Buffett says that Munger has influenced him greatly about being attuned to the quality of a business rather than just buying for a cheap price.

The Wall Street Journal noted that Wesco’s businesses were not considered as good as Berkshire’s. Munger has said much the same thing himself. He wound up saying, “We’d be fine if we had bought quality stocks, instead of Wesco, in 1972.”

Berkshire acquired Wesco at about $6 a share. With the stock selling at more than $300 per share in 2003, that’s on the order of 15% on his money annually, a “money fund” to make Buffett proud.

At Wesco’s annual meeting in 1993, Munger was asked who really makes the decisions for Wesco. He threw a compliment to Buffett saying, “Well, the most important person is in Omaha.” In response to another question, Munger answered, “I always like to see the nerds win.”

Although Munger downplays the stock, it has done well over the years. At one time he said: “An orangutan could figure out that the stock is selling for miles above the value of the company, if it were liquidated. I keep telling people this, but they keep on buying the stock. It may be that Berkshire groupies see us as a way to buy into the [Berkshire] complex” (The Washington Post, November 28, 1993).

In the 1995 Wesco Annual Report, Munger calculated Wesco’s intrinsic value at $149 a share compared to the stock price of $182 on December 31, 1995. In the 1996 Wesco Annual Report, Munger calculated Wesco’s intrinsic value as $196 a share compared with $187 stock price at the end of 1996. “This comparison indicates that Wesco stock was then selling about 5% below intrinsic value,” Munger wrote. In Wesco’s 1997 Annual Report, Munger calculated Wesco’s intrinsic value at $273 at year-end 1997, compared with a stock price of $300 a share. In the 1998 Wesco Annual Report, Munger calculated Wesco’s year-end 1998 intrinsic value to be $342 a share compared to the year-end stock price of $354 3/4, about 4% above intrinsic value.

Munger calculated in Wesco’s 1999 Annual Report that year-end 1999 intrinsic value was $286 a share compared to Wesco’s stock price of $245, about 14% below intrinsic value. In Wesco’s 2000 Annual Report, Munger figured Wesco’s $278 a share of net worth was probably a conservative view of the company’s liquidation value. He figured it at $275 a share for 2002 plus something less than $28 a share for the “interest-free” loan on deferred taxes. In 2003, Munger figured it at $292 a share plus something less than $32 a share for the “interest-free” loan equal to its deferred taxes commitment.

He wrote: “Wesco is not an equally-good-but-smaller version of Berkshire Hathaway, better because its small size makes growth easier. Instead, each dollar of book value at Wesco continues plainly to provide much less intrinsic value than a similar dollar of book value at Berkshire Hathaway.”

Wesco’s 2004 Annual Report said the company’s net worth was $297 a share plus something less than $32 a share for the “interest-free” loan equal to its deferred taxes. For 2006, Munger calculated things at $337-per-share net worth with the interest-free “loan” at about something less than $42 a share. For 2007, Munger figured Wesco’s net worth at $356 a share with an interest-free loan from deferred income taxes at $45 a share.

At the Wesco annual meeting in 1998, Munger said he calculated Wesco’s intrinsic value because it’s a lot easier to figure than Berkshire’s. At the 1998 meeting with Berkshire was trading at about $70,000, Munger said Berkshire’s stock price was “not crazy” when compared to most other stocks.

Munger said at the Berkshire Annual Meeting in 1998: “Per unit of book value, Wesco is not a clone of Berkshire. It’s an historical accident. We will do our best for Wesco, but most opportunities will be with Berkshire.” Maybe Wesco shares are really Berkshire’s Class C shares.

Wesco sold its Freddie Mac stock in 2000. Munger said at Wesco’s annual meeting in 2001: “We’re exceptionally goosey of leveraged financial institutions. If they start talking about risk management [e.g., how good it is], it makes us nervous. We fret way earlier than other people. We left a lot of money on the table through early fretting. It is the way we are—you just have to live with it.”

Munger also said, “The businesses that Berkshire has acquired will return 13% pre-tax on what we paid for them, maybe more. With a cost of capital of 3% - generated via other people’s money in the form of float—that’s a hell of a business. That’s the reason Berkshire shareholders needn’t totally despair. Berkshire is not as good as it was in terms of percentage compounding [going forward], but it’s still a hell of a business.”

At Wesco’s annual meeting in 2002, Munger said: “Personally, I think Berkshire will be a lot bigger and a lot stronger than it is. Whether the stock will be a good investment from today’s price is another question. The one thing we’ve always guaranteed is that the future will be a lot worse than the past.”

Wesco is consolidated within Berkshire; for example, stock holdings such as Coca-Cola are reflected in Berkshire’s totals.

BUYING THE REST OF WESCO

Berkshire confirmed in early 2011 that it planned to buy the remaining 19.9% of the Wesco shares it didn’t already own for $543 million, or $385 a share. Berkshire paid for the shares with both Berkshire Class B stock and cash, specifically with $298 million in cash and 3.25 million shares of Berkshire Class B stock.

Back in 1973, Berkshire had bought about 80% of Wesco for $30 million when Buffett and Munger made the investment through one of their other holdings called Blue Chip Stamp Co. which itself later became part of Berkshire.

Today, all of Wesco is worth about $2 billion.

At one point in the negotiations for Wesco, Buffett wrote in a January 21 letter to Wesco board member Carolyn Carlburg that the transaction was “disadvantageous to Berkshire,” assuming a large number of Wesco shareholders opted for Berkshire stock. “I believe the prospects for Berkshire shares over the next ten years to be considerably better than the prospects for Wesco shares considering the economic prospects of the businesses each of the companies own.”

Wesco was merged into Berkshire on June 24, 2011, becoming a wholly owned subsidiary of Berkshire.

“A MORNING WITH CHARLIE”

Originally there was talk of an “afternoon with Charlie” to replace Wesco’s annual meeting where crowds had grown to more than 1,000 to hear Munger. In the end “a morning with Charlie” was held on July 1, 2011.



The Pasadena Pleasure Palace

This is the Wesco office building in Pasadena, California, which is owned by its property unit. The annual meetings used to be held in the cafeteria here, but in 1988, the meeting was moved to McCormick & Schmick Seafood Restaurant. Munger explained that the office’s cafeteria tenant had left and apologized for the opulent surroundings of the seafood restaurant room but said it would have been more expensive to cater the event in an empty office space. In recent years, Wesco meetings have been held at the nearby University Club. Munger started the 2000 meeting with some Chamber of Commerce–type comments about Pasadena saying, “Pasadena was a civilized place when Beverly Hills was still a bean patch.”

(Photo by Andrew Kilpatrick)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Wesco’s Precision Steel Warehouse

Exhibit at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2003

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

Of Permanent Value Wesco

Wesco The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Wesco



(Photo by John Gartmann)

Ben Franklin in the 21st Century

Munger at Wesco’s annual meeting in 2000. With him is Cathy Hayden, a Berkshire and Wesco shareholder from Rancho Palos Verdes, California.



Munger

Munger and his assistant Doerthe Obert

during Berkshire’s annual meeting weekend in 2005

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Wesco The Story of Warren Buffett



The Brains Behind Berkshire

Munger’s assistant Doerthe Obert with Buffett’s Assistant Debbie Bosanek during Berkshire’s annual meeting weekend in 2006

tPhoto courtesy of Debbie Bosanek)



Wesco

Unlike Berkshire, Wesco has a logo.

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

Of Permanent Value Wesco



87





AMBASSADOR BRIDGE


In 1977, Buffett and Munger through Wesco tried to buy up shares of the Ambassador Bridge, a span that links Detroit with Windsor, Ontario (Bloomberg, January 22, 2003).

Squaring off against them for the prize was Manuel “Matty” Moroun, the CEO of Warren, Michigan, trucking company CenTrac Inc. In 1979, CenTrac Inc. gained control of Detroit International Bridge Co. which owned the valuable bridge built in 1929. Today the bridge handles one-fourth, or more than $100 billion, of the goods transported between the U.S. and Canada, the world’s largest trading partners. Every year about 10 million vehicles cross the bridge which is a major point of security, especially following 9/11.

In 1976, Ambassador Bridge made 31 cents in net income for every dollar in sales, a better margin than any company listed in the Dow Jones Industrial Average that year (ibid.). “I can’t imagine a more secure investment than that bridge,” said Munger. “There aren’t very many locations where a bridge like that can work” (ibid.).

Opened in 1929, the four-lane bridge was privately built by New York financier Joseph Bower. With the bridge toll of $3.75 for cars and $12 for trucks, the bridge is a huge money-maker for billionaire Moroun.

Buffett and Munger bid for the bridge in September 1977, drawing on an $18 million war chest and ready access to millions more in credit from Berkshire’s Security Pacific National Bank. They made a tender offer of $20 a share to Detroit International Bridge stockholders and built a 24.9% stake.

The Bloomberg account said the Canadian government, which resisted foreign ownership, demanded concessions that would have lowered profits of the bridge. Then Moroun, who had been investing in the company since 1972, undermined Wesco’s bid by buying more shares in the open market.

After Buffett and Munger balked at Canada’s demands, Moroun borrowed more to buy Wesco’s stake at $24 a share, thereby giving him about 50% of the company.

Berkshire pocketed $1.25 million in losing the bridge to Moroun.

Moroun, who became a wealthy figure in trucking, real estate, and banking, is occasionally spotted at Berkshire annual meetings.



Ridge at the Bridge

Former Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge at Ambassador Bridge on April 16, 2002

(AP/Wide World Photos)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Ambassador Bridge



88





KANSAS BANKERS SURETY CO.


Through Wesco, Berkshire bought Kansas Bankers Surety Co. of Topeka, Kansas, for $80 million in 1996. Kansas Bankers, founded in 1909, insures community banks throughout middle America. The company’s infrequently traded stock, which had been listed on the OTC bulletin board, was at $19 a share before the announcement. The price Berkshire paid in cash was about $24.50 a share.

“He just flat made an offer to us out of the blue,” said Don Towle, CEO of Kansas Bankers, of a letter Buffett wrote to the company in February 1996 (Topeka Capital-Journal, April 12, 1996). Buffett wrote the letter to Roy Dinsdale, a Kansas Bankers director who is also chairman of Pinnacle Bancorp Inc., of Central City, Nebraska. Towle, who runs the company with 15 other people, said he was initially “shocked,” then, finally, “flattered” that Buffett would make an offer.

Buffett explains in Berkshire’s 1996 Annual Report: “You might be interested in the carefully crafted and sophisticated strategy that allowed Berkshire to nab the deal. Early in 1996, I was invited to the 40th birthday party of my nephew’s wife, Jane Rogers. My taste for social events being low, I immediately, (and in my standard gracious way), began to invent reasons for skipping the event. The party planners then countered brilliantly by offering me a seat next to a man I always enjoy, Jane’s dad, Roy Dinsdale—so I went.

“The party took place on January 26. Though the music was loud—why must bands play as if they will be paid by the decibel?—I just managed to hear Roy say he’d come back from a director’s meeting of Kansas Bankers Surety, a company I’d always admired. I shouted back that he should let me know if it ever became available for purchase.”

Dinsdale took Buffett up on his suggestion and sent him the company’s financials. Buffett answered with an offer.

Most of the 600 stockholders of Kansas Bankers—many of whom were banks or bankers—sold out to Berkshire.

Kansas Bankers insures bank deposits beyond the limits of the federal government; and it insures banks against burglaries, robberies, forgeries, and check writing fraud. It also offers directors and officers indemnity policies, bank employment practice policies, bank annuity, and mutual funds indemnity policies. Its product line also includes Internet-banking catastrophe bonds. The company insures more than 1,200 banks and about 70% of the banks in Nebraska; and it is the only bonding firm owned by the banks it serves, according to the Topeka Capital-Journal.

Kansas Bankers was founded by a group of bankers who shunned government programs designed to insure their banks’ deposits. The company started as Bankers Deposit, Guaranty and Surety Co. Its main purpose was to guarantee the deposits of the banks that formed it. By 1922, the company changed its focus, deciding it was no longer profitable to issue deposit insurance. The company’s stock, on a pro-rata basis, was placed in more than 700 Kansas banks; and the name was changed to Kansas Bankers Surety Co.

By 1979, the company had captured all the market share in Kansas that it could and then expanded to many other midwestern states. It is licensed to write business in 30 mainly midwestern states. Kansas Bankers had about $7 million in operating earnings in 2002. The company has a triple-A claims credit rating from Standard & Poor’s.

Munger wrote in Wesco’s 2005 Annual Report that Kansas Bankers’ tangible net worth exceeded the acquisition price of $80 million. “It has been a very satisfactory acquisition, reflecting the sound management of President Don Towle and his team,” he added. Munger said KBS’s combined ratio “has been much better than average for insurers, at 74.9% for 2004 and 58.8% for 2005.” KBS had combined ratios of 73.8% in 2006.

HALTING BANK DEPOSIT INSURANCE

Kansas Bankers Surety Co., halting its bank deposit insurance program, notified about 1,500 banks in more than 30 states that it would no longer offer a program called “bank deposit guaranty bonds” (The Wall Street Journal, September 16, 2008).

The story said Buffett himself made the decision to stop the insuring above the amount guaranteed by the federal government, dealing a blow to the financial service industry. The FDIC insures deposits of as much as $100,000 and $250,000 on some retirement accounts. The move reflected overall nervousness about the possibility of bank failures.

Even with substantial reductions in exposures to crime insurance, bank employment practices, and directors and officers liability, Kansas City Bankers rang up losses in the last half of 2008.



One of 16 Employees

Don Towle says: “The best thing about managing a Berkshire company is that no one questions our claims-paying ability and Warren lets the company grow.”

(Photo courtesy of Don Towle)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Kansas Bankers Surety Co.



89





BERKSHIRE’S “SAINTED SEVEN”


Last year we dubbed these operations the Sainted Seven: The Buffalo News, Fechheimer, Kirby, Nebraska Furniture Mart, Scott Fetzer Manufacturing Group, See’s, and World Book. In 1988, the Saints came marching in.”

—1988 Berkshire Annual Report

Buffett tells Berkshire’s newly-acquired businesses, which he sometimes calls “sluggers,” that they are “free at last”—free of rating agencies, free of bankers, and free of public relations. He has referred to Berkshire’s operating businesses as “Corporate Cooperstown.” Here’s the pantheon of Berkshire’s businesses:

BERKSHIRE’S NON-INSURANCE OPERATING COMPANIES

“If Berkshire’s directly owned manufacturing, publishing, and retailing businesses alone were separated as an independent company, its financial profits would be impressive. The ‘company’ would have sales of $2.4 billion, net income of over $200 million, and rank in the Fortune 500. In fact, in terms of profitability defined as return on assets, it would rank in the top 5 of the Fortune 500!” (Sequoia Fund Quarterly Report, March 31, 1995).

See’s Candies

The Buffalo News

Nebraska Furniture Mart

Scott Fetzer Manufacturing Group

Kirby

World Book

Fechheimer

Borsheims

H.H. Brown, Lowell, and Dexter

Helzberg’s Diamond Shops

R.C. Willey Home Furnishings

FlightSafety International

Star Furniture

International Dairy Queen

NetJets

Jordan’s Furniture Company

MidAmerican Energy/Yorkshire Electricity

Williams’ Kern River Gas

Transmission Co.

Northern Natural Gas Co.

CORT Business Services

Ben Bridge Jeweler

Justin Industries

Shaw Industries

Homemakers Furniture

Benjamin Moore Paints

Johns Manville

MiTek

Delco Remy

XTRA

Fruit of the Loom

Larson-Juhl

Garan

CTB International



The Pampered Chef



Clayton Homes

McLane’s

Oakwood Homes

Forest River

Business Wire

Russell Corp.

Iscar Metalworking Co.

TTI, Inc.

Bel-Oro International and Aurafin

Marmon Holdings

Burlington Northern

Lubrizol

Finance and Financial Products Businesses



Finova

Other

Buffett and His Egg Basket



(Photo by Art Council)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s “Sainted Seven”



90





SEE’S CANDIES


Buffett once sent a box of See’s Candies to a Berkshire stockholder for Christmas. The box was accompanied by an item from USA Today (December 8, 1998) that quoted the American Boxed Chocolate Manufacturers: “Twenty-nine percent of men believe that giving boxed chocolates improves their chances of getting sex and 8% of women agree.” Next to the newspaper item, Buffett scrawled: “Much higher with See’s. Please verify and report.”

Candy companies are fun; in the case of See’s Candies, make that both fun and profitable. And Buffett watches See’s numbers obsessively. “We fax him a sales report daily,” says Dave Harvey, a See’s executive at the 350,000-square-foot plant in Carson, California. Buffett is so devoted to See’s that his Laguna Beach, California, home has a portrait of a box of See’s that, for a long time, hung over a couch in the family room, according to Buffett’s longtime stockbroker, Arthur Rowsell.

Buffett boasts of a photo he has of Nancy Reagan boarding Air Force One carrying a large box of See’s candy under her arm. Actress Sally Field also is a big See’s Candies fan.

The See’s Candies shops, wholly owned by Berkshire, have been making candy for sweet-toothed customers for more than 80 years. At Munger’s suggestion, Buffett bought See’s on January 3, 1972, for $25 million through Berkshire’s Blue Chip Stamps affiliate. See’s was making $2.5 million a year after taxes, so Buffett bought the company for 10 times its earnings.

When Buffett was called about See’s, he said, “Gee, … the candy business. I don’t think we want to be in the candy business.” For some unknown reason the phone went dead. After several minutes had passed, the call reconnected. Buffett then burst out, “I was taking a look at the numbers. Yeah, I’d be willing to buy See’s at a price” (Janet Lowe, Damn Right! p. 128). “Buffett’s decision to buy the company was easy.” she said.

“It was a no-brainer. I wish I could find 50 more like it. Most of the businesses we’ve bought on the first visit. See’s Candies, I went out there one time to see the grandson of Mary See. His name was Harry See. … We had a deal. We understood the kind of position they held in consumers’ minds and pricing flexibility and so on,” Buffett said regarding the purchase of See’s.

In a talk to Columbia business students on October 27, 1993, he said, “Did I think they could charge 20 cents a pound more for candy? Sure. And sure enough, they could.” He has also said, “If you own See’s Candies, and look in the mirror and say, ‘Mirror, mirror on the wall, how much do I charge for candy this fall?’ and it says, ‘More,’ it’s a good business” (Warren Boroson, Pick Stocks Like Warren Buffett, p. 253).

See’s, which made 12 cents a pound profit in 1972, now makes more than a $1 a pound largely because it has been able to raise prices. It has been a sweet investment. Buffett said that while Blue Chip’s sales dropped from about $100 million in 1972 to about $1 million in 1991, See’s revenues more than made up for the loss by rising from $29 million to $196 million during that time. Profits in 1999 were $36 million when See’s sold 33 million pounds of boxed chocolates. See’s still sells about 33 million pounds a year. Sales were $325 million in 2004. Brand quality counts.

When Buffett bought See’s for chocoholics everywhere, he put Chuck Huggins in charge. Huggins recalls that when he met with Buffett and Munger, he “told them only bad news.” He recalled Buffett saying “We’re planning to make an offer to Harry [See], but we don’t run companies.”

Buffett said it took him 15 seconds to decide to install Huggins in the top

position. Buffett said in the 1991 Annual Report that the compensation agreement was “conceived in about five minutes and never reduced to a written contract—that remains unchanged to this day.” Over the years Huggins and Buffett have talked about once every 10 days; although, Huggins said, during the Salomon crisis it was more on the order of once a month (The Wall Street Journal, November 8, 1991). Huggins says that over the years See’s has sent money to Buffett to invest. “We’ve got a great chute straight to Omaha.”

Born in Vancouver, Canada, of American parents, Huggins served in World War II as a paratrooper in the U.S. Army then went on to Kenyon College where he majored in English. He and his late wife Marian (Mime) were married 48 years, a union that produced four children and nine grandchildren. After her death, Huggins remarried, and now lives in Riverside, California, with his new wife Donna.

See’s was founded in 1921 by a 71-year-old grandmother, Canadian immigrant Mary See, who went into the business with little more than an apron and a few pans. From a small neighborhood candy shop, Mary See expanded to San Francisco in 1935. See’s candy boxes still bear the logo of a smiling Mrs. See, a logo designed by her son, pharmacist Charles See. Mrs. See’s face and a cottage in the woods are featured on See’s boxes of chocolate walnut fudge, Victorian toffee, and peanut brittle.

During the Great Depression, See’s lowered the price of its chocolates from 80 cents to 50 cents a pound. “Be Thrifty. Pay Fifty,” was See’s slogan. Fortunately, See’s landlords lowered rents, enabling See’s to stay in business.

In the 1920s, a time when there were only a few See’s shops, See’s delivered to many of its customers by Harley Davidson motorcycles with enclosed sidevans hitched to them (Ironworks, August, 1997). (Maybe this is why Sequoia Fund, managed by Buffett’s friend Bill Ruane, owns a large stake of Harley-Davidson stock.)

David H. Ramsey, president/co-publisher of Hatton-Brown Publishers, Inc., of Montgomery, Alabama, sent Buffett the magazine piece about the connection between See’s and Harley cycles. Buffett wrote Ramsey, “Thanks for your nice letter and the article. Fifty years ago, I had an Indian [motorcycle] for a short while, which I lost enthusiasm for after I drove it over the cobblestones of Baltimore, (they made them a little different in those days). During the festivities last year, they let me sit in the driver’s seat of the See’s Harley,

but they pushed it out on stage rather than trust me to rev it up. Somewhat humiliating!”

Today See’s candy is delivered in a variety of ways, including 40-foot tractor trailers and 747 jet aircrafts.

See’s makes boxed chocolates and other confectionery goodies in two large kitchens, one in Los Angeles and the other in South San Francisco and distributes them through its own distinctive black-and-white retail stores in many western and midwestern states and Hawaii.

The great majority of them, more than 165 stores, are located in California where the company gets about 80% of its profits.

About 40% of See’s candies are made in Los Angeles. This plant concentrates on hard-centered candies. An “enrober moves the centers—the toffees and caramels through various chocolate baths, and a drying period. They are then boxed in brown cardboard.… Women crowd the head and foot of the enrober, keeping the candies upright, then getting them off the machine without marring the shiny surfaces. Yes, this is the same type of machine that Lucille Ball and Ethel Mertz worked on in the famous I Love Lucy episode” (Los Angeles Times, July 19, 1999).

Huggins has been asked if this scene was filmed at See’s: “What actually happened is one of the producers toured our factory to see how candy was really made. Then they re-created part of the assembly line in a studio in Los Angeles. It was filmed there” (Sacramento Bee, August 11, 1999).

The stores have a variety of chocolate goodies. The names were kept simple yet mouthwatering: Walnut Cluster, Peanut Cluster, Almond Square, Milk Patties, Molasses Chip, and Milk Cherry. Maybe Death by Chocolate will be one of the offerings in this new millennium or maybe Belly Rubbin’ Good. Lollipops in chocolate, butterscotch, and other flavors are also available.

The number of distribution centers vary according to the season. Many sales are made through direct shipments nationwide from these centers. Significant seasonality exists in this business—heavy sales in cold months and light sales in hot months. Most of each year’s sales come in the last two months of the year when quantity discounts add to extremely high Christmas and New Year’s sales. See’s gift-wrapped boxes make popular Christmas presents. Half of See’s chocolate sales are made between Thanksgiving and New Year’s Eve. About 90% of its profits are recorded in December. In 2006, See’s sold about 50 million pounds of sweets and brought in a pretax profit of $27 million. See’s has 1,500 employees but adds another 3,500 to that at its peak Christmas season.

Among the many customers with fond memories of See’s is Karen Salerno who grew up in Houston with a See’s shop downtown. “It was one of the first businesses I ever knew that let me always try the candy to decide if I liked it before buying. I could go in, try four or five and then buy as little as two or three individual pieces, or as many gift-wrapped boxes, but was always treated courteously. That is how they won my loyalty and business.”

In March 1982, Berkshire received a $120 million cash bid for See’s from a British firm. Buffett didn’t bite. See’s net income has grown from about $6 million in 1981, to well over five times that much—about $31 million in 1996. But there has been trouble with expansion.

“We’ve looked at dozens of ideas of how to expand,” Buffett said at the annual meeting in 1988. “And in the end we haven’t found how to do it. … It’s a tough business.”

See’s has opened a few sites in New York and Pennsylvania and in 1976, went international with a few locations including Hong Kong. More recently See’s has opened shops in Singapore and Guam. See’s, which calls itself a “Happy Habit,” can now be ordered over the Internet and is available on Amazon.com.

Buffett himself is a big See’s eater. But even when it comes to delicious chocolates, Buffett strives for discipline, and limits himself to one two-pound box a month which is delivered like clockwork to Berkshire headquarters. Everyone at the office enjoys it. See’s is another example of, “We eat our own cooking.”

In every box of See’s, you’ll find the following message:

Since 1921, we have worked hard to maintain the tradition of quality which literally millions of faithful See’s candy eaters have come to expect, year after year.



Our philosophy is quite simple: Be absolutely persistent in all attitudes regarding quality—buy only the best ingredients obtainable—offer the most delicious and interesting assortments of candies available in the United States, if not the world—own and operate all See’s sparkling white shops, while providing the highest level of customer service.



This may seem old-fashioned, if not unusual, in this day and age—but it works. At the same time we fully believe that we can always do a better job at what we try to do—ultimately making people happy!



See’s has tried to stick to doing business the traditional way. For example, it long refused to honor credit cards in its stores. That changed on November 18, 1997 according to this ad in the Los Angeles Times:

After some lengthy debate, the Accounting Department at See’s has concluded that credit cards are here to stay. So now we’ve begun accepting American Express, Visa, MasterCard, and Discover cards at all of our shops. We want to make it easier for you to make your purchases, especially during the holiday season. Other than that, nothing has changed. Your cash and personal checks are still gladly welcome. And when it comes to making candy, and to our friendly service, we’re happy to stay behind the times. Forty years behind at least.



Presumably, Buffett’s top-secret plan for synergy at Berkshire calls for all that candy to be washed through everyone’s digestive tract with Cokes.

The Tim Moylan family of Omaha are believers in Buffett’s plan. Moylan keeps a stock of See’s at his office for visitors. One day, according to writer Robert McMorris, the candy caught the fancy of Moylan’s four-year-old son, Dan.

“Remember our friend, Howard Buffett?” asked Moylan. “Well, Howard’s father owns the factory that makes the candy.” Replied Dan, “You mean Howard’s dad is Willy Wonka?” McMorris promptly got a note from Buffett saying he planned to pass out samples of See’s candy at the Berkshire Annual Meeting (Omaha World-Herald, April 8, 1992).

“When business sags,” Buffett once wrote, “we spread the rumor that our candy acts as an aphrodisiac. Very effective. The rumor, that is; not the candy.”

The aphrodisiac theme has come up before in the annals of chocolate:

’Twill make old women young and fresh;



Create new motions of the flesh,



And cause them to long for you know what,



If they but taste of chocolate.



(James Wadsworth’s quatrain as contained in A Curious History of the Nature and Quality of Chocolate as quoted in the Jöel Glenn Brenner, Emperors of Chocolate: Inside the Secret World of Hershey and Mars, pp. 94–95.)

Buffett said at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1997, “Here we were in 1972—and we know a fair amount about candy; in fact, I know more than when I sat down this morning. I’ve eaten about 20 pieces already.”

He then said, “But does their face light up on Valentine’s Day when you hand ’em a box of candy of some nondescript origin and say, ‘Here, Honey, I took the low bid’? You’ve got tens of millions of people, or at least many millions of people, who remember that the first time they handed that box of candy to someone, it wasn’t long thereafter that they got kissed for the first time or something. The memories are good. The associations are good.”

Munger added: “See’s is the first time we paid up for quality. If they had wanted just $100,000 more for See’s, we wouldn’t have bought it.”

Buffett continued, “If we hadn’t bought See’s, we wouldn’t have bought Coke. So thank See’s for the $12 billion. We’ve had the luck to buy whole businesses that taught us a whole lot. We’ve had windmills, well, I’ve had windmills. Charlie was never in the windmill businesses. I’ve had second-rate department stores, pumps, and textile mills.”

Munger ended the discussion saying: “I don’t think it’s necessary to be as dumb as we were.”

Buffett loves See’s: “I find companies fascinating. We’ve had See’s since 1972, but I can tell you what its sales are day by day. We had 1,800 orders yesterday off the Internet, for example” (St. Petersburg Times, December 15, 1999).

In 1999, online sales were $2.7 million. Coming off a small base, See’s Internet sales were growing rapidly in early 2000.

So how did the Internet come to old-fashioned See’s, where each piece of candy is placed by hand in boxes?

“Buffett called Huggins and told him to get on the Internet,” said See’s Dave Harvey. See’s set up the Web site on July 28, 1998, and began very cautiously.

In late 1999, Buffett toured the See’s Candies plant in Carson, California. When he walked by the area where Internet orders are received, he noticed a sign that said: “WEB orders.” “Oh, thanks, you’ve got my initials up there,” he quipped.

A big piece of See’s business, in addition to 70% of its sales through its retail outlets, is bulk orders for fundraisers or for corporations. In a Berkshire synergy note, GEICO employees get a discount at See’s. “We love GEICO,” said a See’s employee.

Where does See’s get its chocolate? From Guittard in San Francisco, just down the street from the See’s factory. Large tanker trucks deliver the melted chocolate which is held at 120 degrees. During Christmas and Easter, See’s gets several tanker truck deliveries a day. Yum!

On a (short but) sour note, in September 2000, about 300 workers walked off the job in South San Francisco on strike after contract talks broke down about higher wages and more health care coverage. The strike lasted six weeks before See’s agreed to pension and pay raises and also to add the Union’s emblem of the Bakery, Confectionery, Tobacco Workers, and Grain Millers International Union Local 125 on the candy boxes.

On a sweet note, when Liza Minnelli married producer David Gest in New York on March 16, 2002, the favors were one-pound boxes of See’s Candies at each place setting. Cards attached to the boxes said, “Liza and David 4 Ever.” Apparently not. The couple separated the following year. People (April 1, 2002) quoted a friend as saying, that Gest “sucked her lips right out of her face at the wedding.” Buffett has said See’s helps with that sort of thing.

During a See’s Candies tour in Carson, California in 2002, Mrs. Huggins said that David Gest, a longtime See’s customer, ordered 900 boxes of candy.

On an entertaining note, according to Janet Lowe in her book Damn Right! (p. 126), 16-year-old Cher was working at See’s when she met Sonny Bono and left her job to move in with him to become his eye-candy.

See’s finally took small expansion steps in 2005 when a new office was opened in Waukesha, Wisconsin. See’s selected the location as a center to focus on sales in Wisconsin and Illinois.

Also in 2005, a new store was planned in a location east of Colorado: Chicago.

After Huggins retired as president and CEO at the end of 2005, Brad Kinstler took his place. Kinstler, a Berkshire executive since 1987, once headed Berkshire’s Cypress Insurance in Pasadena and later its Fechheimer uniform company in Cincinnati before succeeding Huggins at See’s.

In 2007, See’s continued to expand its business beyond its California home base by opening kiosks in 21 airports, mainly in western states but also in Boston’s Logan Airport. By the end of 2007, more than 100 temporary holiday gift centers were to open from Maryland to Minnesota.

Buffett wrote of the advantages of a durable product, citing See’s as an example in the 2007 Annual Report:

At See’s, annual sales were 16 million pounds of candy when Blue Chip Stamps purchased the company in 1972. (Charlie and I controlled Blue Chip at the time and later merged it into Berkshire.) Last year See’s sold 31 million pounds, a growth rate of only 2% annually. Yet its durable competitive advantage, built by the See’s family over a 50-year period, and strengthened subsequently by Chuck Huggins and Brad Kinstler, has produced extraordinary results for Berkshire.



We bought See’s for $25 million when its sales were $30 million and pre-tax earnings were less than $5 million. The capital then required to conduct the business was $8 million. (Modest seasonal debt was also needed for a few months each year.) Consequently, the company was earning 60% pre-tax on invested capital. Two factors helped to minimize the funds required for operations. First, the product was sold for cash, and that eliminated accounts receivable. Second, the production and distribution cycle was short, which minimized inventories.



Last year, See’s sales were $383 million, and pre-tax profits were $82 million. The capital now required to run the business is $40 million. This means we have had to reinvest only $32 million since 1972 to handle the modest physical growth—and somewhat immodest financial growth—of the business. In the meantime pre-tax earnings have totaled $1.35 billion. All of that, except for the $32 million, has been sent to Berkshire (or, in the early years, to Blue Chip). After paying corporate taxes on the profits, we have used the rest to buy other attractive businesses. Just as Adam and Eve kick-started an activity that led to six billion humans, See’s has given birth to multiple new streams of cash for us. (The biblical command to “be fruitful and multiply” is one we take seriously at Berkshire.)



WHAT A FRIEND WE HAVE IN JESUS

One of Buffett’s classic one-liners came early in the Salomon crisis. During that time, Buffett had to stay in New York for extended periods. While there, he made the comment: “My mother’s sewn my name in the underwear, so it’s all okay.”

Buffett, known for this one-liner, outdid himself in a question-and-answer session after a talk to Seattle’s CityClub July 20, 2001. He explained that See’s makes about 80% of its money just before the Christmas holidays. Then suddenly came the holiest of Buffettisms: “The company song is: ‘What a friend we have in Jesus.’”

A man of the cloth interjected that he was glad to hear Buffett had a friend in Jesus. At one point Buffett said he would like to recognize another religion, if it could come up with a holiday in July. Perhaps the Grand Church of Permanent Shareholder Value.

He said he loved Seattle because he had free room and board at Bill and Melinda Gates’s house.

Buffett’s talk and joke were extremely well received, according to Floyd Jones, head of FirstWashington Corp. of Seattle, who was in the audience of 1,100 people. “They really got a big laugh at that.” Jones added, “He received a standing ovation. He owned the entire Seattle business community after the talk.”

Buffett’s crack bears some relation to one made once by a Birmingham florist. Swamped with Christmas orders, he said in exasperation: “Thank God Mary didn’t have twins.”

In any event, See’s has a superstar in Jesus Christ.



55 Years as the Candyman

Chuck Huggins served longer than any other head of a Berkshire-operating business. In 1971, when the See family decided to sell the business, Huggins interviewed potential buyers, including Buffett. Huggins retired at the end of 2005 saying: “Thanks to a steady diet of Molasses Chips, Bordeaux, Butterchews, and lollipops, I am in great health and ready for a new adventure.” Huggins started out in 1951 managing the packing department. See’s operates more than 200 retail stores and is in 11 airports.

(Courtesy of

See’s Candies)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Aphrodisiacs, Galactic Sex, and Cosmic Chocolate Sold Here.

This See’s Candies shop in Pasadena, California, is typical of the West Coast firm’s more than 200 aphrodisiac shops in black and white décor serving chocoholics. Buffett hopes customers wash the sugar down with Coke, then grab their Gillette Oral-B toothbrushes.

(Photo by Andrew Kilpatrick)

Of Permanent Value See’s Candies



Hall of Fame

Cardboard cutout of Mary See at the company’s Carson, California plant. Next stop, the Berkshire Hall of Fame Wax Museum.

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)



Lucy Clones

At See’s packing plant in Carson, California, workers pack one-pound boxes of assorted chocolates.

(Photo courtesy of See’s Candies)



Lucille Ball in the late 1960s

See’s Candies The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value See’s Candies



(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

Mrs. See

Dave Harvey, who is with the See’s plant in Carson, California, stands next to a cardboard cutout of Mary See. (But, says Dave, “Gentlemen prefer wax women, not cardboard.”)

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)



(AP/Photo/Robert Spencer)

Some Marriages—Even with See’s—

Don’t Have Low Enough Expectations.

Newlyweds Liza Minnelli and David Gest arrive at their wedding reception at the Regent Wall Street Hotel in New York on March 16, 2002, shortly before their divorce.

See’s Candies The Story of Warren Buffett



(AP/Wide World Photos)

Cher About to Devour a

See’s Chocolate Microphone

Cher, a former See’s employee, raises her award for lifelong contributions to the music industry, at the 1999 World Music Awards in Monoco.

Slim Down on the

See’s Barbie Atkins Diet

The See’s Candies Barbie Doll made by Mattel, dressed in her prim white uniform, was introduced at Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2000. One thousand orders were made in the first few days following Buffett’s announcement that the product would be available.



(Photo courtesy of See’s Candies)

Book by Cher

I Got You, Babe



(Photo by Mary Porter)



Three Wise Men

The entrance to See’s facility in Carson, California, honors left to right: Huggins, Buffett, and Munger.

(Photo by John Gartmann)



Gentlemen Prefer See’s

See’s Candies’ Barbie Doll model shares a piece of the world-famous chocolate with See’s former president Charles Huggins. He and Buffett, far right, display limited edition See’s Barbie Dolls that were introduced at the annual shareholders’ meeting Saturday, April 29, 2000. Joining in the announcement is Charles Munger, Berkshire’s vice chairman who couldn’t take his hands off the chocolate. See’s flavors of the day: Titillating Taffy and Chocolate Sexsation.

(Business Wire photo)

Of Permanent Value See’s Candies



Nice Job, Eva.

When Berkshire shareholder Charles Page stopped in See’s Candies Shop No. 9 in Monterey, he was impressed with the cheerfulness and efficiency of See’s employee Eva Magdaleno in handling a line of customers. Page wrote a post on AOL’s Berkshire board about the excellent service he received. A short time later Magdaleno received thank you letters from both Buffett and Huggins.

(Photo courtesy of Charles Page)



Mr. X, Author of Best Selling “How to Attract Beautiful Women at Any Age”

See’s President Chuck Huggins and wife Donna, hosted a tour of See’s Candies in Carson, California, on May 8, 2002.

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)



See’s Candies

A See’s Candies store has opened at Mall of America in Bloomington, Minnesota. Yum.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Cover of Book about See’s

Published in 2005

With the book, can a movie be far behind? Maybe with Angelina Jolie as Mary?

(Photo by Mary Porter)



Charlie and the Chocolate Factory

Published in 1964, this book has become a children’s classic.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

See’s Candies The Story of Warren Buffett



Buffett and Front-Door Floyd

First Washington Corp.’s Floyd Jones of Seattle, right, at the CityClub luncheon with Buffett. In 2007, Jones wrote an autobiography called Kisses for Breakfast of his rags-to-philanthropist run in life.

(Photo by Jeffrey Luke)

Of Permanent Value See’s Candies



91





THE BUFFALO NEWS


Buffett bought The Buffalo News—sight unseen—in 1977 for $34 million from the estate of Mrs. Edward H. Butler, Jr. Kate Butler, the matriarch of the family who had run the paper for nearly a century, had died in 1974.

The predecessor of the paper, The Buffalo Express, was for a time partially owned and edited by Mark Twain. Twain was the quintessential journalist, being one of the first to write books with a typewriter.

Buffett negotiated the purchase while Munger, dropping quarters in a pay phone near his lake home in Minnesota, dictated the contract to Buffett. Because of his knowledge of newspapers, Buffett could look at the paper’s financial statements and tell how the paper was doing; therefore, it wasn’t necessary, in his view, to go look at the plant. After all, he already knew what a printing press looked like.

He bought the newspaper, not through Berkshire, but through the other company he controlled, Blue Chip Stamps. The Chicago Tribune and The Washington Post had both turned down purchase of the paper. The Post passed because of its reluctance in dealing with the paper’s 13 unions. The Post, after all, had just crushed an ugly strike at its paper (Murray Light, From Butler to Buffett, The Story Behind the Buffalo News, p. 197).

Newspaper broker Vincent Manno had been given the task of selling the paper. After the Post declined, Manno got a call from Buffett, and the sale was finalized April 15, 1977. In 1971, Buffett had made an unsuccessful bid to buy the Cincinnati Enquirer. He had long wanted to own a major newspaper (Murray Light book, p. 196).

In 1977, the paper introduced a weekly entertainment tabloid called Gusto. “I had come up with the idea,” retired News Editor Murray Light recalled. “It was vetoed by then publisher, Henry Urban, because anything that had to do with changes in how the press was set up was upsetting to all the powers that be. In my first meeting with Warren Buffett, I told him one of the things I definitely wanted to do was publish the entertainment tabloid, which would be a new direction for us. He said, ‘Let’s explore it a little more, let’s get it done’” (The Buffalo News, December 28, 2002). Gusto launched June 3, 1977, and became a success.

In her book Personal History, Katharine Graham wrote:

I started to look into properties that I’d hear were available. Warren was of especial help on acquisitions, knowing to some degree about almost every deal that was taking place or had taken place in the previous 10 years. One potential acquisition we considered was a television station in Buffalo. Warren advised me that the newspaper, which was also for sale, would be a better buy, and if we didn’t want it, he did. Although dominant in its market, the paper had strong competition, strong unions, and no Sunday edition. When we decided not to pursue it, Warren bought it and after considerable struggle managed it to great success. I still feel we made the right decision for us (p. 581).



The Buffalo News had a very slow start after being added to the Berkshire fold. The following are excerpts from the 1981 Annual Report of Blue Chip Stamps written by Charles Munger:

Our 100%-owned subsidiary, Buffalo Evening News, Inc., was acquired in April 1977 for approximately $34 million. It now constitutes only approximately $28.5 million of our consolidated net worth, as a result of about $5.5 million of aggregate after-tax operating losses after acquisition. This translates roughly into $11 million of aggregate operating losses before taxes.



However, the operating loss, before taxes, of the News in 1981 was lower than that of 1980, having declined to $1,091,000 from $2,805,000 in the previous year, which in turn had declined from $4,617,000 in 1979. …



We predicted accurately the financial improvement in 1980 and 1981. For 1982 we confidently predict a lack of improvement. We anticipate terrible market conditions for the News in 1982. …



Economic forces are at work which are plainly beyond anyone’s control, and we are catching at least our share of a widespread malaise. We know of no easy solution.



It is of course a temptation when writing an annual letter to shareholders to gloss over difficulties, like those in Buffalo, and comment extensively concerning successes. We recommend exactly the opposite emphasis to business managers who report to us, and we believe in practicing what we preach. Accordingly, year after year, we re-tell and extend the history of the News, creating the largest single section of our annual letter. This year we surpass all previous records. …



While convention doesn’t require reporting of “opportunity cost” losses to shareholders, we believe they are just as important as conventional reported losses and should be faced just as squarely. If we hadn’t purchased the News in 1977 but had simply earned returns on the unspent purchase price comparable with the average earning power of the rest of our shareholders’ equity, we would now have about $70 million in value of other assets, earning over $10 million per year, in place of The Buffalo Evening News and its current red ink. No matter what happens in the future in Buffalo we are about 100% sure to have an economic place lower than we would have occupied if we had not made our purchase. …



The News remains a salable property, even with its current troubles, so long as its share of circulation and advertising is stable to inching ahead, and we could easily improve our consolidated operating earnings and the percentage return we earn on our shareholders’ investment by selling the News and reinvesting the proceeds, after tax effects, in profit-earning assets. That we are not even slightly tempted to do so demonstrates our conviction that Buffalo will have a reasonably felicitous future as a city and that the fine people who work at the News will ultimately succeed in making it a sound business for its owners and employees, through continued provision of sound service to its customers. We still plan to stay with the News until it either expires, or far more likely, becomes a solid earner and employer.



Buffett, seeing that the Buffalo paper might be a good business if it could launch a Sunday edition, bought the property. It has been wholly owned by Berkshire since 1983, when Blue Chip was merged into Berkshire.

Light wrote in his book: “A few weeks prior to finalizing the sale of the News to Blue Chip, I met with Buffett and Munger in the editorial conference room next to my office. … Early on in that meeting, Buffett asked my feeling about a Sunday paper, which the News had not published since 1915. My response was that I felt very strongly about the need for a Sunday publication, given that every study indicated that the Sunday edition of newspapers were gaining in circulation and advertising and were in effect offsetting the losses in the revenue streams from their daily operations” (p. 209).

The News quickly decided to launch a Sunday paper and did so in November 1977. Its special introductory offers to subscribers and advertisers brought a swift reaction—a lawsuit on the grounds the introductory practices were improper—from its competitor, the morning Buffalo Courier-Express, and later from a Cowles Media paper that published seven days a week.

The News eventually beat back the lawsuit, but both papers continued to lose money for years. From the time of Buffett’s purchase in 1977, the News lost about $12 million, before taxes, through December 31, 1982. However, on September 19, 1982, the Courier-Express folded, and what Buffett had on his hands was a flourishing monopoly, his favorite kind of business. The News began putting out a morning edition, and today the successful paper publishes Sunday and eight additional editions each week.

Lipsey thinks Buffett’s upbeat personality helped pull the paper through its tough times. “He’s put all his money in. He’s got a Sunday section going to zip. He’s got an antitrust action. He’d be encouraging. He’d say thanks for calling” (Roger Lowenstein, Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist, p. 217).

Munger has often said that buying the News was not a sure thing. While it was a gamble with favorable odds, the quick and favorable outcome came partly from luck.

Forbes (January 3, 1983) reported:

Warren Buffett Strikes Again. The rich get richer. Or maybe we should say the smart get richer. When investment genius Warren Buffett bought the ailing The Buffalo Evening News back in 1977, a lot of people figured: Oh, well, he’s rich enough to have an expensive hobby. After all, the Omaha-based businessman and investor was already prosperous enough to make The Forbes Four Hundred. And what happens to Buffett’s folly? Several months ago the rival morning Courier-Express folded, leaving Buffett with a monopoly daily and Sunday newspaper in a somewhat depressed but still rich area of western New York.



The Buffalo Evening News was acquired for $33 million in 1977. It’s now worth an estimated $400 million.



With 10,000 employees, The Buffalo News serves the large city and surrounding area long-regarded as the eastern end of the Rust Belt, an industrial outpost on the Canadian border. The only metropolitan paper within its 10-county distribution area, it has a high percentage of household penetration in that area.

The News has turned into a quintessential Buffett business. It has a return on assets of “an astonishing 91.2%,” according to a January 1991 story in NewsInc magazine. “The Buffalo News may well be the most profitable newspaper company in the country,” according to the article. The paper has a circulation of 224,000 a day and 316,000 on Sunday.

Indeed, the paper has the highest profit margin of the nation’s publicly owned newspapers, better than 35 cents on each dollar the paper takes in, according to Editor and Publisher, as quoted by the Columbia Journalism Review (November/December 1998). The Review portrayed the News as a respectable if not outstanding paper. It said although it was a huge success as a business, “Journalistically, Buffett gets a B in Buffalo.”

Barbara Ireland, the former editorial page editor at the News, now with The New York Times, told the Columbia Journalism Review, “You could do a helluva lot worse than Warren Buffett as owner. He definitely was not the standard business conservative. I saw a humane attitude on social issues. He had just two major issues: world population and nuclear weapons control. Because he doesn’t impose his politics, most people don’t even know what they are.”

The article quoted the News Editor Murray Light as saying, “In his first meeting with me, he told me he would not interfere with newsroom operations. He never has.”

In his book, Light wrote, “Buffett, for the most part, has confined his direction to the News circulation and advertising-rate policies and has refrained from any involvement in its editorial product or policies. He has maintained that hands-off editorial policy steadfastly and has fended off numerous opportunities to get involved. These are decisions, he always has said, that can only properly be evaluated and made by the editors of the paper” (Murray Light book, p. 201).

Buffett is listed on the masthead as chairman of The Buffalo News and is followed by Stanford Lipsey, publisher and president, then Margaret Sullivan, the editor who replaced Murray Light. After serving as editor for 30 years, Light retired in September 1999.

Just before Light’s 71st birthday in 1996, Buffett wrote: “From both a professional and a personal standpoint, you are a perfect person to be editor of The Buffalo News. I’ve always considered myself very lucky in having you there when I arrived in 1977” (The Buffalo News, August 9, 1999).

Slight of build, the curly-haired Lipsey has been with Buffett since Berkshire bought the now defunct Sun Newspapers of Omaha in 1969. Lipsey owned that business when Berkshire acquired it and later took over management of the much larger The Buffalo News. Lipsey and Buffett are close friends and talk on the phone frequently. In the 80s, Lipsey introduced Buffett to M&T Bank Chairman Robert Wilmers; and, in 1991, Berkshire made a $40 million successful investment in the bank.

When the Buffalo papers were in an all-out war, Buffett called Lipsey. “Warren asked me about moving to Buffalo, and I told him I really didn’t want to go. But then he said, ‘How about going up there one week a month, it will just run better with you up there’” (Robert P. Miles, The Warren Buffett CEO, p. 241). Lipsey shuffled off to Buffalo to stay. He now divides his time between Buffalo and Palm Springs, California.

“We’ve been working together for more than 30 years, and we’ve never had a disagreement,” added Lipsey. “In fact the biggest compliment that I’ve ever had was when Warren said to me, ‘Stan, you and I would make the same mistake.’”

Lipsey says Buffett “can take a complex situation and make it simple. I have sent a number of people who have had business problems to Warren. They’ve traveled to Omaha; they’ve come back and said, ‘He just made it so simple.’ They had been hassling with it—with attorneys, with accountants, with banks. Then they flew to Omaha and in a few minutes they knew exactly what they had to do. So they came back sort of in awe, with their eyes a ‘little glazed,’ because he made it so simple” (Robert P. Miles, The Warren Buffett CEO, p. 247).

Tim Medley, president of the Medley & Company investment counsel/financial planning company in Jackson, Mississippi, once told this story about meeting “Stan” at a Berkshire shareholder party at Borsheims the day before the annual meeting in 1990: “While you all were over talking to those bigwigs, I was talking to some regular fellow named Stan who said he was with The Buffalo News,” he said.

When informed that it must have been Stan Lipsey, publisher of the paper and a Pulitzer Prize winner, Medley demurred, doubting the fellow was really the publisher. Since he said he’d be glad to drop off a couple of copies of the newspaper at Medley’s hotel room the following morning, Medley had the impression “Stan” might be with the newspaper’s circulation department. The next morning, Medley discovered that “Stan” had left two copies of The Buffalo News at his hotel doorway.

Generally a newspaper has great difficulty enjoying better economic times than the area it serves, but someone forgot to tell that to Lipsey.

“We don’t budget at the News,” he told NewsInc. “We maintain a living, everyday awareness of expenses, and thereby we save an enormous amount of time and aggravation that goes into budgeting.” This attitude is common but not always present in all Berkshire’s subsidiaries.

BUFFALO

Since 1950, Buffalo’s population has fallen by half to 292,000. The city of cold winds lost 23% of its manufacturing jobs in the early 1980s. Its industrial base has declined after taking hits such as the closings at Bethlehem Steel in 1983. Life recovered gradually for the mostly blue-collar city after the U.S.-Canada free trade agreement of late 1988. The unemployment rate dropped from a whopping high of 13% in the 1980s to a respectable 5% by the early 1990s.

Buffalo, perched on the Niagara River separating the United States and Canada, is just a 90-minute drive to Toronto, the highly congested and expensive business hub of Canada. Real estate prices have been improving, and many Canadian businesses have opened offices in Buffalo, once home for the late Tim Russert, of NBC election chalk board fame. Russert’s father once delivered the News as a second job (Tim Russert, Big Russ & Me, p. 64).

It also didn’t hurt that the Buffalo Bills professional football team improved to the point that they were the first team to appear in four straight Super Bowls from 1991 to 1994—only to lose every game.

Businesses still are not enthralled with Buffalo’s bitterly cold snow-belt winters. (A blizzard in 1977 caused snow drifts as high as 30 feet.) But local boosters of the city are fond of saying that the city does have four seasons. What is attractive to businesses is the fact that Buffalo’s industrial land costs are far below those of Toronto, as are taxes and electricity.

All this has not been lost on The Buffalo News, which has been enjoying steadily rising profits even in a sluggish ad environment. Among newspapers published in major markets, The Buffalo News claims the highest percentage of area household coverage, 66% on weekdays and 81% on Sundays.

Buffett has said he believes the large “newshole” (percentage of the paper devoted to news versus advertising) of The Buffalo News to be greater than that of any other dominant paper of its size or larger.

In 1997, The Buffalo News won a George Polk Award for excellence in journalism. The reporting of Kevin Collison linked the death of a teenager, who was run over on a highway on her way to work at a suburban shopping mall, with an alleged policy of denying some city buses access to the mall in order to discourage minority customers.

On September 9, 1998, Buffett made an appearance to help sell luxury boxes and club seats for the Buffalo Bills to help keep the team in Buffalo. The Buffalo News (July 15, 1998) reported that team owner Ralph C. Wilson, Jr. and The Buffalo News publisher Stan Lipsey collaborated on the invitation to Buffett. Buffett gave his thoughts on the matter: “I think it’s important for Buffalo to keep the Bills, so I’m happy to do it for Buffalo and Ralph. I think it would be a terrible mistake for Buffalo to lose the Bills.”

In his folksy way, Buffett put it like this: “It’s a little like virginity,” he said of the National Football League franchise. “It can be preserved, but not restored. If this community loses it, you’re not going to get it back.” And if Buffalo lost the Bills and somehow managed to earn another franchise, Buffett said, it would pay a lot more for the privilege (The Buffalo News, September 19, 1998).

Two The Buffalo News reporters, Lou Michel and Dan Herbeck, wrote a book about Timothy McVeigh entitled American Terrorist. The infamous McVeigh was convicted and put to death on June 11, 2001, for the bombing of the Oklahoma City Murray Federal Building in 1995. The book portrayed McVeigh, who grew up outside Buffalo, as showing no remorse for the bombing that killed 168 people.



In 2001, the News launched a CityXpress Home and Garden online magazine at its portal, http://www.buffalo.com/. Further, it announced plans to spend $40 million on a new press project. The computer-controlled German-made presses run 75,000 copies an hour and deliver far better photo reproduction. “These presses alone cost more than Berkshire paid for the newspaper (in 1977), when nobody else would buy it,” said Buffalo News publisher Stan Lipsey (The Buffalo News, June 10, 2001). The new presses started running in 2004.

Although Buffett doesn’t normally intrude on the business decisions of Berkshire’s operating managers, he was a cheerleader for GEICO’s decision to bring at least 2,400 new jobs to the Buffalo area in 2003: “I wanted it [a new call center] to be there, make no mistake about that. When it became clear that we needed another center in the Northeast, as far as I was concerned, it should come to Buffalo” (The Buffalo News, December 24, 2003).

Gradually, economic woes mounted for the News; and in order to cut costs, the paper offered a buyout to 65 employees with 25 years experience and switched to morning-only delivery. “Like every other paper, we have to reduce expenses,” Lipsey was quoted. “We are not losing money, but we are seeing the writing on the wall” (Editorial Publisher, June 27, 2006). In early 2008, the paper offered buyouts to 300 employees.

The buyouts continued over the years at The News. In mid-2011, ten high-profile reporters and a columnist accepted buyouts.



The Buffalo News’

Faithful Delivery Dog

(Photos by Mary Porter)



Former Editor Murray Light wrote a

history of The Buffalo News.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Story of Warren Buffett



A Company So Obsessed Even Its Real Estate Looks Like a Newspaper

The Buffalo News, an early Berkshire investment, now earns in a year about what Buffett originally paid for the newspaper.

(Courtesy of The Buffalo News)

Of Permanent Value The Buffalo News



(From The Buffalo News, 2003)

The Buffalo News The Story of Warren Buffett



The Boss Said Let ’Em Roll.

The Buffalo News Publisher Stan Lipsey, a lover of jazz and photography, is shown here as the presses run. He now spends winter months at a home in California, keeping in touch with his editors by phone. Early on Lipsey had sold a chain of suburban Omaha papers to Buffett.

(Courtesy of The Buffalo News)



Murray Light

Former Editor Murray Light worked at the News exactly 50 years, retiring September 19, 1999. After retiring he wrote a book about his paper called, From Butler to Buffett: The Story Behind The Buffalo News. He could have called it From Mark Twain to Buffett. Light died in 2011 on his 85th birthday.

Of Permanent Value The Buffalo News



(Photo courtesy of

The Buffalo News)

Margaret Sullivan

Margaret Sullivan was named editor after Light’s retirement and has said: “My goal is for The Buffalo News to be the best regional newspaper in the

country.”



Checking Newsprint Costs?

Buffett near a Buffalo News display before Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 1994. Maybe he is checking his horoscope to see if it is a good day to purchase something.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

The Buffalo News The Story of Warren Buffett



Huddle Up.

Left to right: New York Governor George Pataki, Buffalo Bills’ owner Ralph Wilson, Buffett, and The Buffalo News publisher Stan Lipsey strategize at a function on September 9, 1998, to boost the cause of the Buffalo Bills. Buffett’s effort (and 5’ 9 3/4” Doug “The Pass” Flutie’s quarterbacking before he signed with the San Diego Chargers) helped keep the Bills in town for at least another five years.

(Photo courtesy of The Buffalo News)

Patrick English of Riverside, Connecticut, became aware of Berkshire while working as a paperboy for the News: “I first heard about Berkshire as a paper carrier for The Buffalo News in the mid ’70s. I started reading annual reports in the mid ’80s. Invested in the ’90s. Now I sit back counting all the zeros. (Ha.Ha.)”

English wrote Buffett the following letter on April 24, 1996:

“Today my wife and I made our first very important investment decision regarding the future of our first child and purchased stock. We bought one share of Berkshire Hathaway. My first order of business as a new owner of Berkshire is to let management know I’m around and that I’ll be watching that they watch out for the company. I’ve got the easy part.

“Thank you for your investment wisdom. We look forward to being part of a great company for a long time.”

And Buffett replied April 29, 1996:

“Thanks for your nice note. You can be sure that I’ll tend to business now that I know you’re watching.”

Of Permanent Value The Buffalo News



92





NEBRASKA FURNITURE MART


He [Buffett] walked into the store and said, ‘Today is my birthday, and I want to buy your store. How much do you want for it?’ I tell him, ‘$60 million.’ He goes, gets a check and comes back right away,” Rose Blumkin, known as Mrs. B, once said of Buffett’s purchase of the Nebraska Furniture Mart.

Buffett’s final price for the 1983 purchase was $55 million for 80%, with the other 20% being held by management. Berkshire originally had bought 90% of the store, but later family management raised its stake to 20%. Sales at this time were about $88 million a year. (Sales were about $700 million in 2005.)

In writing of the purchase in Berkshire’s 1983 Annual Report, Buffett said: “Last year, in discussing how managers with bright, but adrenaline minds scramble after foolish acquisitions, I quoted Pascal, ‘It has struck me that all the misfortunes of men spring from the single cause that they are unable to stay quietly in one room.’ Even Pascal would have left the room for Mrs. Blumkin.”

Buffett said the total legal and accounting fees for the purchase were $1,400. When Buffett was buying the store, he did not even order an inventory check until the deal was completed. When Mrs. B., who never spent a day of her life in a school room, asked where his accountants, lawyers, and investment bankers were; he replied, “I trust you more.” Buffett also reportedly said: “I would rather have her word than that of the Big 8 auditors—it’s like dealing with the Bank of England.” The contract was one page long and Mrs. B. signed by simply making a mark. She never learned to read or write English.

At the time of the purchase, Nebraska Furniture Mart had yearly sales of $500 a square foot in the 200,000-square-foot store. The Mart is Nebraska’s No. 2 tourist attraction after Omaha’s Henry Doorly Zoo.

Former NBC anchor Tom Brokaw, who worked in Omaha in the early 1960s, has made a few purchases of his own over the years.

Although Buffett just walked in and bought the store, it is not as though he

hadn’t thought about it for a long time. More than 10 years before the purchase, he told journalist Adam Smith it was a good business. Smith recounted the conversation: “We are driving down a street in Omaha, and we pass a large furniture store. I have to use letters in the story because I can’t remember the numbers. ‘See that store?’ Warren says. ‘That’s really a good business. It has “a” square feet of floor space, does an annual volume of “b,” has an inventory of only “c,” and it turns over its capital at “d,”

“Why don’t you buy it?” I said.

“It’s privately held,” Warren said.

“Oh,” I said.

“I might buy it anyway,” Warren said. “Someday” (Adam Smith, Supermoney, p. 196).

The Nebraska Furniture Mart, founded in 1935, is a whopper of a furniture store—the largest single home-furnishings complex in the United States.

In 1993, the store expanded by building an electronics and appliance superstore and today serves a trade area within a 300-mile radius from Omaha. It sells everything: rugs, sofas, lamps, tile, lawn furniture, grandfather clocks, electronics, cellular phones, and appliances.

“Anybody would learn a lot more from watching this business for a few months than from going to business school,” Buffett says (The New York Times, June 17, 1994).

Rose Blumkin, formerly Rose Gorelick, was one of eight children born to a rabbi and a mother who ran a small grocery store during the reign of czars. She was born on December 3, 1893, near Minsk, Russia. Later she talked her way past a border guard, assuring him she would return after buying leather for the army and a bottle of vodka for him. Instead of returning, she made her way to this country; and afterwards did only two things: run her business and raise her family.

Mrs. B., all feisty 4-foot-10-inches of her, came to the U.S. in 1917, at the age of 23. Her family did fine until the Depression hit. To prevent her family from starving, Mrs. B. went around to local stores, checked prices, and then printed 10,000 circulars offering to dress any man from head to toe for $5. After circulating these fliers, she made $800 (Rich Rockwood, Internet article, June 10, 2000). She began selling furniture in her basement in 1936, and started Nebraska Furniture Mart in 1937, with only $500. “Just imagine what she could have done with more,” Buffett jokes. Her advice: “Sell cheap and tell the truth.” She followed that carefully with the exception of what she told the border guard. With this motto, she eventually made the Nebraska Furniture Mart the success that drew Buffett’s attention.

By controlling costs and offering value to the customer, she made the business flourish. In fact, when Mrs. Blumkin was sued by a competitor for selling too cheap, the judge not only ruled in her favor, he also decided to buy $1,400 worth of carpet from her.

For years Buffett brought friends by to see her, and he bragged at annual meetings and in the annual reports about how she picked up speed as she got older. His portrait of Mrs. B. was of a business heroine. But in 1989, at age 96, following a dispute with her family, she quit the business. The dispute arose over the remodeling and running of the Nebraska Furniture Mart’s carpet department to which she was so devoted.

Further, she demanded—and got—from Berkshire $96,000 for unused vacation time. Although she received every penny of it, she stormed out and set up shop across the street from the Nebraska Furniture Mart. She called her new store Mrs. B.’s Warehouse. “Their price $104; our price $80,” a sign in her store used to read.

“I got mad. I expect too much,” she later told Forbes (April 26, 1993).

At the time, she was moving around on her famous motorized cart. For a while, she said in interviews that Buffett was not her friend and that she was running her store to get revenge. For years afterwards, her family members preferred not to talk about it.

Buffett was once asked about his ability to inspire such loyalty in such a range of business managers, and he joked that he tended to have trouble with them in their 90s.

In his annual report, Buffett told it straight to shareholders but was more than gracious in his remarks about Mrs. B. Nevertheless, it was a distressing moment in a storybook business relationship. Yet better days would come.

The story worked its way to a happy ending when Berkshire bought her out again in 1992.

On December 1, 1991, just before Mrs. B.’s 98th birthday, Buffett paid a call to her and presented her with two dozen pink roses and a 5-pound box of See’s candy. Mrs. B. was quoted as saying, “He’s quite a gentleman” (Omaha World-Herald, February 2, 1992).

Reconciliation? The story said Louie Blumkin had asked his mother whether she might be willing to sell Mrs. B’s business to Berkshire. The rapproachement was well on its way when Rose Blumkin told the Omaha World-Herald (July 14, 1992) that she planned to sell her furniture business to her son, Louie Blumkin.

“I do a very good business there, but it’s hard to manage it,” she said. “My son offered to buy me out, and I’m going to sell.”

She said her son is buying the business for the Nebraska Furniture Mart owned by Berkshire.

Under the agreement of December 31, 1992, did Mrs. B. contemplate early retirement? No way. She kept selling carpet. However, Mrs. B. began having headaches over thefts at her store and was getting cantankerous with employees and customers.

“I am delighted that Mrs. B. has again linked up with us,” Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1992 Annual Report. “Her business story has no parallel and I have always been a fan of hers, whether a partner or a competitor.… But, believe me, partner is better.

“This time around Mrs. B. graciously offered to sign a non-compete agreement—and I, having been incautious on this point when she was 89, snapped at the deal. Mrs. B. belongs in the Guinness Book of World Records on many counts. Signing a non-compete at 99 merely adds one more.”

Explaining his oversight a decade earlier in not including the non-compete agreement then, 62-year-old Buffett conceded to Forbes (April 26, 1993), “I was young and inexperienced.”

“Maybe I was wrong. Maybe I was too hard on them,” Mrs. B. said in an interview (Omaha World-Herald, April 24, 1993). She and Buffett held dedication ceremonies for Mrs. B.’s after the Nebraska Furniture Mart bought it.

To begin the era of better feelings, Buffett pulled out a stuffed bee, playfully putting it in Mrs. B.’s hair and mugging for photographers. Shortly afterwards, she said, “He’s an honest person. He’s never stuck-up. He’s straight.”

Riding around in her cart in the carpet section, Mrs. B. said, “You can’t get good help these days,” adding that she had recently threatened some wayward employees by bluffing that she was going to throw acid in their eyes.

Her tough side once gave way and she said, “I live alone now and so that’s why I work. I hate to go home. I work to avoid the grave.” At the age of 100, Mrs. B. was still working at the store 60 hours a week.

“Rose Blumkin’s going to be 100 years old in December. Incidentally, she still works 7 days a week. The nights the store’s open until 9 o’clock, you’ll find her there at 9 o’clock. She rides around in a little golf cart, and if the salesperson isn’t waiting on someone and she gets a little disgusted, she goes up and rams him with her cart and makes her point,” Buffett told an audience at Columbia University’s Business School on October 27, 1993.

“We’ll do $200 million (in sales) in that store this year. A very remarkable woman, remarkable family. She has done it by having a terrific mind, an incredible desire.”

Sales at Nebraska Furniture Mart are now about $500 million a year.

Buffett said, “It was brains, intelligence, her wouldn’t-be-stopped drive. It wouldn’t have happened with anybody except Mrs. B. and it had to happen in America. It was the right qualities, the right soil” (Omaha World-Herald, August 10, 1998).

The Furniture Mart also owns a flooring business in Lincoln, Nebraska, and a commercial sales office in Des Moines, Iowa.

Nebraska Governor Ben Nelson, Senator Bob Kerrey, Representative Peter Hoagland, and Omaha Mayor P. J. Morgan all showed up at Mrs. B.’s Clearance and Factory Outlet for her 100th birthday celebration.

Kerrey said, “We all have noticed that sometimes we, as a consequence of profession, are held in somewhat low regard. So what we try to do is appear in photographs with people who are held in very high regard.”

Buffett couldn’t make the party because he was in New York for a Cap Cities board meeting. He did, however, give her a $1 million check for the Rose Blumkin Performing Arts Center in Omaha. The check, written on the Buffett Foundation account at FirstTier Bank, was folded up, rumpled, and had a Coke stain on it.

At Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1994, Buffett offered a display of Berkshire’s products, including a See’s candy assortment commemorating Mrs. B.’s 100th birthday. The box package featured her picture rather than Mrs. See’s.

Buffett, at the annual meeting in 1995, wondered aloud why students of business don’t study Mrs. B. “She started a business with $500 with not a day of school.… Look what she accomplished.… Who is studying her?” Buffett said business schools are preoccupied with teaching things like “Economic Value Added,” and just view Mrs. B. as a curiosity. Buffett said it was probably asking too much for folks to come out to the Nebraska Furniture Mart and “study a woman in a golf cart.”

In the 1996 Annual Report, Buffett wrote of Mrs. B., “She’s 103 now and sometimes operates with an oxygen mask that is attached to her cart. But if you try to keep pace with her, it will be you who needs oxygen.”

In 1997, Mrs. B. was fitted with a pacemaker. Her grandson said, “She’ll probably be back [at work] before the doctor will allow” (Omaha World-Herald, May 21, 1997).

It was only after fighting pneumonia in 1997 at the age of 103 that she began to work less often, dismissing her slowdown with, “I’m not sick. I’m lazy.” She died August 9, 1998. at the age of 104. Two days earlier she had worked at the Mart. Remarkably three of her siblings attended her funeral to send her to the Business Hall of Fame in the sky. At her death Buffett said, “She came over unable to speak the language. They’ll be studying her in business history books for decades.”

The Nebraska Furniture Mart is always a must-visit for Berkshire shareholders. I once wandered into the Mart a day prior to the annual meeting and was told that Buffett had been in earlier. I assumed he had left. When I turned into the carpet section, however, I saw a scene that would have warmed the heart of any Berkshire shareholder. In the middle of the carpet section were Buffett; his longtime friend Sandy Gottesman, chairman of the First Manhattan investment firm in New York and a large Berkshire shareholder; and Mrs. B., sitting in her cart. One had the feeling that if Buffett and Mrs. B. were really on the carpet section floor talking business, things were right in the world.

I walked up to Buffett and introduced myself as a Berkshire shareholder. He said, “Good, come to the annual meeting. Ask questions.”

We had a very brief chat in which, instead of asking about business, I asked how his tennis game was. He said he wasn’t playing much any more because of a back injury.

He and Gottesman wandered around the carpet section inspecting the operations and so I wandered around inspecting (stalking?) them.

Another year I asked a Nebraska Furniture Mart employee if Buffett had been in lately. She said yes, he had been in with a friend. Naturally, I inquired who the person was and she replied, “Some guy named Tisch.” Asked if it might be Larry or Preston Tisch, she said she had no idea.

Another time I spotted Charles Munger, wearing a well-worn casual travel jacket, blue shirt and dark slacks, wandering around in the lower level of the store.

Once, standing again in the carpet section, I saw an energetic young man in casual clothes come up to Mrs. B.’s grandson, Nebraska Furniture Mart’s Executive Vice-President Robert Batt, and ask to use the telephone. The man was Buffett’s son Howard Buffett, then county commissioner of Omaha’s Douglas County.

They talked politics for a time and then I said hello and asked him a question he’d heard a time or two in his life, “What’s your father like?”

The younger Buffett replied, “He’s great. I’ve been working on him a long time and he’s improving a lot.”

Batt, who had just been talking about Buffett, said: “I often fly in the plane with Buffett to go to New York to buy rugs. … Buffett will talk to all of us. Actually, he does the talking and we listen. We really don’t talk to Buffett. We listen… and then he’ll read a lot of the way.

“He knows more about our business than we do,” Batt continued. “He knows about our business and he knows about competitors. It’s not just that he knows about See’s. He knows about Russell Stover’s. He knows all about Coca-Cola, but then he also knows all about Pepsi, too.”

He also said Buffett has told him that he should have bought a huge stake in Disney, that he recognizes Michael Eisner’s talents.

The heavy-set Batt, once fell at a garage sale held by his friend, Sen. Bob Kerrey who was preparing to move from one home to another. Kerrey had asked him to help with the sale. Batt arrived to help and stumbled, hurting his back and knees and smashing a chest of drawers. “I massacred it,” Batt said. “But what’s really embarrassing is that I’m our company’s safety officer” (Omaha World-Herald, August 26, 1997).

Batt says the mart now has 1.2 million square feet—500,000 of which is selling space. It has a 40-foot high, 512,000-square-foot warehouse.

Both Katharine Graham of The Washington Post and Stanford Lipsey of The Buffalo News have visited the Nebraska Furniture Mart.

Of late, Berkshire-style synergy has come to the store. A See’s Candies shop is on the premises. As Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1990 Annual Report to shareholders, “While there, stop at See’s Candies cart and see for yourself the dawn of synergism at Berkshire.”

Installed October 21, 1990, the See’s Candies cart—the first See’s outlet east of Colorado—sold 1,000 pounds of candy in its first week. It didn’t hurt sales when Buffett went on a local ABC affiliate notifying Omaha chocoholics of the See’s Candies cart at the Furniture Mart. Buffett was an inexperienced spokesman back then, but GEICO’s Gecko wasn’t yet available.

Now Borsheims sometimes offers a small See’s candy box with its advertising materials. See’s is now offered in Wells Fargo’s online banking service as a gift idea selection. Expanded synergy? Who knows, maybe one day See’s and Coke will be combined into a Berkshire Foods Division based at the Nebraska Furniture Mart.

In October 1991, the Nebraska Furniture Mart opened a new store called Trends just behind the Mart. The store sells mainly ready-to-assemble contemporary furniture, including leather sofas, day beds, children’s furniture, and cribs.

Buffett was on hand for the ribbon cutting and predicted the store would become the second-largest furniture seller in the Midwest, second only to the Nebraska Furniture Mart itself.

With synergy apparently still on his mind, Buffett went over to the store’s soda fountain and asked for a Cherry Coke.

In the fall of 1994, the Furniture Mart opened the Mega Mart, billed as the “Greatest Store on the Planet.” The 102,000-square-foot store carries more than 50,000 items, mainly electronics, computer equipment, and appliances including built-in refrigerators, microwaves, cameras, video games, whirlpool baths, Cuisinarts, and coffee makers. An example of the discount pricing: CDs, which normally cost $14, sell for about $10.

At the opening ceremony Buffett said, “The Nebraska Furniture Mart is never finished.”

In 1999, the company opened a small carpet, appliances, and electronics store in West Des Moines.

In 2000, the Furniture Mart completed a $24 million expansion, but the project had another cost: The Mart parted ways with Thomasville, one of their long-time brands. Mart officials said Thomasville wanted to dictate how its display areas would be set up.

Still and all, the Nebraska Furniture Mart was the launching pad of Berkshire’s furniture empire.

Nebraska Furniture Mart is now the largest single retail location for home furnishings, appliances, electronics, and flooring in North America. In June 2000, Artios, a leading provider of business-to-business data, launched an e-commerce initiative to help simplify the Mart’s procurement.

In 2000, the Mart, at the suggestion of chairman emeritus, Louie Blumkin, bought Homemakers Furniture of Des Moines, Iowa. (See Homemakers chapter.)

Louie Blumkin is a friend of golf pro Tom Watson who has a houseful of furniture from the store. Blumkin, in his early 80s, checks the store’s showroom floors daily—by, what else—a motorized cart. Like mother, like son (Omaha World-Herald, December 17, 2000).

On February 8, 2001, Mart officials announced plans to build another Mart—slightly larger than the current one—in a $500 million shopping mall in the west side of Kansas City, Kansas adjacent to the Kansas Speedway.

Opened in 2003, the two-story Mart in Kansas City cost $125 million and features 160,000 items. It has 712,000-square-feet of retail space, bigger even than the 422,500-square-foot store in Omaha. A 130,000-square-foot warehouse was attached to the rear of the store. At the Omaha store, the company has a 700,000-square-foot distribution center, enough space for 12 football fields. The store, built from scratch, occupies 80 of the development’s 400 acres. “We’ll be the kings,” said Robert Batt, the Mart’s executive vice president and grandson of Mrs. B. Said one old shareholder, “Next stop: the world.”

Batt, optimistic about the store’s prospects, increased hiring in 2003 and said: “There are more people in the Kansas City metroplex than in the whole state of Nebraska” (Omaha World-Herald, March 6, 2003).

The Kansas City store has about 1,200 employees compared to 3,000 at the Omaha store. Exploding in growth, the Kansas City store was expected to catch up in sales in 2007, roughly $400 million for each store (Omaha World-Herald, January 14, 2007).

“With 450,000-square-feet of retail space, it could well produce the second largest volume of any furniture store in the country—the Omaha operation being the national champion” (Kansas City Jewish Chronicle, August 1, 2003).

Buffett attended a charity gala on August 14, 2003, to launch the new Nebraska Furniture Mart in Kansas. Proceeds benefited the breast cancer services at the University of Kansas Medical Center.

President Bush praised the Nebraska Furniture Mart’s Kansas City location, citing it as “an interesting American story.” During a speech at the Kansas City Convention Center on September 4, 2003, Bush singled out the store as an example of how tax relief has helped the economy.

Bush said Mart officials had planned to hire 550 new workers for the Kansas City store, but the “tax relief we passed put more money in people’s pockets, and the demand for the goods they sold in that store was greater than expected.” Therefore, the store wound up hiring 1,000 people.

Robert Batt, the store’s executive vice president, said that 10 days prior to the President’s speech, a White House speech writer called with questions about the Nebraska Furniture Mart and its history. Batt had to keep that to himself until after the speech was given. “It makes my day,” Batt said (Omaha World-Herald, September 5, 2003).

DALLAS

Nebraska Furniture Mart is planning a huge project in the Dallas area which, if plans move forward, would be finished in 2015.

Plans for the $1.5 billion, 433-acre complex in The Colony call for the retailer to seek developing partners for a theme park, hotels, and additional retail and restaurants.

The Omaha retailer is looking for partners, such as Dallas-Fort-Worth construction partners and architects.

The 1.8 million-square-foot retail and distribution center would include 1.2 million-square-feet of warehouse space, a 546,000-square-foot showroom, and 25,000 square-feet of regional corporate space. “We will be the mainstay of the whole development,” Bob Batt, the mart’s executive vice president told the Dallas Business Journal (November 9, 2011).

The glacially expanding Nebraska Furniture Mart has three other locations—Omaha, Kansas City, and Des Moines.



Nebraska’s #2 Tourist Attraction

Today’s Nebraska Furniture Mart, with 1,500 employees, operates a 450,000-square-foot facility on a 74-acre site in Omaha. Buffett loves for shareholders to visit the store. In connection with the Berkshire annual meeting in 1987, two yellow school buses were rented for $100 to take shareholders to the Nebraska Furniture Mart.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Nebraska Furniture Mart



(Omaha World-Herald)

Buffett wrote a song and sang it at the Omaha Press Club in 1987:

WARREN’S SONG

(to the tune of “The Battle Hymn of the Republic”)

Oh, we thought we’d make a bundle

When we purchased ABC

But we found it’s not so easy

When your network’s number 3

So now the load at Berkshire

Must be borne by Mrs. B

Her cart is rolling on.

Chorus:

Glory, Glory, Hallelujah

Keep those buyers coming to ya

If we get rich it must be through ya

Her cart is rolling on.

Ideas flop and stocks may drop

But never do I pale

For no matter what my screwups

It’s impossible to fail

Mrs. B will save me.

She’ll just throw another sale

Her cart is rolling on.

Chorus

Forbes may think I’m brilliant

When they make their annual log.

But the secret is I’m not the wheel

But merely just a cog.

Without the kiss of Mrs. B

I’d always be a frog

Her cart is rolling on.

Mr. B. and Mrs. B.

Go for a Ride

Buffett and Mrs. B were inducted into the Omaha Chamber of Commerce Business Hall of Fame in 1993. Mrs. B. is shown on her souped-up motorized cart known as “The Rose B.” She was famous for driving around the warehouse in a cart after both knees were replaced. Mrs. B. had a personality that you’d expect from the grandmother of Rolling Stones’s Keith Richards. Buffett has said Mrs. B. never spent much time at home because she was always at the store. But occasionally Buffett was able to catch up with her at home for visits. “She had little green price tags hanging from all the furniture in her house because it made her feel at home she said. That’s my kind of woman.”

Nebraska Furniture Mart The Story of Warren Buffett



The Check Cleared

Buffett once wrote a $1 million check to the

Rose Blumkin Center for the Performing Arts.

Of Permanent Value Nebraska Furniture Mart



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Subtle Synergy

In 1983, Buffett bought the Nebraska Furniture Mart in Omaha from Rose Blumkin after saying, “I’d like to buy your store.” When she said okay, he gave her a check for $60 million: no lawyers, no accountants, no investment bankers, no due diligence. The See’s sign may signal some slight and subtle synergy along the Berkshire road of Permanent Value.

Nebraska Furniture Mart The Story of Warren Buffett



Furniture Store for the Berkshire Set

The Mart specializes in electronics, computers, and appliances. It carries everything from CDs to coffee makers. This is where Buffett buys his big screen TVs, computers, and all

the rest.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Slow Down or I’ll Ticket You, Warren!

The “Sam Walton of Home Furnishings”—His Cart Is Rolling On

Louie Blumkin served in World War II in the invasion of Normandy and the Battle of the Bulge (earning a Purple Heart), and was at Dachau for the freeing of the prisoners. Here he is touring Nebraska Furniture Mart’s showroom floors. He remains involved with the store in his late 80s.

(Photo by

Omaha World-Herald)

Of Permanent Value Nebraska Furniture Mart



Sleeping with “The Warren”

For a good time, Scott Keller of Portland, Oregon, positions himself on “The Warren,” a bed for sale during the Berkshire annual meeting weekend in 2001. Nebraska Furniture Mart salesman Scott Kienow, explains The Warren’s features to Keller and how to create “your own Pleasure Palace.” No wonder the Mart did $14.2 million in sales during the 2002 shareholders’ weekend.

(Photo courtesy of Omaha World-Herald)

RUSSIAN BRIDE

NOT

INCLUDED



Bed Essentials

Buffett poses for an ad for “The Warren” sold by Nebraska Furniture Mart. Buffett calls the bedding “your best investment in rest.” Gotta have big dreams on this mattress.

(Photo by Andrew Kilpatrick)



“Hasta la Vista, Baby”

Nebraska Furniture Mart opened a huge store in Kansas City in 2003. The retail floor space covers the equivalent of 12 football fields. The 80-acre site includes 3,200 parking places. At the grand opening on August 14, 2003, at a time when Schwarzenegger had picked Buffett to be his economic adviser, Buffett told a gala gathering, “To our competitors, I say, ‘Hasta la vista, baby.’”

(Photo by Omaha World-Herald)

Nebraska Furniture Mart The Story of Warren Buffett



(AP/Wide World Photos)

Not Nebraska

A worker rumbles along Nebraska Furniture Mart’s site in Kansas City, Kansas, in view of the Kansas Speedway, where fans pumped $150 million into the local economy in 2001, the track’s first year. By 2007, the Kansas City store had annual sales of $400 million, equal to the Nebraska store.

WARREN,

WE’RE NOT

IN NEBRASKA

ANYMORE!



Sleeping on the Job

Saying he has a future as a mattress tester, Buffett tries the new “Warren” at the Kansas City store



(Photos courtesy of Warren Buffett)

Sitting Down on the Job

The “mattress tester” checks out a chair. Buffett may look like he’s taking it easy here, but as a shopper, he’s a speed merchant. NFM CEO Irv Blumkin has said Buffett is a loyal customer. “He buys everything here. He’s a very fast shopper.”

Of Permanent Value Nebraska Furniture Mart



Buffett Speaks for NFM

The Nebraska Furniture Mart got a celebrity spokesman for its 25th anniversary advertising campaign.

(Photo by Mary Porter)



93





SCOTT FETZER


Berkshire bought the Scott Fetzer Company of Cleveland, Ohio, in early 1986 for $315 million. The acquisition doubled Berkshire’s sales at the time to about $2 billion. Scott Fetzer had been on the auction block since 1984, but nothing had clicked. Finally a plan involving heavy employee stock ownership was approved by shareholders. However, when difficulty arose in closing, the plan was dropped.

Buffett’s watchful eye tracked the progress, or lack thereof, in the newspapers. He phoned Chief Executive Ralph Schey and asked for a meeting. Schey was an unusual businessman who found the time to be actively involved with the Cleveland Clinic, Ohio University, Case Western Reserve, and a venture capital firm that backed a number of Ohio firms. Buffett and Munger dined with Schey in Chicago on October 22, 1985. The following week, a contract was signed.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1999 Annual Report; “Unfortunately, Scott & Fetzer’s letter of engagement with a banking firm provided it with a $2.5 million fee upon sale, even if it had nothing to do with finding a buyer. I guess the lead banker felt he should do something for his payment, so he graciously offered us a copy of the book on Scott Fetzer that his firm prepared. With his customary tact, Charlie responded: ‘I’ll pay $2.5 million not to read it.’”

Word of Berkshire’s purchase of Scott Fetzer was carried by the Dow Jones News Service. Stunned Berkshire shareholders were faced with: “Scott Fetzer to acquire Berkshire Hathaway.” The report was quickly corrected to show that Berkshire was buying Scott Fetzer.

With Scott Fetzer, Berkshire acquired about 20 manufacturing and distribution businesses, including World Book encyclopedias, and the Kirby, Douglas, and Cleveland Wood divisions. Campbell Hausfeld, maker of air compressors and related “Built to Last” tools.

Campbell Hausfeld’s legacy began in 1836 when it manufactured horse-drawn wagons and agricultural equipment. Now Campbell Hausfeld is a recognized leader in the home improvement and automotive industry. For more than 170 years, Campbell Hausfeld has manufactured quality tools and equipment for do-it-yourselfers and professionals.

Today Campbell Hausfeld’s product line includes air compressors, tire inflators, air tools and accessories, air nailers and staplers, paint sprayers, pressure washers and welders. Campbell Hausfeld tools make it faster and easier for do-it-yourselfers to finish home and auto projects ranging from installing crown molding to rotating car tires. In addition, Campbell Hausfeld offers commercial-grade products for professionals who need dependable equipment to run their business. Campbell Hausfeld products are available nationwide at home centers, mass merchandisers, hardware stores, and through online retail partners.

Scott Fetzer businesses also include Adalet, Carefree, Douglas/Quikut, France, Halex, Kingston Meriam Instrument, Northland, Scot Laboratories, Scottcare, and Western Enterprises. These businesses are lumped with Berkshire’s other small businesses, collectively—and creatively—referred to as “other businesses.”

These businesses may not be exciting at first look; but together they’re another little stream winding its way into Old Man River, and that’s quite a great adventure. The main business, and clearly Buffett’s favorite from among the Scott Fetzer acquisition, is World Book. But he likes Kirby, too.

Increasingly, Berkshire subsidiaries are experimenting with e-commerce. “The No. 1 topic Warren and I talk about now is whether retail selling is going to move over to the Internet,” says Schey (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

Scott Fetzer has been a big cash cow for Berkshire. “Since 1986, when Berkshire paid $315 million, its earnings have risen by only 5.5% a year on average. Yet Buffett repeatedly has praised it as a model of capital efficiency. In 1998, Scott Fetzer netted $96.5 million after taxes on its $112 million in equity, a return on equity of 86%. This is all the more astonishing considering Buffett has been milking it for 13 years, extracting more than $1 billion all told” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

In Berkshire’s 2000 Annual Report, Buffett wrote:

In 1985, we purchased Scott Fetzer, acquiring not only a fine business but the services of Ralph Schey, a truly outstanding CEO, as well. Ralph was then 61. Most companies, focused on the calendar rather than ability, would have benefitted from Ralph’s talents for only a few years.



At Berkshire, in contrast, Ralph ran Scott Fetzer for 15 years until his retirement at the end of 2000. Under his leadership, the company distributed $1.03 billion to Berkshire against our net purchase price of $230 million. We used these funds, in turn, to purchase other businesses. All told, Ralph’s contributions to Berkshire’s present value extend well into the billions of dollars.



As a manager, Ralph belongs in Berkshire’s Hall of Fame, and Charlie and I welcome him to it.



Scott Fetzer’s 21 Companies

ALTAQUIP

Created out of a need to recondition and service Campbell Hausfeld air compressors, the origins of Altaquip date back to 1997. Within a few short years, Altaquip had grown to the point where it was spun off from Campbell Hausfeld, and had become an independent operating division of Scott Fetzer.

Altaquip provides repair and maintenance services for commercial and consumer power tools and lawn and garden equipment, such as lawn mowers, generators, pressure washers, trimmers, edgers, blowers, air compressors, and battery powered hand tools.

Altaquip offers customers the option of walk-in service at one of 27 locations based in the U.S. and Canada, home or business pick up, or convenient drop off at retail partners nationwide. This level of accessibility to the customer makes Altaquip one of the leaders in the power equipment service industry.

At Altaquip’s high volume service center locations, product is turned around quickly and back in the customer’s hands within a week. The company has warranty partnerships with 55 manufacturers.

DOUGLAS/QUIKUT

The company was founded in 1902 as a producer of automotive parts. Douglas Products built its first vacuum in the 1940s. Douglas, bought by Scott Fetzer in 1968, makes a variety of vacuum products for Kirby, Oreck, Sears, and Campbell Hausfeld.

Quikut has make cutlery for more than 80 years. The Douglas and Quikut operations joined up in 1988. Quikut’s products include Ginsu knives, made famous by Arthur Schiff’s commercials later parodied by comedian John Belushi with his samuri sword antics on Saturday Night Live. Evoking a Japanese heritage, (the knives were actually made in Fremont, Ohio), Schiff’s ads caught fire. They showed a hand squashing a tomato and then how easily it could be done with a Ginsu knife. Belushi took things further. Swinging a samuri, he’d whack off people’s ties. Infomercials for the knife have stopped running, but the knife is still on the market, having become a pop icon.

SCOTTCARE BUYS NICORE AND ROZINN

In 2005, ScottCare of Cleveland, Ohio, which has made noninvasive cardiology products since 1989, acquired NICORE, a privately held maker of External Counterpulsation (ECP) systems for cardiac care therapy. In 2007, ScottCare bought Rozinn Electronics Inc., a privately held cardiovascular diagnostic equipment maker based in Glendale, New York.

Need Air?

Campbell Hausfeld makes

air compressors.



(Photo courtesy of Scott Fetzer)

The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo courtesy of

World Book)

Ralph Schey



Ken Semelsberger

(Photo courtesy of

Scott Fetzer)



Campbell Hausfeld Products

Bob McBride



(Photo courtesy of

Scott Fetzer)

Of Permanent Value Scott Fetzer

Adalet

Altaquip

Arbortech

Campbell Hausfeld

Carefree of Colorado

Douglas/Quikut (Ginsu)

France

Halex

Kingston

Kirby

Meriam Instrument

Northland

Scot Laboratories

ScottCare

Stahl

UCFS

Wayne Combustion Systems

Wayne Water Systems

Western Enterprises

Western Plastics

World Book



An Altaquip Store—Ready to Repair

(Photo courtesy of Scott Fetzer)



The Wisdom of Ginsu Knives: Carve Yourself a Piece of the American Dream is a book about the folks who market Ginsu knives and other products.

(Photo by Mary Porter)



94





KIRBY


With the acquisition of The Scott Fetzer Company, Berkshire became the owner of The Kirby Company, maker of quality home cleaning systems. Founded in 1914 in Cleveland, Ohio, Kirby—headed by Robert Schumay—makes this quintessential American product in Cleveland and in a second facility in Andrews, Texas.

Inventor Jim Kirby, whose name is on every home care system the company has manufactured since 1931, long wanted to reduce drudgery wherever it existed. He developed the concept for his first vacuum cleaner after watching his mother’s cleaning efforts result in dust quickly settling on everything in the house. In 1906, his first cleaner used water for dirt separation. Emptying the dirty water was a messy job, so he redesigned the cleaner by using centrifugal action and cloth to filter out the dirt.

After World War I, Kirby designed vacuum cleaners exclusively for George Scott and Carl Fetzer. More than 200 patents still used today are attributed to Jim Kirby. As the company that bears his name is approaching its centennial in 2014, Kirby is proud to remain made in America. Few companies can make that claim. That’s a testament to the more than 15 million Kirby owners worldwide.

“There’s just nothing like a Kirby,” says Dorothy Garby of Yaphank, New York. According to another happy customer, Jeff LaChapelle, “It is really nice to see a company that will actually stand behind its product; [Kirby] people make a quality product and do quality work.” Perhaps customer Nancy Bates puts it best: “Wouldn’t it be nice if all of our appliances lasted like the Kirby?”

In one consumer survey after another, Kirby ranks at the top. “It leaves the others in the dust,” Buffett likes to say. Although the Kirby home care system does tend to cost more, customers don’t always “realize what a bargain [they are] getting when [they buy] it,” according to Betty Griffin.

The current red and gray Sentria model, with its upscale polished aluminum handle and the classic polished aluminum power unit, carries a manufactured suggested retail price of $1,349 for the basic model. Users say the strong motor, the strength, durability and incredible suction power are well worth the cost. Plus, the TechDrive makes it easy to push, and there’s an attachment to clean nearly everything in an entire home from ceiling to floor. Kirby home care system consistently scores No. 1 in reliability in a major consumer magazine.

Kirby builds its home cleaning systems to last a lifetime, putting its money where its mouth is by offering a rebuild plan with every new unit. The Kirby Rebuild Plan allows the original purchaser to return the unit to Kirby. The company then rebuilds and restores the unit to like new condition, no matter its condition and age, for a fraction of the price of a new one. Kirby has received many letters from satisfied rebuild customers, like this one from Lois B. in South Bend, Indiana. “Just a note to tell you how pleased I am with the rebuilding of my model D50 [Kirby made the D50 from 1965 to 1967]. It looks and runs like new after 40 years of use! At the time of purchase, it was a major expense for us as my husband was earning only $2 an hour. Such a quality product proves that ‘quality remains long after the price is forgotten.’”

Debbie Bosanek, Buffett’s assistant, told the Omaha World-Herald (October 14, 1999) that Buffett receives about 100 complaining letters a year about products and services of Berkshire’s companies. On average, only one in 100 comes from a disappointed Kirby customer.

From its humble beginnings in Cleveland, Kirby today has hundreds of independent distributors in more than 70 countries. These entrepreneurs are proud to sell a product of quality, building their own businesses and promoting others, like themselves, to independent Kirby Distributors.

Kirby distributors buy the product from the Kirby Company, and then sell it to consumer end-users through in-home demonstrations. Kirby remains dedicated to this face-to-face interaction because the in-home demonstration process is the best way to allow the customer to see the quality of the Kirby unit and to determine if the Kirby home cleaning system can solve their specific cleaning problems. Sales personnel at “big box” stores often know little about cleaning and which systems work best for their customers. Kirby dealers, on the other hand, can help the consumer make an informed purchasing decision.

Kirby has not advertised for more than 50 years because a significant portion of a distributors’ business comes from referrals.

Although Berkshire’s home-cleaning segment is led by Kirby, it also includes Douglas Quikut, Scot Labs, Western Plastics, Cleveland Wood Products and Northland. Each of these companies serves as a key supplier to Kirby. For example, Cleveland Wood manufactures vacuum cleaner brush rolls and Western Plastic supplies handle parts. In addition, Douglas Quikut also specializes in hand-held electric and cordless vacuums, which it distributes through department and hardware stores.



Founder Jim Kirby



(Photos courtesy of Kirby)

George Scott and Carl Fetzer

The Story of Warren Buffett



These salesmen made

history in Philadelphia,

Pennsylvania, in the 1920s when

they posed for Scott Fetzer’s first

direct selling organization. Many of them

sold the 1920 Model B, non-electric vacuum cleaner.

(Photo courtesy of Kirby)

Here’s an early advertisement of a salesman showing his Kirby Model 510 to a potential buyer. The model, manufactured in Cleveland in 1950 and 1951, was called the “Cadillac” of vacuum cleaners in its day.

Of Permanent Value Kirby



In the 1970s, the Kirby Company proved, beyond a shadow of a doubt, the suction power of the Kirby home care system during a humorous stunt involving a Volkswagen Beetle.

(Photo courtesy of Kirby)



(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

“Kirby Leaves the Others

in the Dust.”



(Photo courtesy

of Jeff Hull)

Cleaning up the Dust

Kirby’s booth at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2006.



(Photo courtesy of Kirby)

Work Being Done in a Kirby Factory



Kirby Headquarters in Cleveland

(Photo courtesy of Kirby)



Kirby

Kirby vacuum cleaner representative Mathew Maniaci shows a Kirby vacuum cleaner at the display booth at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2000.

(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)



95





WORLD BOOK


During the period between his service as governor of Nebraska and his representation of Nebraska in the United States Senate, Bob Kerrey visited Birmingham, Alabama. Following an interview, I asked Kerrey if he knew Buffett. Kerrey once told Buffett he had bought a set of The World Book Encyclopedia for his children. “I bought World Book, too,” replied Buffett, meaning, of course, he had bought the whole company. Kerrey has said, if ever elected president of the United States, he’d turn to Buffett for economic advice. The two men occasionally met over dinner at the French Café in Omaha and Kerrey sought Buffett‘s advice about matters including taxation, healthcare reform, finance, and trade policy. (Kerrey has been president of the New School in New York City since 2001.)

World Book issued its first edition in 1917 with eight volumes and 6,300 pages.

By 2010, The World Book Encyclopedia had grown to 22 volumes and more than 14,000 pages and was joined by a suite of subscription-based digital products—the World Book Web—and hundreds of non-fiction titles. Buffett did not read World Book as a youngster, but in 1962 he bought a set for his children and has used them ever since. Former United States president Bill Clinton read World Book volumes when he was very young. Microsoft magnate Bill Gates read World Book from beginning to end when he was only seven or eight years old. In later years Buffett said, “Bill [Gates] was reading World Book at that time. He has since put it out of business [with Microsoft’s Encarta].” (Fortune, July 20, 1998). (Since making that dire assessment, Buffett has watched Encarta fade from the scene while World Book has expanded its Web presence.) Walter Cronkite’s mother sold sets of World Book, and Cronkite himself spent hours as a child reading the volumes.

Today’s World Book Web includes custom-designed groups of digital products for school and public libraries as well as classrooms. In addition, World Book Web products feature such functions as text-to-speech and real-time translation (into 30 languages). World Book Web segments include Dramatic Learning—a reader’s collection—Early World of Learning for early childhood social and academic skills development and Science Power, a self-guided interactive study of science concepts and the scientific method. At the center of the World Book Web stand the thousands of World Book encyclopedia articles—routinely, systematically, and accurately maintained by in-house editors.

To mark the millennium, the binding of the 2000 edition of the print set featured the first of the now-trademarked World Book Spinescape® bindings. Although World Book continues to produce a set in a traditional-style binding, the Spinescape binding quickly caught on with customers using the binding of each individual volume in the set to present a single panoramic image. Librarians have remarked that the Spinescape even helps youngsters improve their alphabetization skills when the children line up the volumes to complete the “picture puzzle”!

Other products include the 15-volume Childcraft set, a children’s topical resource; the World Book Discovery Encyclopedia, a “starter” A-Z set; and the 60-title Animals of the World series.

Some factoids from Buffett: In 1985, World Book cost $600 and sold 300,000 copies. It weighed about 70 pounds. “Now, that’s freely available over the Internet.” Unquestionably, the Internet has prompted a previously unimaginable outpouring of information and put that information within easy reach of millions of people. It is likely that more students today have access to World Book in its digital form than students at any one time in the past had access to print sets of World Book, even in the years when hundreds of thousands of sets were sold.

There are downsides to the proliferation and easy accessibility of information to children: Some of this information is inappropriate, and some is incomprehensible to children. A child may be able to quickly locate a piece of information on the Internet, but if that child cannot understand that information and apply it to his or her school assignment or simply to satisfy curiosity, then that effort has been wasted. Efficient access to information does not always mean effective use of information.

Microsoft offered to form a partnership with World Book Publishing to market a multimedia encyclopedia, according to The Microsoft Way by Randall Stross. In 1989, as Microsoft received the tapes that contained the Funk & Wagnalls text, it discovered that its new partner had failed to clean up the tapes and remove internal codes as it had promised to do in its contract. Some Microsoft managers lobbied to reopen the question of who should supply the text for Microsoft’s multimedia encyclopedia, and a delegation was dispatched to talk again to World Book.

Peter Mollman, then president of World Book Publishing, listened to the pitch with some interest. Microsoft offered to invest $7 to $12 million over the next two years to develop a multimedia encyclopedia based on World Book’s text, but the company hardly was desperate for funds. Mollman noted that content maintenance costs typically are far less than origination costs and this enabled World Book Publishing to profitably maintain the source of its mainstream revenue. (Microsoft representatives were astounded to learn the figure required to sustain the franchise, but they could have seen the same phenomenon within Microsoft, such as in the Word or Excel groups, where an astonishingly small team of a few dozen developers was needed to update mature programs that brought in hundreds of millions of dollars a year.) Mollman pointed out that World Book’s commissioned sales force of more than 25,000 representatives remained a sticky problem, and he wondered how a truly multimedia encyclopedia could be compressed into one CD-ROM. Microsoft replied obligingly that it would keep an open mind about the question—perhaps multiple discs would be offered. In a formal offer to create a partnership that Microsoft tendered to World Book after this meeting, Microsoft presented a number of ingenious arguments.

In the fall of 1993, after Encarta’s initial release, Gates asked Peter Mollman (who, after retiring from World Book, went to work for Microsoft) to look into the possibility of purchasing World Book, a possibility to which Mollman and another manager coincidentally had also recently given some thought. All continued to feel that the Funk & Wagnalls provenance of Encarta’s text was a handicap. Mollman’s inside sources had reported that World Book’s sales had been sliding downward in recent years. At Mollman’s urging, Gates spoke to his friend Warren Buffett about a possible sale, but they did not arrive at a satisfactory arrangement. Buffett, at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1997, kidded Gates, saying: “Microsoft’s Encarta is the old Funk & Wagnalls. Bill Gates hates it when I tell people that, but it’s true. Gates had a lot of success with Encarta [on CD-ROM] so we copied him.” But Buffett continued, “In some versions of Encarta, the moon collides with Earth. In the World Book CD-ROM, the moon never collides with Earth.”

Current digital versions of World Book offer every article from the 22-volume printed edition along with thousands of “Back in Time” articles (from editions of the World Book Year Book), numerous video and audio clips and interactivities, and thousands of still images.

As an update service to owners of the print set, World Book publishes Year Book—a general news summary—and Science Year—advances in science and technology—annually. Several of World Book’s competitors now private-label the World Book annual publications for their own customers. World Book markets the annuals to its subscribers by mail. Otherwise, products are marketed primarily through demonstrations in schools and libraries by a commissioned sales force throughout the U.S., Canada, Australia, New Zealand, India, South Africa, the United Kingdom, and other countries where English is the principal language or a principal second language. World Book also maintains an online store at www.worldbookonline.com.

Education is World Book’s best selling point, and several of World Book’s sales representatives are former educators. All World Book sales representatives offer on-site in-person training in the use of World Book digital and print publications. A focus of World Book’s annual sales conference is continued training of the sales representatives about new and updated World Book products and changes in curriculum development. The companies include teaching methods to help the representatives effectively present the company’s products against the backdrop of educators’ everyday concerns.

The encyclopedia industry has several major players, including Encyclopaedia Britannica and Scholastic’s Grolier. Wikipedia, a free online encyclopedia published by the Wikimedia Foundation, came onto the scene in 2001. Wikipedia is a collection of interlinked Web pages called “wikis” that permit anyone to read, create, or edit articles. In response, World Book’s challenge is to demonstrate to customers the value of World Book’s age-level- and grade-level-appropriate content and of the authority and reliability that the company stands behind.

A large portion of encyclopedia sales was made on an installment basis when the principal market was among families at home. Buyers could finance their purchases through World Book Finance, Inc., a Scott Fetzer subsidiary. Many stories have been relayed about the gentle persistence of dedicated World Book sales agents, not the least of whom was Joyce Fishman of Marshfield, Massachusetts. Fishman, a top sales agent, was once bitten by a dog and still managed to make the sale (perhaps because the potential customer feared a reprisal). Direct sales to homes via a commissioned sales force was largely disbanded by 1999. However, this channel remains profitable for several of World Book’s overseas distributors.

In 1988, World Book overhauled the encyclopedia’s format. The 70th anniversary edition was three years and multi millions of dollars in the making, featuring its most extensive revision in 26 years. Every annual edition of World Book involves some 500 scholars, expert practitioners, editors, artists, researchers, cartographers, production specialists, and illustrators, who review and revise tens of thousands of words of text and thousands of illustrations to bring the content up to date.

The publication is known for its extensive fact checking. As an example, in researching the biography of a famous and beloved American figure, it appeared to World Book’s researcher that Marion Morrison had second thoughts about the name she gave to her son—Marion Robert Morrison, better known to all of us as the “Duke,” John Wayne. But did she ever legally change it to Marion Michael or Marion Mitchell? Apparently she liked the alliteration of the initial M’s. World Book’s researcher phoned Madison County, Iowa, the local jurisdiction for the Duke’s birthplace (and, yes, the Bridges of Madison County Madison County). The county recorder in Madison County, Iowa, was prevented by policy from divulging any information over the phone, but hinted that a local genealogist might be willing to do a little undercover work. At World Book’s researcher’s request, the genealogist located the relevant courthouse documents and determined that the Duke’s mom never arranged for a legal change of her son’s name.

World Book’s 17,000 articles by some 3,900 of the world’s leading experts in their fields, including the late Sir Edmund Hillary, “Mount Everest” contributor; former Georgetown University Head Basketball Coach John R. Thompson, “basketball” contributor; and Joe Gagnon, the “Appliance Doctor,” Talk Radio 1600 WAAM, contributor of “clothes dryer,” “dishwasher” and “washing machine.“ The encyclopedia also includes about 28,000 photographs and illustrations and 2,300 maps.

The World Book Encyclopedia was introduced by J.H. Hanson of the Hanson-Bellows Co. in Chicago in 1917 as The World Book-Organized Knowledge in Story and Picture. He created World Book by spending $150,000 to revise his then-popular encyclopedia, The New Practical Reference Library. In 1918, Hanson’s money ran out. He sold World Book to one of his former accountants, W. F. Quarrie, also of Chicago, and the company flourished. Celebrities such as the late FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, etiquette expert Emily Post, and Bishop Fulton J. Sheen became contributors. In 1945, Marshall Field III, bought World Book as the flagship of a new company that ultimately became Field Enterprises Educational Corp. Field believed that “education is the keystone of the democratic form of government” and that World Book was a key tool for education. In 1978, World Book was bought by Scott Fetzer.

At the Berkshire annual meeting in 1994, Charlie Munger, Berkshire Hathaway vice chairman, said, “I give away more of that product than any other product that Berkshire Hathaway makes. … It’s a perfectly fabulous human achievement. To edit something that user-friendly with that much wisdom encapsulated is a fabulous thing.” Ever the advocate of eating one’s own cooking, Buffett has gently pushed sets on his children and grandchildren. He also keeps sets of World Book at both his home and office.

Here’s the World Book entry about Buffett:

At Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1997, shareholder Nancy Jacobs of Omaha asked Buffett: “Does purchasing World Book over a competitor give someone an improved chance of becoming a brilliant billionaire investor?”

Buffett: “It practically guarantees it!”

Jacobs: “I’m buying it.”

In 2001, World Book was named the primary general resource for AOL and CompuServe. The contents of the complete print set plus an additional 3,200 articles and media features became available online to their subscribers.

Buffett and Walter Cronkite teamed up and used their voices for a cartoon called Liberty’s Kids, a PBS TV series to help children better understand the American Revolution. Buffett acted as James Madison, “The Father of the Constitution” and fourth president of the United States; and Cronkite acted as Ben Franklin. Interviewed on CNN (October 21, 2002), Buffett said, “I boned up a little bit. I got out my World Book and did a little reading.” Buffett said Cronkite was a product of First Amendment freedoms and that the Constitution set the framework for the United States to become an incredible country.



World Book Spinescape

(Photo courtesy of World Book)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value World Book

World Book The Story of Warren Buffett

Buffett, Warren Edward (1930-…), an American business executive, is chairman of the board of directors of Berkshire Hathaway Inc., a major U.S. holding company. Berkshire Hathaway’s holdings consist of insurance companies and manufacturing, retail, and publishing businesses—including the publisher of The World Book Encyclopedia. Buffett is known for buying into undervalued firms.



Buffett was born on Aug. 30, 1930, in Omaha, Nebraska. He received a bachelor’s degree from the University of Nebraska in 1950 and a master’s degree in business administration from Columbia University in 1951.



After graduation, Buffett worked first as an investment salesman with his father’s brokerage firm in Omaha, then as a security analyst in New York City. In 1956, Buffett borrowed money from relatives and friends and formed an investment firm, the Buffett Partnership. By the time he dissolved the firm in 1969, the investors had received 30 times their original investment. Buffett then turned his attention to building up Berkshire Hathaway, a Massachusetts textile firm he had bought control of in 1965. The textile business eventually failed and Buffett closed it in 1985. But by that time, he had developed Berkshire Hathaway into a profitable holding company.



The success of Berkshire Hathaway made Buffett one of the richest people in the world. In 2006, he announced plans to give away nearly all of his fortune to charity.



Contributor:

• John C. Schmeltzer, M.A., Financial Writer, Chicago Tribune.



© World Book, Inc. All rights reserved.



Of Permanent Value World Book

Autographed World Book

One attraction at the Berkshire Annual Meeting in 2003 was the autographed World Book’s Year in Review 2002. A limited edition of only 500 books. Collector’s numbers 1 through 5 were personally autographed by Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger. The collector’s editions were sold by bid, with the proceeds going to the Nebraska Humane Society and Girls Inc. of Omaha.





Walter “Ben Franklin” Cronkite

(AP/Wide World Photos)



(Photo by Mary Porter)

World Book’s Year in Review 2002

Collector’s Edition

This 500-print issue has all the facts and figures of 2002.

World Book Booth in 2008



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

World Book Puppy

But has he read the whole thing?



(Photo by Rose Nguyen)



96





FECHHEIMER


In June 1986, Berkshire bought 84% ownership in Fechheimer Brothers, a uniform company in Cincinnati, Ohio. This transpired after longtime Berkshire shareholder Bob Heldman wrote Buffett that he ran a business he believed met Buffett’s famous acquisition tests.

Buffett frequently has referred to his “ad,” which explains his business criteria: Large purchases; demonstrated, consistent earning power; businesses earning good returns on equity while employing little or no debt; management in place (“we can’t supply it”); simple businesses (“if there’s lots of technology, we won’t understand it”); and an offering price.

Heldman, an avid reader of the Berkshire Annual Report and well-aware of Buffett’s criteria, convinced Buffett his company was a good fit for Berkshire. He wrote Buffett about Fechheimer, a uniform manufacturing and distribution business owned and operated by the Heldman family—Bob, his brother George, and a subsequent generation of Heldmans. “We wrote several times, and I think convinced him the business fit the tests he lists in his ad. I had a meeting with him in Omaha,” recalled Bob Heldman.

“We had the parameters of a deal set and met just one last time. It turned out it was in Middle Fork, Idaho, on the Snake River. There are no roads. You have to fly in. We had planned a board meeting at a lodge there and decided that was a good time to settle it,” Heldman said. “He [Buffett] flew into Boise, and I met him and then we got on a little plane and went to Middle Fork. Munger flew in from California and we all met most of the afternoon with our lawyers; and we were going to meet the next day but a storm warning came up and we left.”

Heldman recalled Munger’s question, “What are you least proud of?” Heldman said he really couldn’t think of anything. “We have made a few bad deliveries,” he recalled.

Buffett never went to Cincinnati, either before or after Berkshire’s purchase, but once complimented Bob Heldman saying, “He knows the size uniform every prisoner needs.”

The buyout of Fechheimer closed shortly afterwards with Buffett paying about $46 million for a stake based on a $55 million valuation for the whole company.

Buffett has said the only problem with Fechheimer is its small size, but it remains a steady contributor to Berkshire’s earnings stream and has been expanding. It now has more than 50 stores nationwide.

Fechheimer, founded in 1842, makes its uniforms at plants in Kentucky, Ohio, Tennessee, and Texas. The product is marketed through the company’s stores and by independent dealers who together serve more than 200 of the country’s major metropolitan areas. Fechheimer stores, with 1,400 employees, go by such names as Command Uniforms, Pima Uniforms, and Kay Uniforms.

The Heldmans were hands-on managers known for starting each day sitting around a table and personally opening the company’s mail which consisted of bills, complaints, compliments, or new business ideas. They believed this practice kept them in close touch with every aspect of the company. A stockbroker showed up once to make a pitch while the Heldmans were opening the mail. He was told to go ahead and make his case as the Heldmans went right on reading the mail. The inscrutable Heldmans, hardly looking up, finally nodded approval to the idea and went right on poring over the mail.

Not much got by the circumspect, play-it-close-to-the-vest Heldmans. During the cocktail party at Borsheims the day before the annual meeting in 1990, Buffett and the Heldmans slipped off to a back office room of Borsheims for a game of bridge.

Buffett teamed up with a lawyer friend, George Gillespie, of the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine & Moore, and they squared off against the Heldman brothers.

Afterwards, one shareholder had the audacity to ask Buffett if he had won. Grimacing a bit, he said no, adding, “Hard to believe, isn’t it?”

The slightly built Heldmans had bettered their boss at the bridge table but declined to confirm at the time. Two years later, Bob Heldman said with quiet pride, “Well, we don’t like to talk about it, but we did win.” They just grinned ever so slightly. Fast, loose talk did not occur much when the Heldmans were around; they were not ones to tell what their bridge or business hands held.

Fechheimer makes and distributes uniforms for public service, postal, and transportation workers, the military, military schools, and umpires. It also offers accessories such as socks, belts, and jackets. One addition to the Fechheimer line is Berkshire Hathaway Activewear. In 1994, Fechheimer won a 3-year contract to supply uniforms and accessories to the New York Fire Department.

The Alabama High School Athletic Association requires all baseball and softball umpires in the state to wear Fechheimer slacks so that all will have identically colored slacks.

After the retirement of George Heldman and the death of Bob Heldman, Bob Heldman’s son ran the company but later was ousted. For years, no CEO was selected.

In 1997, Buffett named Patrick Byrne president of Fechheimer. Byrne attended Dartmouth College and Beijing Teachers College, in addition to earning an M.A. from Cambridge University and a Ph.D. in philosophy from Stanford University. He is also a director of White Mountains. His father, Jack Byrne, was former CEO of Fund American Enterprises, later CEO of White Mountains Insurance Group, and once head of GEICO.

Patrick Byrne, who boxed as a youngster, was diagnosed with cancer shortly after college and had 20 surgeries from 1985 to 1988. Fortunately, he recovered and went on to pursue a professional boxing career—even though his 6-foot 5-inch frame had lost some ribs and about 75 pounds to cancer. After his boxing career, he became a businessman.

After being named Fechheimer’s president in 1997, he left his tool-and-die firm, Centricut, in West Lebanon, New Hampshire, for Cincinnati. He sold Centricut in 1999, giving $2.3 million to the company’s 80 employees to show his appreciation.

At the Berkshire annual meeting in 1998, Patrick Byrne asked a question, identifying himself only as a Berkshire shareholder. In his response, Buffett pointed out that Byrne headed Fechheimer, adding, “He’s doing a sensational job.”

Buffett hired Byrne’s brother Mark to run new offices in London and Bermuda. The company is West End Capital which operates like a hedge fund. It’s engaged mainly in fixed-income arbitrage. Buffett put $270 million into the fund originally, and it has since grown much larger. In 2000, Mark Byrne was named CEO of General Re Financial Products (GRFP) in London. Buffett said that there is a third Byrne brother, John, and that he might have to go to work on him.

In 1999, Patrick Byrne, who had been with Berkshire on a temporary basis, left for China to honor a previous commitment to teach Chinese and American students there. Byrne, who speaks five foreign languages including Mandarin and has bicycled across the U.S. three times, is now CEO of Overstock.com, an e-commerce business in Salt Lake City.

When asked what’s it like to work for Buffett, Patrick said, “It’s like trying to get a drink from a firehose. It was absolutely one of the highlights of my life to be able to call him up and ask about different business issues … how he sees inventory control or marketing or hiring and so on. It was definitely one of the great privileges of my life.”

He added, “There was a physicist, Richard Feynman who died some years ago, and another physicist said of him that there are two kinds of geniuses in the world. There’s the kind that you and I would be if we were just a lot smarter. And there’s the kind we’d never be no matter how much smarter we were. They are somewhere off to the side. That’s Buffett.”

Fechheimer decided to stop making band uniforms which put one Massachusetts high school band in a pickle as they scrambled to get new uniforms for the Rose Bowl Parade to be held on New Year’s Day (Reuters, November 21, 2000).

After winning a $13,000 bid for the Danvers High School band uniforms, Fechheimer, shut down the band uniform business, and closed the uniform-making plant in San Antonio, Texas. The high school faced paying a higher price tag and shipping costs to buy the new uniforms from a rival firm. Buffett stepped in to help; he agreed to foot the difference, said Brad Kinstler, Fechheimer’s president at the time. Kinstler estimated the Danvers band would have had to pay $600 more to have the rival fill the order, plus additional shipping costs.

Danvers band director, Ron Parsons, told the Salem Evening News that he spoke with Buffett after Buffett left a message on his answering machine. Buffett told the newspaper, “We were wrong. … It shouldn’t have happened that way, but mistakes happen, and the important thing is to fix it.”

In recent years Fechheimer’s business has slowed markedly as outsourcing and imports have hurt the textile industry nationwide. The company has let some employees go and shut down some operations.

In 2006, Fechheimer announced a new line of public safety uniforms called IntelliDry made by Milliken & Company. The uniforms are available under Fechheimer’s Flying Cross brand, its primary brand.



A Fechheimer Uniform

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Fechheimer



Thinking about What His Father Said?

Patrick Byrne survived cancer to become a professional boxer, a Berkshire subsidiary head, and a successful businessman.

(Photo by Anne Katrina Senstad)



97





BORSHEIMS


Borsheims, the jewelry giant in Omaha, boasts of an inventory of 100,000 pieces of jewelry. In 1989, Buffett bought 80% of the business, and now this fabled store is the site for the shareholder shopping spree and cocktail party during Berkshire’s annual meeting weekends.

Mrs. Deedee Walter, a former Borsheims employee, jokes, “I want to get my big-girl ring here.”

Each year Borsheims shines as it hosts a special exhibit for Berkshire’s stockholders. In 1996, the exhibit featured the world’s largest polished diamond—the 545-carat Golden Jubilee Diamond given to the King of Thailand from the people of Thailand. King Bhumibol Adulyadej, who has been on the throne more than 50 years, is the world’s longest-reigning monarch.

Buffett himself shows up for the Borsheims party and so have the likes of Katharine Graham and Ann Landers.

In earlier years, a string quartet played as party-goers enjoyed champagne and salmon. In recent years, the goodies have been cut to wine and Cokes—more cost-cutting at Berkshire.

Whatever is served, shareholders spend the afternoon swapping Buffett stories. The following is from Yours Truly: Years ago I walked up to Buffett to shake hands, as scores of shareholders do. Thinking he could not possibly remember me, I introduced myself. His instant reply was, “Up from Birmingham, are you?”

His memory is so widely-regarded that if it ever fails, people are shocked. One shareholder at the same party, relating that he had a brief chat with Buffett about bridge, came away shaking his head, “Gosh, he didn’t remember I sent him a bridge hand [last year].”

The party is great fun. Everyone peers at the merchandise which ranges from $10 items and inexpensive coffee cups to jewelry priced at hundreds of thousands of dollars. In addition to jewelry, Borsheims carries pens, watches, china, crystal, and many other items.

A 35-carat diamond ring has sold for $450,000. Some of the sapphires are almost the size of golf balls.

Borsheims offers it all. If you are interested in something special for your “significant other,” Borsheims has it: Fabergé eggs, gold chains, Lalique crystal, a Cartier necklace, gemstones, or pearls the size of marbles.

Maybe you want a Waterman pen. After all, it’s made by Gillette. Synergy at Berkshire is approaching an all-time high.

At the 1991 meeting, some jewelry was priced in Berkshire stock. Cute little signs accompanied the items: Two shares of Berkshire for this diamond, three shares will get you that necklace. One diamond ensemble went for 15 shares—$120,000 at the time.

In April 1992, Borsheims held a special event for Berkshire shareholders—an exhibition that included a $6 million Patek Philippe watch. Made of gold and 126 jewels, it’s the most expensive watch ever made. The watch had 1,800 parts and was equipped with a chime, moon phases, a calendar, and a century leap-year correction that turns once every 400 years. (How would one know?) The company produces only 15,000 pieces a year. The collection also included pocket watches owned by Queen Victoria, Albert Einstein, and Rudyard Kipling.

The annual party at Borsheims had a special twist in 1992: Buffett and Philippe Stern, President of Patek Philippe, held a 1 p.m. Sunday press conference at the store to introduce the watch exhibit. Borsheims President Donald Yale said good morning and introduced Stern, who in a thick Swiss accent, proclaimed the watches his company makes as “the finest watches in the world.” Buffett then addressed the party: “Good afternoon—my watch is keeping more accurate time.”

After the press conference, Harvey Knowles asked Buffett to sign his book. Knowles is a stockbroker with Merrill Lynch in Cincinnati and is coauthor of The Dividend Factor, a book touting the importance of high dividends.

Buffett is well known as an opponent of dividends who strongly prefers corporate reinvestment. After dutifully signing Knowles’ book, he shouted, “Throw him out!”

After the press conference, Dr. Michael Prus and his wife, Judith Goodnow Prus, of Grosse Pointe Farms, Michigan, and their daughter Elizabeth met Buffett. Elizabeth Prus Myers, then a senior at Princeton University, had received a number of job offers from Wall Street firms, including Salomon but finally accepted an offer from J.P. Morgan. Buffett said to Elizabeth, “Maybe you could send us some of your extra business.”

In 2000, Borsheims shareholder shopping day was sponsored by Tag Heuer. Berkshire’s annual meeting notice said: “Shop exquisite jewelry, watches, fine gifts, and explore World Championship McLauren Formula One Racing courtesy of Tag Heuer, the Official Formula One Timekeeper.”

Borsheims was founded in 1870 by Louis Borsheim. In 1947, it was bought by Louis Friedman and his wife, Rebecca, the younger sister of Rose Blumkin of Nebraska Furniture Mart fame. Their son Ike Friedman once worked at the Nebraska Furniture Mart but took over the family business after his father stepped down. Along with Ike, his son Alan, his daughters and sons-in-law owned and were managing the business when Buffett bought it.

Berkshire later redeemed Alan Friedman’s share of the business, making Berkshire the owner of 85.72% of Borsheims. The (Donald) Yales and (Marvin) Cohns each own half of the remaining 14.28% of the business.

In 1986, Borsheims moved from its 6,800 square-foot location with 35 employees in downtown Omaha to what is now a 45,000-square-foot site in the Regency Fashion Court Mall. An expansion in 2006 increased the space of the store to 62,500 square feet.

The store—which carries about $60 million to $75 million in merchandise—claims more than half the jewelry market in Omaha. About 55% of Borsheims customers are from the Omaha area. On a normal Saturday, more than 2,500 people visit the store, gazing at an inventory of more than 75,000 pieces of finished jewelry, 400 china patterns, 375 flatware patterns, and thousands of loose gems. The other 45% of its sales comes from out of state, partly from a catalog business.

Borsheims or Borsheims.com, with 300 employees, is one of the largest jewelry stores in the country, second only to Tiffany’s Fifth Avenue flagship store. Between Thanksgiving and Christmas in 1991, 58,500 customers—an average of 2,250 a day—bought 38,500 items (Omaha World-Herald, February 23, 1992).

Borsheims customarily sends trusted customers a custom-made smorgasbord of the store’s collection, say $40,000 watches and assorted goodies, to consider. Their special customers may look them over, buy what they want and return the rest. Buffett once said no case of dishonesty has occurred in connection with this honor system.

That clean record was spoiled in 1998 when a man posing as a wealthy Asian businessman deceived Borsheims into shipping him nearly $410,100 worth of merchandise. In late 1999, John Dewey Lim, 36, of Kansas City, Missouri, was sentenced to 57 months in prison and fined, but none of the jewelry, which included diamond earrings and cufflinks, was recovered (Omaha World-Herald, December 28, 1999).

Borsheims is a giant single-unit jeweler. Employees do not work for commissions; management feels that would force them to worry more about making the sale than serving the customer.

The store traditionally has done little advertising, but that has increased recently. It now even offers a special bridal package. In 1989, Borsheims’ first catalog was sent to 23,000 people around the U.S., including 11,000 preferred customers, as well as Berkshire shareholders who get a discount at the store. Today, the catalog is sent to about 250,000 people.

The store buys in great volume, often directly from the source, and sometimes cuts its own stones. Also, the store is a part-owner of an amethyst mine in Brazil, which explains the large pile of geodes on the floor by an entrance to Borsheims.

Donald Yale, Friedman’s son-in-law who came to Borsheims management team after a successful accounting practice, played a role in the sale to Buffett.

In 1988, while Buffett was in the store ring-shopping for Christmas, Yale yelled out, “Don’t sell Warren the ring, sell him the store!”

After the first of the year, Buffett called and asked if a sale were possible. A short time later, Buffett bought the store from Ike Friedman, Borsheims president, after a brief meeting at Friedman’s house with Friedman and Yale.

“The substantive part of the talk was 10 minutes,” Yale said. “He asked us five questions and Ike had a price. The three of us later met at Buffett’s office, and Ike and Warren shook hands on the sale.”

Recalling Mrs. B. of Nebraska Furniture Mart fame, Buffett has said of his purchase of Borsheims, “I neglected to ask Mrs. B. a question that any schoolboy would have asked. That is, ‘Are there any more at home like you?’ ”

Here are the five questions Buffett asked about the business: What are sales? What are gross profits? What are expenses? What’s in inventory? Are you willing to stay on?

“He already knew we had no debt,” Yale said.

Without referring to books, Friedman answered all five. Although the questions are known, the answers are not—with one exception: Would Friedman stay on. The answer to that one was obviously yes.

As usual Buffett wrote a check. Friedman was suddenly a cash-rich man, and a happy, fruitful business partnership with Berkshire was born.

Buffett said at the time: “Ike, there are only a handful of people I do business with this way. And none of them is a Fortune 500 company.”

Friedman told Buffett: “I’d never have guessed when I was selling newspapers downtown that I would one day sell a business for this kind of money! I’m a lucky man.”

Once the agreement was reached, Yale recalled, “Buffett said, ‘Now, forget that it happened, and just keep doing what you were doing.’ There was no discussion of future growth and absolutely no discussion of changing our way of making decisions, planning expansion, or bringing in additional profits. He made it very clear that he was not in this as a quick-return deal.

“The contract was a short document in which the signatures were longer than the contract. The legal costs for both parties in total was $1,100,” Yale said.

Buffett and Friedman agreed not to disclose the price, but it’s believed to have been more than $60 million (James Traub, Lear’s, October, 1991).

Traub interviewed Friedman about doing business in Omaha, and Friedman told him the following story:

“Guy calls from Geneva and says where the hell is Omaha, Nebraska. Guy says, ‘Do you think you could use three million dollars worth of diamonds?’ ”

Replies Friedman, “If you can come up with thirty million dollars worth of diamonds, or three hundred million dollars worth, if it’s the right price, we’ll buy ’em all.” Friedman said the fellow couldn’t believe it.

Friedman told Traub, “We buy it right. We sell it right. That’s the difference between us and the other stores. I would say that 70% to 80% of our jewelry is cheaper than what a jeweler would pay to buy it. We make money on volume. And compared to other jewelers’ expenses, ours are nil.”

In delineating the fundamentals of Borsheims business, Buffett has listed these attributes:

1 Huge inventories and enormous selection across all price ranges



2 Daily attention to detail by top management



3 Rapid turnover



4 Shrewd buying



5 Incredibly low expenses



“The combination of the last three factors,” he says, “lets the store offer everyday prices that no one in the country comes close to matching” (The Goldsmith, November 1989).

“Ike has a big smile on his face today,” Buffett announced at the annual meeting in 1990. The reason being the previous day’s sales figure—$1.5 million. Not bad for an afternoon Berkshire shareholder get-together.

Berkshire’s 10-K form explains, “The size of this operation, like several of the Scott Fetzer operations, currently precludes its classification as a ‘reportable business segment’ of Berkshire. However, it contributes meaningful added diversity to Berkshire’s activities.”

The day before the 1991 Annual Meeting, The Buffalo News publisher Stan Lipsey and his girlfriend, spent hours checking out practically everything in Borsheims. The moment Buffett passed by the couple (giving her a quick kiss on the cheek), they finally settled on an emerald ring.

One time at Borsheims, a shareholder asked Buffett to sign a two-share Berkshire stock certificate. Buffett did so, saying, “I’m not sure they’ll cash it if I sign it.” The young man said, “Well, I’m never going to sell it.”

Buffett replied, “I haven’t sold any of mine either.”

Those were happy moments.

On a sad note, Ike Friedman, long a heavy smoker and seriously ill with lung cancer, died September 12, 1991.

Yale was named president and chief executive officer; Marvin Cohn, also a son-in-law of Friedman’s, was named executive vice president. Buffett was named chairman of the board of Borsheims at a time when he was already chairman of Berkshire and interim chairman of Salomon.

Due to family obligations, Yale left in early 1994. Yale told the Omaha World-Herald, “I have family responsibilities and business responsibilities, and it got to the point I couldn’t do both. My family responsibilities are my priority. … This was my decision solely. Warren was very understanding and supportive of my decision.” Yale remained on the board.

Buffett named as president and CEO Susan Jacques, 34, who had joined the firm as a gemologist and appraiser. A native of Zimbabwe (the former South African country of Rhodesia), she came to the United States in 1980, and once won a prize as the outstanding gemology student worldwide. She joined Borsheims in 1983, at age 23, making $4 an hour. She is married to Gene Dunn of Omaha, owner of Mica Mecca, a cabinetry casework firm.

She said, “Becoming a subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway opened our market to a whole new group of people who previously may not have been aware of us.… We’ve drawn thousands to shop here and at the Nebraska Furniture Mart, with the added attraction of seeing Warren at the stockholders’ meeting” (Midlands Business Journal, February 4–10, 1994).

At the Berkshire annual meeting in 1994, Buffett introduced Susan Jacques, saying she had a record day at the Berkshire party the day before. “Keep it up, Susan,” Buffett implored the crowned Queen of Diamonds.

George Morgan introduced his son Adam and Adam’s fiancée to Buffett, and they told him they planned to buy a wedding ring the next day at Borsheims. Buffett replied, “Good. We’ll open the store early and send a cab.”

During the 1995 cocktail party at Borsheims, sales popped up 15% over 1994 sales which were up 40% over 1993 sales. “You’re a sporty crowd,” Buffett said at the annual meeting the next day. Sales during the annual meeting party in 1996 were 60% higher than those in 1995. Sales were flat in 1997 when no exceptional exhibits were on display. Sales took a moon shot in 1998, doubling over the comparable day in 1997, when many more Berkshire shareholders attended “Woodstock.”

A shareholder came up to Munger at the Borsheims party in 1996, and asked for Munger’s autograph on his Borsheims sales slip for a $54,000 watch. “That is the kind of autograph we like to give,” laughed Munger.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1998 Annual Report, “The store’s volume on Sunday [of the 1998 Annual Meeting weekend] greatly exceeded volume for any day in Borsheims history. Charlie attributes this to the fact that he autographed sales tickets that day and, while I have my doubts about this proposition, we are not about to mess with a winning formula. Please give him writer’s cramp.”

BILL GATES SHOPS FOR AN ENGAGEMENT RING AT BORSHEIMS

Microsoft Chairman Bill Gates shopped for an engagement ring for his fiancée at Borsheims on Easter Sunday, April 11, 1993. Buffett, stepping in with an assist, met Gates and his fiancée, Melinda French, at the airport and drove them to Borsheims to get the ring.

On a flight from Palm Springs, California (where Bill and Melinda had been visiting his parents at their vacation home), to Seattle, Gates secretly diverted the flight to Omaha, pulling down the shades so Melinda couldn’t see and distracting her with a jigsaw puzzle. When the plane arrived in Omaha, Melinda was surprised to be greeted by “Buffett with a bugle” (Fortune, January 21, 2008).

During a talk at the University of Nebraska in Lincoln on October 10, 1994, Buffett confirmed the story saying that as he drove Gates and Melinda French from the airport to Borsheims, he said, “It’s none of my business—who am I to give you advice?—but when I bought an engagement ring for my wife in 1951, I spent 6% of my net worth on it! We didn’t have quite as big a day that Sunday as I had hoped.”

Buffett was disappointed when Gates’s sales ticket for Melinda’s diamond ring did not come up to the anticipated 6% of his net worth.

Gates, who brought Windows to the world and uses “billg” as his e-mail address, met his wife at the Microsoft offices in 1987.

Buffett was one of 130 guests who attended Gates’s wedding New Year’s Day 1994, at a Jack Nicklaus-designed golf course in Hawaii. Gates was the second richest person at his wedding because Buffett was atop the U.S. rankings at the time. Other luminaries included Microsoft cofounder Paul Allen (whose 154-foot yacht was the site of a champagne brunch before the wedding), Microsoft’s Steve Ballmer (known as Boom Boom Ballmer for his supercharged voice and personality), and singer Willie Nelson.

Afterwards, the couple honeymooned in Fiji.

Buffett has said of Gates’s marriage: “She’s [Melinda] not a junior partner, she’s not a senior partner—she’s an equal partner” (Newsweek, August 30, 1999).

Here’s a post from Morriss Partee of Holyoke, Massachusetts, on September 23, 1998:

WEB was disappointed that Gates did not spend 6% of his net worth on the ring, as he did when he bought an engagement ring for his wife in 1951.



Frankly, I was shocked that WEB spent so much of his net worth on a ring. I’m glad to hear of it. It makes him seem more human. But I wouldn’t have been surprised if he had not spent such a large part of his net worth on an engagement ring. After all, he and Susie rented their dwellings three years beyond the time when they could have bought a house so that WEB could build up his net worth some more before spending the cash on the down payment.



While I don’t know that anyone knows what 6% of WEB’s net worth was in 1951, we can say how much Warren loves Susie in that if Warren hadn’t bought the ring, he would now have an additional $200 million or so. That is one expensive ring!



Gates is not the only hopeful groom that Borsheims has accommodated. Buffalo News CEO Stan Lipsey and former See’s Candies President Chuck Huggins have also bought engagement rings for their fíancees at Borsheims.

In 2001, Borsheims helped sponsor the Durham Western Heritage Museum presentation of The Lost Treasures Exhibit in Omaha. The Lost Treasures, one of the largest finds ever, was recovered from a convoy of Spanish ships sunk in a hurricane in the Florida Keys in 1622. After years of searching, Mel Fisher uncovered $300 million in treasure. This historical glimpse of 17th century Spain included silver; gold link chains, some as long as 60 feet; pottery; weapons; navigational tools; cannons; and anchors.

To mark the start of the 2002 holiday shopping season, Borsheims threw 500 silver boxes to a crowd—some sporting catcher’s mitts—who showed up for a chance to win a diamond tennis bracelet. Some boxes contained pearls or writing pens. Tara Kell, 23, a college student from Illinois, was surprised to find the $1,500 bracelet. “I figured I’d get a pen,” she said (Associated Press, November 30, 2002).

THE JAMES BOND WATCH

In late 2006, marking the reopening after a $5 million renovation, Borsheims held a poker tournament where such dignitaries as Buffett and Olympic champion swimmer Michael Phelps appeared. Phelps is a spokesman for Omega watch which was selling its Seamaster 300M. The price tag for the watch—$3,500. It is the watch worn by James Bond in Casino Royale.

BUFFETT MONOPOLY

A Monopoly board game featuring Buffett and Berkshire was unveiled during the week of Berkshire’s shareholder meeting in 2005. Berkshire’s version of the game (which sells for $30) was the brainchild of folks in Borsheims corporate gifts department, including Emily Wigton and Adrienne Perry. Perry said the games were arranged through a company called USAopoly. The idea had been kicked around for years and just finally clicked, she said.

Five thousand of the games were made. Sales were hot and an immediate reorder had to be made.

In the Berkshire version, each of the pieces represent a Berkshire-owned subsidiary including an ice-cream cone for Dairy Queen, a cowboy boot for Justin Brands, a toy jet for NetJets, and a sofa for Berkshire’s furniture stores.

The Community Chest and Chance cards feature likenesses of Buffett and Munger.

During the 2005 yearend holiday season, Borsheims lured hundreds of men with servings of pizza and beer. And for the women? They offered wine, Perrier and pint-size pastries.

FIRST LAYOFFS

In 2009, with the recession biting into the nation’s retailers, Borsheims laid off employees for the first time letting go 13 people.



Party Time for the Rich and Financially Famous

Borsheims, the home of jewels and Berkshire shareholder parties, displayed items from Joan Crawford’s collection in 1993.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Rock of Ages: You Break It, You Own It.

Baseball Diamond—In 1986 this golden yellow diamond weighing 755.50 carats was discovered in the DeBeers Premier Diamond Mine in Transvaal, South Africa. Two years in the cutting, the resulting 545-carat diamond—about the size of a baseball—is the largest polished diamond in the world.

(Photo courtesy of Borsheims)

Of Permanent Value Borsheims



It’s My Party.

Buffett and the author at Borsheims on April 29, 1990. I broke the news here that I planned to write a book about him. He did not say, “Boy, that’s great to hear.” He cordially declined an interview. Later he said, “I wish you well, but not too well.” After that he kidded me, “Are you up to 1,000 pages yet?”

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)



(Photo by Marsha Tate)

He’s Safe.

Andy Kilpatrick Publishing Empire (AKPE) and Warren “The Whip” Buffett met up May 1, 1999. Earlier in the day, The Whip said,“Andy thinks he gets paid by the word.”



Know the Jeweler

The late Ike Friedman

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

Borsheims The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Borsheims



(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

Woodstock Festival at Borsheims

The crowd outside Borsheims during Berkshire’s shareholder weekend in 2002 is massive.



(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)

Susan in the Sky with Diamonds

Susan Jacques joined the store in 1983 as a $4-an-hour employee and became CEO in 1994. When she was a sales associate, she took every piece of merchandise from the counter, polished it, examined it, then put it back. When Buffett named her CEO, he told her he had no problem with either her gender or her age of 34.

Borsheims The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Borsheims

Park Place

Monopoly is a big hit at Borsheims at 2005 Berkshire Annual Meeting





(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

The High Rent District



(Photo courtesy of Borsheims)

Berkshire’s Monopoly

Borsheims newest item in the corporate gifts department. Borsheims sold 5,000 games before running out.

Berkshire’s Master Plan

At the annual meeting in 2006, Borsheims inserted 50 surprise Buffett and Munger autographs into the monopoly board games.



(Collage by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Borsheims The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Chess Game

at Borsheims



Any Ideas, Bill?

Bridge Champion Sharon Osberg and Bill Gates play bridge with youngsters.



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Hollywood Social Scene

Borsheims President Susan Jacques with Peter Buffett and his wife, Jennifer.



Borsheims During the 2008 Annual Meeting

Of Permanent Value Borsheims



Webster at Borsheims

Stephen Webster is the jeweler to Madonna, Jennifer Lopez, and Christina Aguilera.



Full House

Borsheims tent was packed during the 2008 Annual Meeting.

(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Jigsaw Puzzle Poster



(Photos by Mary Porter)



The Good Old Days

This photo (circa 1989) shows Buffett holding court at the old Borsheims store in downtown Omaha.

(Photo by Tim Medley)



Money Talks

One of the items for sale at Borsheims was a

yearly calendar of quotes from Buffett and Munger.



98





H. H. BROWN SHOE


It was a case of the ultimate dull business, a case of Buffett as a shoe salesman.

Berkshire agreed on June 10, 1991, to buy all of H.H. Brown Shoe Company, a closely held shoe business based in Greenwich, Connecticut, with annual sales of about $200 million.

H.H. Brown was founded in 1883, by Henry H. Brown when he opened his first shoe factory in Natick, Massachusetts.

In 1992, H.H. Brown acquired Lowell Shoe Inc., of Hudson, New Hampshire, with yearly sales of about $90 million and a manufacturing facility in Puerto Rico. Lowell makes Nurse Mates, a line of shoes for nurses, and has other shoe lines such as Soft Spots and Day Lights. The Nurse Mates shoes are comfortable and durable.

In 1997, H.H. Brown bought Dicon Technologies, an engineering and research firm which enabled Brown to improve its footwear.

Berkshire bought H.H. Brown from the estate of the owner and board chairman, Ray Heffernan. Heffernan had been with the company since 1927, when he bought it for $10,000. His daughter Frances Heffernan married Frank Rooney, who became the longtime boss of what is now Melville Corp. (formerly Melville Shoe).

Before Heffernan’s death, he asked Rooney to run H.H. Brown. When the Heffernan family decided to sell the company, Rooney sold to Berkshire after Buffett’s friend John Loomis told Rooney during a golf game in Florida that Brown might fit comfortably at Berkshire.

Brown Shoe operates as an independent Berkshire unit run by Rooney, chairman of the board and chief executive officer; and James E. Issler, president and chief operating officer. Employing more than 2,000 people, Brown markets its shoes under H.H. Brown, Børn, Carolina Shoe, Corcoran, Double H Boot, Matterhorn, and other names. It also owns Isabela Shoe Corp., an offshore company. A faded red Double-H Boot plant in Womelsdorf, Pennsylvania (closed in 2007), gave new meaning to the words nondescript and no frills.

H.H. Brown is the leading U.S. producer of steel-toe safety work shoes. Cyclists and cowboys often buy Brown shoes. Bikers prefer their rugged harness boots for their cross-country trips. The company’s Ranch Wellington work boots are among its best sellers. About 40,000 pairs a year are sold for $110 each.

H.H. Brown is the leading North American manufacturer of work shoes and boots, according to Buffett, who added that the shoe business in the U.S. is tough, since almost all of all shoes sold in America are imported. H.H. Brown makes, imports, and markets work, safety, outdoors, western, and casual shoes through 15 company-operated retail stores around the country. The company sells a variety of men’s and women’s shoe lines including walking and hiking shoes, cowboy boots, and a businessman’s shoe called Comfa.

Many of H.H. Brown’s work and military boots are sold to the United States and Canadian military PXs as well as to such retailers as Wal-Mart, Kmart, and Payless Shoe Co. The company competes in the middle-price markets where the consumer is often an industrial laborer who is required by OSHA to wear certain footwear. The company has plants in Morganton, North Carolina; Martinsburg, Pennsylvania; and in Canada.

Buffett called H.H. Brown “exactly the type of business Berkshire strives to acquire: a leader in its industry and already staffed with tested and trusted management.”

The company is not related to Brown Group, Inc., a large shoe company in St. Louis. A number of Berkshire shareholders raced to buy a few shares of Brown Group, thinking it was Buffett’s purchase.

At the Berkshire annual meeting in 1991, Buffett said he was then looking at a business that had some international operations because it did business in Canada. Shareholders did some rifling through the usual publicly held stock information guides but couldn’t figure out his tip about some firm which had foreign interests. Since the Brown stock was privately held, he was hardly giving anything away.

At Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1992, Buffett said that Brown management is so good that, “When a single steer topples, they know.”

A tidbit from Fortune (February 20, 1998): “Warren Buffett may have found a use for the 129.7 million ounces of silver he bought, right inside Berkshire Hathaway! [Berkshire announced a large silver purchase in 1998.] Turns out Buffett was recently at a shoe show in Las Vegas of all places—remember, Berkshire owns several shoe businesses—when some executives from one of his own companies, H.H. Brown Shoe, showed him a new product which fights the bacteria that causes foot odor. The active ingredient in that product, is, you guessed it, silver.”

In 2000, John M. Sweeney was named president of H.H. Brown’s Carolina store division. Sweeney earned his bachelor’s degree from Harvard University and is married to Olympic Gold Medalist Sandra Whyte-Sweeney, a Harvard graduate who was on the U.S. women’s hockey team that won a gold medal in 1998. Jon Lebo was named vice president of operations for Double H Boot.

In Berkshire’s 2001 Annual Report, Buffett wrote:

Our operating companies made several “bolt-on” acquisitions during the year, and I can’t resist telling you about one. In December, Frank Rooney called to tell me H.H. Brown was buying the inventory and trademarks of Acme Boot for $700,000.





That sounds like small potatoes. But—would you believe it?—Acme was the second purchase of P&R, an acquisition that took place just before I left Graham-Newman in the spring of 1956. The price was $3.2 million, part of it again paid with non-interest bearing notes, for a business with sales of $7 million.





After P&R [Philadelphia and Reading Coal and Iron] merged with Northwest, Acme grew to be the world’s largest bootmaker, delivering annual profits many multiples of what the company had cost P&R. But the business eventually hit the skids and never recovered, and resulted in our purchasing Acme’s remnants.





In the frontispiece to Security Analysis, Ben Graham and Dave Dodd quoted Horace: “Many shall be restored that now are fallen and many shall fall that are now in honor.” Fifty-two years after I first read those lines, my appreciation for what they say about business and investments continues to grow.





In 2009, H.H. Brown bought comfort sandal brand Kork-Ease and relocated the business from Houston to the H.H. headquarters in Greenwich, Connecticut.



Børn Again

The Børn shoe booth at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2001

Always

Coke

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value H. H. Brown Shoe



99





DEXTER SHOE


“Ungodly dumb.” (Warren Buffett)

“A man of genius makes no mistake. His errors are volitional and are the

portals of discovery.” (Stephan Dedalus in Ulysses)

Having previously bought into H.H. Brown Shoe Co., Buffett extended

his reach in the shoe industry in late 1993 when he bought Dexter Shoe Companies. Buffett rarely gives away Berkshire stock but did so in this case to the tune of $420 million. It was an investment he later acknowledged as a mistake.

Actually, it was a disaster. By 2011, the Berkshire shares paid for the buyout of Dexter are worth $3 billion. The worth of Dexter is the starvation figure of zero.

The announcement came on September 30, 1993, and the Dow Jones wire said Berkshire was trading at $6,600 a share. Then Dow Jones ran a correction: Berkshire was trading at $16,600.

Berkshire and Dexter agreed that privately held Dexter, then with about $250 million in annual sales, would merge into Berkshire for 25,203 Berkshire shares. Dexter was headed by sports philanthropist Harold Alfond, part-owner of the Boston Red Sox since 1978. (Dexter also has been a long-time minority owner of the Bosox.) The purchase increased the number of Berkshire shares by 2.2%.

Years later Buffett would say that paying for the declining business with Berkshire stock was “ungodly dumb.” Dexter was earning about $40 million a year pretax at that time, a figure which would soon plummet.

Born in Lynn, Massachusetts, to Polish immigrant parents, Alfond, (he lived in Belgrade part-time), began his career in the shoe industry in Maine in the 1930s, earning 25 cents an hour. He founded Dexter Shoes in 1957 after buying a wool mill in the town of Dexter with $10,000. His nephew, Peter Lunder joined him in 1958. Their business now makes more than 7.5 million shoes a year, which is great considering the decline in the domestic shoe industry. Dexter’s log-cabin-style stores dotted the New England landscape.

As a billionaire in his 80s, Alfond said, “Buffett won’t let me retire. He’s the smartest man in America” (Forbes, October 16, 1995).

In addition to his partial ownership of the Boston Red Sox since 1978, both personally and through Dexter, Alfond was generous in his gifts to a number of sports facilities in Maine, including the Alfond Arena at the University of Maine campus in Orono.

Although he was accepted at Dartmouth on an athletic scholarship, he turned it down in order to work in the shoe business where he was known as a tough boss (Kennebac Journal, April 10, 2005).

Alfond organized the first private foundation in Maine and has donated more than $100 million to Maine schools, hospitals, and other organizations since 1950.

Early in 1993, at the suggestion of Frank Rooney, head of Berkshire’s H.H. Brown Shoe Co., Buffett met with Alfond and Lunder at an airport in West Palm Beach, Florida. “We went to some little restaurant based on a World War II theme, had a hamburger, and talked about shoes,” Buffett said (Forbes, October 10, 1994).

Buffett made a cash offer on the spot; but Alfond, not wanting to give a third to the government in capital gains, wanted Berkshire stock. Buffett told Alfond he would think about it.

Several months later when Berkshire stock was trading near an all-time high, Buffett met Alfond and Lunder in Lunder’s apartment in Boston. Without lawyers, accountants, or investment bankers, the deal was struck.

Buffett didn’t wear Dexter shoes until he bought the company. “Well, I’d never heard of him before either,” Alfond said (Forbes, October, 1994). The Alfond and Lunder families suddenly owned 2% of Berkshire’s stock, becoming the largest shareholders other than the Buffett family itself. Their 25,203 shares have grown to more than $2 billion now.

Dexter Shoe Company based in Dexter, Maine, makes a variety of men’s and women’s dress, casual, and athletic shoes, particularly golf shoes. Dexter sells classic “New England casual” shoes, including moccasins and boat-type footwear. Nordstrom and J.C. Penney are big buyers of Dexter shoes.

However, profits at the shoe companies slumped steadily from 1995 to the present day amidst fierce foreign competition.

At Berkshire’s special meeting on September 16, 1998, Buffett said the shoe segment was “not a big winner” for Berkshire. But, Buffett of course continues to wear Dexter shoes. The shoe business declined further in 1999, and Buffett wrote in the Annual Report:

We manufacture shoes primarily in the U.S., and it has become extremely difficult for domestic producers to compete effectively. In 1999, approximately 93% of the 1.3 billion pairs of shoes purchased in this country came from abroad, where extremely low-cost labor is the rule.



Counting both Dexter and H.H. Brown, we are currently the leading domestic manufacturer of shoes, and we are likely to continue to be. We have loyal, highly-skilled workers in our U.S. plants, and we want to retain every job here that we can. Nevertheless, in order to remain viable, we are sourcing more of our output internationally. In doing that, we have incurred significant severance and relocation costs.



A recent Tweedy, Browne Company report said: “The Shoe Group is comprised of three companies that manufacture and distribute footwear: Dexter Shoe Companies, H.H. Brown Shoe Company, and Lowell Shoe, Inc. These companies were acquired by Berkshire Hathaway between 1991 and 1993. Between 1994 and 1998, the Shoe Group’s sales declined 18% from $609.4 to $500 million and pre-tax earnings declined 61% from $85.5 to $33 million as the companies faced increased competition from imported shoes.”

In Berkshire’s 2000 Annual Report, Buffett wrote:

Most of our manufacturing, retailing, and service businesses did at least reasonably well last year.



The exception was shoes, particularly at Dexter. In our shoe businesses generally, our attempt to keep the bulk of our production in domestic factories has cost us dearly. We face another very tough year in 2001 also, as we make significant changes in how we do business.



I clearly made a mistake in paying what I did for Dexter in 1993. Furthermore, I compounded that mistake in a huge way by using Berkshire shares in payment. Last year, to recognize my error, we charged off all the remaining accounting goodwill that was attributable to the Dexter transaction. We may regain some economic goodwill at Dexter in the future, but we clearly have none at present.



In another sign of the gloomy times for the shoe industry, Prime Tanning, a leather-processing supplier for Dexter, closed its plants in Berwick, Maine, and Rochester, New Hampshire. The move threw 550 people out of work as shoe manufacturing companies continued to move overseas for the cheaper labor costs.

Imports now account for 96% of shoe sales in the U.S.

In the third quarter 2001 report to shareholders, Buffett wrote:

At Dexter, we have sadly and reluctantly ended shoe production in the U.S. and Puerto Rico. We had an outstanding labor force but the ten-for-one wage advantage enjoyed by competitors producing elsewhere in the world finally forced us to act—after our having delayed longer than was rational. I cost you considerable money by my unwillingness to face unpleasant facts when they first became obvious. Dexter’s business, which remains substantial, will be continued under the management of H.H. Brown. In the third quarter, we sustained a loss of $31 million at Dexter, about 20% of that from operations and the balance from the shutdown.



About 450 workers who were laid off by Dexter signed up for services offered by a career transition center. Of those 450, 181 found new employment, and the rest were furthering their educations. There were also those who were able to take early retirement (Associated Press, March 1, 2003). In all, about 800 people lost their jobs when the company closed plants in Dexter, Newport, and Milo. In 2004, Dexter Factory Outlets (33 in New York, Vermont, New Hampshire, and Maine) changed their name and expanded their line of shoes. The new format and name is Super Shoes, which, like Dexter, is owned by H.H. Brown Co.

The stores offer other brands of footwear in addition to the Dexter line. The new shoe brands include New Balance, Reebok, Keds, Grasshoppers, Sketchers, Timberland Pro, and Chippewa.

Payless Shoe Source and H.H. Brown signed a multi-year agreement in 2007, which made Payless the exclusive retailers for the Dexter brand of footwear and accessories in the U.S. and the rest of the Western Hemisphere. Brown will continue to sell Dexter bowling and golf shoes.

In Berkshire’s 2007 Annual Report, Buffett called his purchase of Dexter’s the worst deal he’s made to date. He wrote:

I made an even worse mistake when I said “yes” to Dexter, a shoe business I bought in 1993 for $433 million in Berkshire stock (25,203 shares of A). What I had assessed as durable competitive advantage vanished within a few years. But that’s just the beginning: By using Berkshire stock, I compounded this error hugely. That move made the cost to Berkshire shareholders not $400 million, but rather $3.5 billion. In essence, I gave away 1.6% of a wonderful business—one now valued at $220 billion—to buy a worthless business.



To date, Dexter is the worst deal that I’ve made. But I’ll make more mistakes in the future—you can bet on that. A line from Bobby Bare’s country song explains what too often happens with acquisitions: “I’ve never gone to bed with an ugly woman, but I’ve sure woke up with a few.”



Although Dexter amounted to Buffett’s black bird of remorse, it turns out that Alfond, through his foundation, will give every infant born in Maine a $500 scholarship to start an investing plan for college. If the foundation was funded with Berkshire, then Buffett

may see his original investment compound in many unexpected ways.



Harold Alfond died in 2007 at age 93 after battling cancer for 17 years.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Dexter Shoe



(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

Ad for Dexter Shoes



100





HELZBERG DIAMONDS SHOPS


The next business to join Berkshire’s sainted business fold was privately held Helzberg Diamonds Shops of North Kansas City, Missouri. The national retail specialty chain has 2,600 employees and about 270 stores across the United States, mainly in malls. Helzberg’s is the fifth largest jewelry chain in the U.S.

The purchase of Helzberg Diamonds was made with Berkshire stock.

Buffett said at the annual meeting in 1995 that the acquisition had come about this way: In the spring of 1994, Buffett was in New York walking near 58th Street and Fifth Avenue near the Plaza Hotel when a woman stopped him to tell him how she enjoyed that year’s annual meeting. Barnett Helzberg, who had four shares of Berkshire in his IRA (first one bought in 1985), had also been to the annual meeting and overheard their conversation. He approached the two and said he might have a business to sell him.

“I hear this quite a bit so I asked him to write me,” Buffett said.

Helzberg said, “I walked over to Buffett, and we had a very detailed 20-second meeting.” Later a deal was struck.

So how does one negotiate with Buffett about the sale of a business? Said Helzberg: “Basically the way to negotiate with Warren Buffett—you don’t negotiate. He tells you the deal and that’s the deal.” You accept or walk away.

Helzberg, Jr., former chairman and owner of Helzberg Diamonds, said Buffett’s deal was fair and was particularly attractive because Buffett promised to retain the employees and keep the business intact. “I did not want a lot of people spitting on my grave,” Helzberg said.

“My dream buyer for the family business all along was Warren Buffett. I knew we could trust him to keep the headquarters in Kansas City, resist changing the company character, and retain the jobs of all Helzberg’s associates. It might have been simpler to sell to the highest bidder, but that notion seemed as sensible as choosing a brain surgeon based on the lowest price rather than on talent and reputation.…

“‘This can be the fastest deal in history,’ Buffett said. ‘But what about due diligence?’ I asked, surprised at how fast the negotiations were moving. Most suitors demand to see every scrap of paper you’ve ever generated and to interview every top manager. That wasn’t Buffett’s way. ‘I can smell these things,’ Buffett said. ‘This one smells good’” (Barnett Helzberg, Jr., What I Learned Before I Sold to Warren Buffett, pp. xvii and xviii).

The chain’s position in the market is similar to Zales or Gordon’s, but with twice their sales per store.

Helzberg, whose grandfather Morris, opened the first store in 1915, said the original location was in a 12-foot building at 529 Minnesota Avenue in Kansas City, Kansas.

“In the first year, Morris’ landlord offered to spend $500 fixing up the store front if he could raise the rent from $25 to $29 a month. After much deliberation, the family decided to accept the offer. From the outset, the concerns of the small store belonged to the family. Serious matters, such as the $4 rise in rent, were debated and discussed for hours. The voice of each family member counted,” Helzberg said.

Morris’ youngest son, Barnett, succeeded his father. Barnett’s son, Barnett Jr., succeeded his father in 1963, and recalls, “An artistic pal by the name of Walt Disney was constantly drawing pictures and did a sketch of my father in one of his textbooks.” Who could have guessed that ownership of both their companies would partially or even totally wind up with Buffett?

Helzberg said that Berkshire’s ownership of his business would allow the jewelry firm continued growth and continuity of its culture. Also it would assure that the headquarters remain in Kansas City and would allow Helzberg time to pursue nonprofit community interests.

Helzberg said: “I am extremely pleased with the fact that we have been able to take a three-generation business and allow it to continue its growth and prosperity under the respected umbrella of Berkshire Hathaway. I believe this ownership change is a win for the associates of Helzberg’s Diamond Shops, a win for the investors of Berkshire Hathaway, a win for our family, and most importantly, a win for the customers of our fine company.”

Buffett said: “I am proud that Berkshire Hathaway is adding Helzberg’s Diamond Shops to our family of businesses. I have great confidence in the present management team. The talent pool represented by the Helzberg management and its associates is one of the reasons I place such a high value on this acquisition. It goes without saying that the long-term financial stability and very bright outlook for the future of Helzberg Diamonds were also major factors in our decision.”

Jeffrey W. Comment, former president of Wanamaker’s, became chairman and chief executive officer of Helzberg.

Comment told the The Kansas City Star (March 11, 1995), “The thing I told our associates, and what’s so beautiful about the deal, is that Mr. Buffett likes his subsidiaries to run as their own business.… He told me, ‘I don’t call my presidents, but I like hearing from you guys once in a while.’”

Comment said the sale to Berkshire brought very little change for Helzberg. “The only change that really took place happened the day after we were purchased. Warren called me up and said, ‘Guess what you get to do today?’ And I said, ‘What’s that?’ And he said, ‘Start breaking all your banking relationships, because from now on I’m your bank’” (Robert P. Miles, The Warren Buffett CEO, p. 303).

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1996 Annual Report: “Our only disappointment last year was in jewelry. Borsheims did fine, but Helzberg’s suffered a material decline in earnings. Its expense levels had been geared to a sizable increase in same-store sales, consistent with the gains achieved in recent years. When sales were instead flat, profit margins fell. Jeff Comment, CEO of Helzberg’s, is addressing the expense problems in a decisive manner.”

After collapsing on October 30, 2004, Comment died at age 60. He was succeeded by H. Morris Beasley.

Comment wrote a book, Jonathan—Through Santa’s Eyes, a compilation of stories of children and families facing life’s toughest situations. The book was inspired by Jonathan, an 11-year-old boy dying of AIDS whom Comment met when he visited a hospital as Santa. Proceeds from the book available at Helzberg’s stores are donated to the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation.

Comment also wrote Santa’s Gift in 2002 which tells the stories of Jonathan and other ailing children. Buffett and Sir Elton John wrote reflections for it. Buffett’s foreword said:

Many years ago, Ben Graham, my friend and teacher, told me of a goal he had set for himself. Each day, he would attempt to do something creative, something generous, and something foolish. I think Ben included the third activity to avoid sounding “preachy” in recommending the first two.



Jeff Comment has run Helzberg Diamond Shops for Berkshire Hathaway since the day we acquired it in 1995. He’s a superb businessman, and I’ve yet to see him do anything that could conceivably be characterized as foolish. As CEO of Berkshire, I feel lucky to be associated with him.



But, more important, I also feel proud. Jeff is a great citizen, and he has blended Ben’s recommendation for creative and generous acts into a program that has lifted the spirits of thousands of ill or disabled children. When Jeff presents his I Am Loved© bear, the child receiving it knows that the message is true: The girl or boy can see it in the eyes of the big fellow standing there in the red suit. That’s a gift that has more therapeutic value than any pill or wonder drug can deliver.



As I write this, my grandson, Howard, is in his fifth week in the hospital recovering from injuries suffered in an automobile accident. I have seen first hand the effect of family love on the healing process. Howie bears his pain far more easily when love and humor are in the room with him. He’s getting that in abundance, but not all hospital-bound children are so lucky.



In his Santa activities, Jeff has redefined “family,” embracing all children as if they were his own. By doing so, he has converted youngsters with impassive faces and lifeless behavior into the excited and eager human beings they were meant to be. His stories about those children will inspire you, as they have me.



Helzberg, along with Steve Harmon, wrote I Am Loved: True Stories of True Love from People Like You, a collection of heartwarming tales.

Claiming he’s “in retirement,” Helzberg teaches management excellence courses, works with a mentoring program, oversees a variety of charitable activities, helps to obtain licenses for children’s television programs, skis, fishes, and wrote a book called What I Learned Before I Sold to Warren Buffett.

Helzberg recalled the time he approached Buffett about selling. Buffett asked him to send some information, but Helzberg hesitated, telling the Kansas City Star (March 11, 1995): “I’m the kind of guy who likes to get someone’s Social Security number before I tell them the time. But finally, I said to myself, ‘You idiot, send him the stuff.’ ”

Later Helzberg asked Buffett if he could use his name (“in vain”) in his book. Buffett told Helzberg he certainly could—he could even use his Social Security number.

One chapter in the book encourages readers to “leave your campsite” better than you found it: “The Berkshire campsite and the campsites of the companies over which he [Buffett] has some level of control are examples. His conduct has been exemplary, whether you consider the $100,000 salary, his lack of stock options, his urging companies to expense stock options, or his unique plan allowing shareholders to send their pro rata share of corporate contributions to the charities of their choice” (Barnett Helzberg, What I Learned Before I Sold to Warren Buffett, p. 151). (See Termination of Shareholders-Designated Contributions chapter.)

Helzberg has been quoted as saying, “I made a few dollars, big deal. The only people that deserve to be full of themselves are people like Jonas Salk who saved kids from polio.”

More than 40 years ago, Helzberg hit on the idea of distributing red and white “I Am Loved” pins through his stores. Fifty million buttons and 12 languages later, the pins have become a trademark. Originally the pins were to honor his love for his wife, Shirley, who now sports a pin encrusted with diamonds and rubies (Kansas City Star, February 12, 2007).

On April 6, 2009, Beryl Raff replaced Marvin Beasley as CEO. In a release Buffett praised Raff as an “outstanding merchant and strong multi-store executive.” No reason was given as to why Beasley resigned. Previously at J.C. Penney’s jewelry operations, Raff lives in Dallas and commutes to Kansas City.

Before she was hired, Buffett picked her up at the airport in Omaha. Over a three hour lunch where they talked about networking, Buffett offered her a job (Omaha World-Herald, May 10, 2009).

“Everything I’ve done has just been rewarded by getting the most amazing job in the industry working for the person I admire the most. I’m having the time of my life,” Raff was quoted as saying.



Barnett Helzberg, Jr.

(Photo courtesy

of Helzberg’s)

The Story of Warren Buffett



What I Learned Before I Sold to Warren Buffett by Barnett Helzberg, Jr.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Helzberg Diamonds Shops



A Helzberg Diamonds Store at Lenox Square in Atlanta

“This One Smells Good.” (Warren Buffett)

(Photo courtesy of Helzberg)

Helzberg Diamonds Shops The Story of Warren Buffett



Weapons of Mass Persuasion

Helzberg store banner sparkles its message.

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)



A Helzberg store at Mall of America in Bloomington, Minnesota

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Beryl Raff

Of Permanent Value Helzberg Diamonds Shops



101





R. C. WILLEY HOME FURNISHINGS


Berkshire, broadening its range in

the home furnishings business, announced May 24, 1995, it would buy R.C. Willey Home Furnishings of Salt Lake City, Utah. The price was reported to be about $150 million in Berkshire stock.

The fast-growing company’s assets included 17 stores in Utah, which also had clearance and carpet centers; Nevada; and Idaho. It produces more than $600 million in annual sales, having 56% of Utah’s market share in furniture and 28% of the state’s electronics market. Willey is the 20th largest furniture firm in the country and has 2,500 employees.

Rufus Call Willey, Child’s father-in-law, had long been known in the community as “someone who started out in the back of his truck.”

He was known as someone who could fix anything. He would come over to wire a house and wind up selling a stove.

In 1932, R. C. Willey and his wife started selling appliances door-to-door to their friends and neighbors in Syracuse, Utah. For almost 20 years, R.C. sold only electric ranges and refrigerators and made a good living doing it. He let customers buy on an extended finance term program called Farm Plan which allowed customers to pay one-third each fall for three years. Customers were delighted. They could keep their food from spoiling and cook their meals without overheating their homes in summertime.

In 1948, Willey constructed his company’s first building, a 600-square-foot structure next to his home. A nine-party telephone line ran from his house to the store. He had one employee. In 1954, Willey became ill. His son-in-law, William H. Child, had just graduated from college and was asked to run the business for a short period until Willey recovered. However, Willey passed away, and Bill Child has been running the business ever since.

“It’s a beautiful concern,” said Hugh Coltharp, a stockbroker and Berkshire shareholder in Salt Lake City. “They have a big warehouse, and they were smart to get a stop light where you turn into it.”

Bill Child started the business with $200,000 in sales in 1954. Buffett said, “Bill Child and his family have built a business that is the envy of merchants throughout the country.”

Owners William (Bill) K. Child, along with his brother Sheldon and their children, sold to Berkshire, in part for estate planning reasons. Sheldon retired to lead missionary work for the Mormon Church in the Philippines. He’s now in Africa.

Bill Child, Utah’s Master Entrepreneur of the Year, and Nebraska Furniture Mart’s Irv Blumkin talked while at a conference in California. Two days later, Buffett called and told Child “you’ve got a jewel of a company. We’d be very interested. I’ll have you a price within three days” (Omaha World-Herald, May 26, 1955). The deal was wrapped up in two months according to Roger Pusey, business writer for the Deseret News in Salt Lake City.

Just as promised, the Federal Express letter came with what Child called “a very fair price.”

“I called him and said I was flattered,” Child said, inviting Buffett to visit the stores. According to Child, Buffett replied, “I know your character, I know your reputation. I know a lot about your company. I really don’t need to” (Omaha World-Herald, May 26, 1995).

Child persisted until Buffett agreed to come. After an eight-hour visit, Buffett found all was well. Child asked for time to work out some tax issues and to think about whether to take the cash or Berkshire stock.

Child, who said he always wanted to buy Berkshire stock but delayed because the price kept going up, told Buffett: “We’ll go with the stock” (Omaha World-Herald, May 26, 1995).

It turned out that Berkshire overpaid Child by several shares. When Child called to point out the error, “Warren gave him a call back, thanked him for pointing out the error, and said he wanted Bill to keep the $100,000” (Phil Swigard Newsletter, Spring 1996).

When Berkshire bought R.C. Willey, no change in name or management took place and no jobs were affected by the transaction.

The company, which has new ventures planned both in state and out, is known for a well-trained sales force who are encouraged to call shoppers back and write thank-you notes. Its credit card operations ensure a healthy cash flow.

With the Nebraska Furniture Mart’s annual sales of more than $250 million a year and with R.C. Willey’s over $500 million, Berkshire is solidly established in the furniture business in America’s heartland. R.C. Willey, like the Nebraska Furniture Mart, also sells appliances, electronics, computers, and carpets.

A footnote: As part of R.C. Willey’s sales promotions, the company offers free hot dogs and soft drinks to customers on many Saturdays. Child said the soft drink henceforth is Coca-Cola (Deseret News, May 25, 1995).

Child told Utah Business (February 1997):

We have a wonderful business partner in Warren Buffett. He knows how to manage people. He only has 13 people at headquarters, and 35,000 employees in companies he owns or controls. So, rather than tell us how to run our business, he gives us a big vote of confidence, 100 percent support and total trust. We don’t have anyone looking over our shoulder. He’s interested in the long haul, and he supports whatever market strategy that we feel is best. If we were to sell every appliance and electronic product we have at a very low margin for the next four years to protect our market share, he would probably not say a thing. He’s the perfect partner.



I’ve learned a lot from Warren. He is one of the brightest men I’ve met. He’s a delightful individual, a fabulous person. We just love him, and he likes our company and this state. He enjoys coming to Utah. He’s been in Utah five times—and he owns companies in other states that he has never visited. When he comes here he gives us a real shot in the arm. Our relationship is great. He is easy to talk with when I call him, or he calls me.



When Warren called to ask about purchasing our company, he asked me what I wanted for it. I just said that I want a fair price and that I want the buyer to get a great deal. I want it to be fair for Berkshire Hathaway and the shareholders.



R.C. Willey, operated largely by Mormons, doesn’t open on Sunday.

In Berkshire’s 1999 Annual Report, Buffett told a story about Bill Child’s desire to open a new store in Boise, Idaho:

I was highly skeptical about taking a no-Sunday policy into a territory where we would be up against entrenched rivals open seven days a week. Nevertheless, this was Bill’s business to run. So despite my reservations, I told him to follow both his business judgment and his religious convictions.



Bill then insisted on a truly extraordinary proposition: He would personally buy the land and build the store—for about $9 million as it turned out—and would sell it to us at his cost if it proved to be successful. On the other hand, if sales fell short of his expectations, we could exit the business without paying Bill a cent. This outcome, of course, would leave him with a huge investment in an empty building. I told him that I appreciated his offer but felt that if Berkshire was going to get the upside it should also take the downside. Bill said nothing doing: If there was to be failure because of his religious beliefs, he wanted to take the blow personally.



The store opened last August [2002] and immediately became a huge success. Bill thereupon turned the property over to us—including some extra land that had appreciated significantly—and we wrote him a check for his cost. And get this: Bill refused to take a dime of interest on the capital he had tied up over the two years.



A footnote: After our “soft” opening in August, we had a grand opening of the Boise store about a month later. Naturally, I went there to cut the ribbon (your Chairman, I wish to emphasize, is good for something). In my talk I told the crowd how sales had far exceeded expectations, making us, by a considerable margin, the largest home furnishings store in Idaho. Then, as the speech progressed, my memory miraculously began to improve. By the end of my talk, it all had come back to me: Opening a store in Boise had been my idea.



Fortune (July 9, 2001) said: “Child had his heart set on opening a new store in Las Vegas, so he took Buffett for a ride—literally. Touring Vegas and its suburbs by helicopter, the two men marveled at the new subdivisions that sprawled in all directions. Child had his eye on a location in upscale Clark County, where an estimated 8,000 newcomers arrive every month—nearly all needing furniture.

“There was just one problem. R.C. Willey stores had always closed on Sundays because Child, a devout Mormon, observes the Sabbath. So do many of his managers, who are also members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. That was no handicap as long as Child stayed close to his roots in Salt Lake City. With nine stores, all in Utah, where most people are Mormon, R.C. Willey had become the biggest furniture retailer west of the Mississippi. Sales last year topped $400 million.

“But Las Vegas? Without Sunday hours? Buffett wouldn’t go for it. ‘Sunday is an enormously popular day for a great many people to shop for a lot of things, and certainly for furniture and appliances,’ says Buffett, whose Berkshire Hathaway owns three other furniture companies, all of which are open on Sundays. Industry experts estimate that 20% to 30% of all furniture sales are transacted on Sundays. Buffett worried that customers who drove to the store to shop on Sundays would be frustrated and never come back.

“To resolve the dispute, the two plainspoken Westerners struck an unorthodox compromise: They would hold off on Vegas and instead test R.C. Willey’s approach outside Utah by building a store in Boise—not Sin City but not a Mormon stronghold either. Buffett still had doubts, so to allay them, Child insisted on paying for the new store himself,” the Fortune story reported.

“This September, R.C. Willey will open its 11th store, in Henderson, Nev., just outside Las Vegas. It will be open until very late at night, but it will be closed on Sundays. Buffett, a self-professed agnostic who plans to be there for the opening, recently told Child, ‘You impressed me in Boise. Now, if you can do it in Vegas, you’ll make a real convert out of me.’”

Buffett has said, “Other people can buy the same furniture, the same land, build the same store—all these things can be duplicated. But they can’t duplicate R.C. Willey” (The Salt Lake Tribune, October 21, 2001).

At a press conference in Las Vegas on October 24, 2001, Buffett said that the

store in Henderson had been a big success after just a month in operation; and the company might break ground on another store in the area within a year. “It could be quickly. I’m 71 and I don’t even buy green bananas anymore” (Las Vegas Sun, October 25, 2001).

Child said in May 2003, “Our Henderson store was an absolute home run. We did over $86 million the first year. We will do in excess of $100 million this year. We opened the second store in an upscale community called Summerlin, which is eight miles west of the ‘strip.’ Henderson is southeast of the ‘strip.’ The 230,000 square-foot Summerlin store looks to us that it is going to be another home run. After 21 days, its sales so far are way ahead of Henderson, and the exciting part of the whole situation is that we have not cannibalized the Henderson store significantly. Their sales are up 20 percent this month so far. We are really excited about that market. Hopefully we can build another store in the north part of Las Vegas.”

In 2003, Child and his wife gave $3 million for the William H. and Patricia W. Child Emergency Center at the University of Utah Hospital.

“WHAT HAPPENS IN VEGAS STAYS IN VEGAS.”

After the two stores in the Vegas area proved to be big successes, R.C. Willey opened a mammoth, 190,000 square-foot store and warehouse in Reno in 2005.

Buffett showed up for the opening of the R.C. Willey showroom in Rocklin, California on July 20, 2006—Willey’s first in California. When asked why he remains hands-off when he buys a business or gives money to charity, he replied, “You never want to marry somebody to change them.”



The R.C. Willey Story

How to Build a Business Warren Buffett Would Buy, published in 2009, tells how Bill Child sold his business to Buffett for legacy and estate planning reasons. An evaluation of the $200-million business could have faced more than $100 million in taxes. The sale solved tax and inheritance concerns and left the business as an ongoing concern under the Berkshire umbrella. The business has remained customer focused, still publishing The Willey Street Manual newsletter sent to Willey associates each quarter. Child’s sold the business to Berkshire for $175 million in Berskhire stock which in 2009 was worth about $730 million.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Furniture Movers and Shakers

R.C. Willey owner William Child and his brother, former company president Sheldon Child, sold Utah’s largest furniture business to Berkshire. Buffett overpaid, but said, “Keep the money.”

(The Salt Lake Tribune)

Of Permanent Value R. C. Willey Home Furnishings

R. C. Willey Home Furnishings The Story of Warren Buffett



Boss Said Roll Out the Furniture

Bill Child, right, chairman, and Scott Hymas, president and CEO of R.C. Willey, look over the large distribution center in Salt Lake City. In 1995, Willey donated 20 A shares to Weber State University in Ogden, Utah. A group of Weber State professors and business students attend Berkshire’s annual meeting each year.

(Photo by Al Hartmann/

The Salt Lake Tribune)

Of Permanent Value R. C. Willey Home Furnishings



The Store in Henderson



The Store in Summerlin



The Large Intermountain Distribution Center

(Photos courtesy of R.C. Willey)



Pam Moser Wears Many Hats

at R.C. Willey



Super Salesmen Cut a Ribbon

Above, left to right: Bill Child, Jeff Child, Buffett, and Scott Hymas prepare to cut the ribbon at the R.C. Willey Grand Opening in Reno, Nevada, on January 17, 2006.

Celebrities

Berkshire’s Debra Ray and Debbie Bosanek, taking a break from the R.C. Willey opening, make the scene at a George Strait concert. Strait (center) began his career with Berkshire doing ads for Justin’s “Strait Up” cowboy boots.





102





LANDING FLIGHTSAFETY


Berkshire Hathaway entered into an agreement to buy FlightSafety International Inc. for $1.5 billion in cash and stock on October 15, 1996.

At first this purchase seemed outside Buffett’s “circle of competence,” but on closer look, it qualified as a brand-name, high-barrier-to-entry business. FlightSafety is the world’s largest non-airline, non-government-owned aviation trainer.

The aviation training and flight-simulator manufacturing company founded in New York on March 29, 1951, provided a pathway for Berkshire’s entry into the growing worldwide travel and transportation market. Based at the Marine Air Terminal at LaGuardia Airport in Flushing, New York, FlightSafety offers high-technology, simulator-based training to corporations, airlines, governments and military agencies throughout the world.

FlightSafety’s instructors provided more than a million hours of training in the past year for pilots, aircraft maintenance technicians, flight attendants, and dispatchers from 154 countries and independent territories. FlightSafety has delivered almost 800 simulators and 700 visual systems for 60 aircraft types since 1978.

More than 75,000 aviation professionals train at FlightSafety facilities each year. The company also makes full-motion flight simulators and other advanced training devices. FlightSafety now has about 3,600 employees and 325 simulators and training devices at 42 locations in Asia, Europe, North and South America, the Pacific Rim and South Africa.

Unlike many Berkshire businesses, FlightSafety is capital intensive. The business earns high return on capital only so long as market dominance permits high profit margins on services sold.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1999 Annual Report: “FlightSafety must lay out huge amounts of capital. A single flight simulator can cost as much as $15 million—and we have 222. Only one person at a time, furthermore, can be trained in a simulator, which means that the capital investment

per dollar revenues of FlightSafety is exceptionally high. Operating margins must therefore be high, if we are to earn a reasonable return on capital.”

Over the next 20 years, airlines are expected to order about 16,000 jetliners; and private aviation is expected to grow at roughly the same rate. FlightSafety benefits from a rising need for new aircraft, with additional and ongoing training requirements.

According to a report issued by Honeywell Aerospace in October 2010, during the 2010-2020 period, corporate aircraft manufacturers are forecast to deliver approximately 11,000 new business jets from 2010 through 2020, generating estimated industry sales in excess of $225 billion. This represents approximately a 10 percent increase in total expected industry sales value versus the prior ten-year horizon forecasted in Honeywell’s Business Aviation Outlook in 2009.

With the sale to Berkshire Hathaway, FlightSafety shareholders could take either $50 a share in cash or $48 a share in Berkshire stock. Most analysts thought Buffett got a good price for it, buying the company in a bumpy time of sluggish earnings growth.

FlightSafety’s chairman emeritus, Albert Ueltschi, now in his 90s, founded the company in 1951, and was the company’s largest stockholder. He said, “I believe that this merger is in the best interests of FlightSafety, its customers, employees, and shareholders. My family and I will vote our entire 37% holding in FlightSafety in favor of the merger. Further, I will elect to receive Berkshire common stock for the FlightSafety shares owned by me. I personally consider Berkshire shares to be one of the finest investments that I could make and anticipate holding the shares indefinitely. I look forward to continuing to run FlightSafety as part of Berkshire and working with Warren Buffett.”

Buffett’s statement was equally complimentary: “FlightSafety is a business that I like, run by a man I like and admire. Al Ueltschi and FlightSafety will fit perfectly in the Berkshire family.”

In a talk by Al Ueltschi on May 21, 1997, he said:

I am proud of this company, of its people and of what they do. At FlightSafety we believe we’ve helped our customers in their quest for safe, reliable transportation. And in doing that, we’ve helped save lives as a matter of course. Knowing that makes it fun to go to work every day and helps me to sleep like a baby at night.



In recent years, I became concerned that once I exited the stage—say, maybe a hundred years from now—the company that we’ve built so carefully and so well could be taken over and parceled out by outsiders. I didn’t want that to happen but wasn’t sure what to do about it. Fortunately, my good luck held once again. Warren Buffett called.



Although Warren had been sending his pilots to us for training, he and I had never met, so the contact came as a surprise. He wanted to know if I’d be interested in discussing FlightSafety’s future.

I was.



So one afternoon in late 1996 we met in New York City. We got to know each other over a couple of hamburgers and Cherry Cokes, and I liked what I saw and heard. Warren said he’d like FlightSafety to be a part of Berkshire Hathaway, but he wanted it to remain an independent subsidiary, to continue on its same course of business, and to be run by the same people as before. At the end of the meal—the best burger I’d eaten since selling Little Hawk—we shook hands on the deal, and by the end of December it was done. FlightSafety became a wholly owned subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway, and I could not be more pleased.



Buffett has said Ueltschi calls the shots at FlightSafety, not him. “Do you think Al Ueltschi, who owns $1 billion in Berkshire stock, is going to want to keep running his business if I’m over his shoulder making decisions?” Buffett said in a speech to Columbia University students on May 9, 2002.

Bruce Whitman was named president and CEO of FlightSafety in 2003. He joined the company in 1961, as assistant to the president and was elected vice president and a director of the company. He was promoted to executive vice president in 1962.

Ueltschi, raised on a Kentucky dairy farm, began his aviation career as a barnstorming wing-walker in the 1930s after listening to broadcasts of Charles Lindbergh’s transatlantic flight of 1927. “From the moment he first heard the distant blattering of an old OX-5 engine and saw the twin wings soaring overhead, he was hooked. It was that simple. He yearned to be a part of it, to be a pilot” (Flying, March 1998). Ueltschi, who became friends with Charles Lindbergh after serving as his pilot, started with a $3,500 loan on his hamburger stand to buy an open-cockpit bi-wing airplane, and began giving flying lessons. When he joined Pan Am in 1941, he noticed that the industry lacked good pilot training. A $15,000 mortgage on his home provided the money Ueltschi used to found the flight training company in 1951, during a time when airlines relied on propeller-driven aircraft. FlightSafety went public in 1968.

How did Berkshire’s purchase of FlightSafety happen?

Buffett said in Berkshire’s 1996 Annual Report, “The heroes of the story are first, Richard Sercer, a Tucson aviation consultant, and second, his wife, Alma Murphy, an ophthalmology graduate of Harvard Medical School, who in 1990 wore down her husband’s reluctance and got him to buy Berkshire stock. Since then, the two have attended all our annual meetings, but I didn’t know them personally.

“Fortunately, Richard had also been a long-time shareholder of FlightSafety, and it occurred to him last year that the two companies would make a good fit. He knew our acquisition criteria, and he thought that Al Ueltschi, FlightSafety’s 79-year-old CEO, might want to make a deal that would both give him a home for his company and a security in payment that he would feel comfortable owning throughout his lifetime. So in July, Richard wrote Bob Denham, CEO of Salomon Inc, suggesting that he explore the possibility of

a merger.”

“Bob took it from there, and on September 18, Al and I met in New York. I had long been familiar with FlightSafety’s business, and in about 60 seconds I knew that Al was exactly our kind of manager. A month later, we had a contract. Because Charlie and I wished to minimize the issuance of Berkshire shares, the transaction we structured gave FlightSafety shareholders a choice of cash or stock but carried terms that encouraged those who were tax-indifferent to take cash. This nudge led to about 51% of FlightSafety’s shares being exchanged for cash, 41% for Berkshire A and 8% for Berkshire B.”

Quick action by Buffett enabled Berkshire to purchase FlightSafety; at the time, Boeing was also studying a purchase (Bloomberg News, April 29, 1997).

In 1997, FlightSafety and Boeing Co. founded a joint venture, FlightSafety Boeing Training International, to train commercial jet pilots and aircraft maintenance workers. FlightSafety and Boeing each contributed about $100 million in assets to launch the venture and each started off owning 50% of the training company.

In 1998, the joint venture announced it would build a 134,000-square-foot flight-training center in Miami to instruct pilots for Latin American routes. The $124 million center, which opened in 2000, is the largest flight-training facility not owned by an airline. The entire venture is made up of 800 employees and 70 flight simulators in 20 locations around the world, training 20,000 people a year.

The partnership, however, was not without its disagreements (The Wall Street Journal, July 3, 2002). The paper said Boeing‘s focus was selling airplanes, while FlightSafety wanted to concentrate on pilot training. It also reported that Boeing was crafting a deal to buy out its partner.

In September 2002, Boeing did indeed buy out the Berkshire stake in FlightSafety Boeing Training International. Berkshire recorded a pre-tax gain of $60 million.

FlightSafety has continued to grow and expand as an operating company of Berkshire Hathaway. Considered to be the world’s premier aviation training company, many of the world’s leading corporations and more than 40 national governments entrust FlightSafety-trained pilots with the safety of their leaders, diplomats, and heads of state. FlightSafety is the factory-authorized training organization for the majority of business and regional aircraft manufacturers.

FlightSafety has designed and developed several new and innovative technologies including MATRIX, an integrated technology training system that brings the same software that runs the full flight simulators into the classroom and self-learning environment. FlightSafety designers and engineers have recently developed the next generation VITAL X visual system for flight simulators and have manufactured and delivered the world’s first electric motion and control simulator. The electric system, which is quieter and less expensive to operate and maintain, replaces hydraulic motion systems.

FlightSafety has become the largest manufacturer of simulators for civil and military aircraft programs in the United States.

FlightSafety long has been a backer of Orbis International, whose programs have helped save or restore the eyesight of six million people through its flying eye hospitals.

Buffett, who rarely takes part in testimonials or ads, was the star in an ad touting FlightSafety. The ad featured a photo of him drinking a Coke and eating a McDonald’s hamburger aboard Berkshire’s jet (The Indispensable). The caption read: “Warren Buffett’s FlightSafety-trained pilots give him safe returns on his investment” (The Wall Street Journal, September 10, 1997).

FlightSafety has continued to expand with the addition new training facilities at the Farnborough airport in the United Kingdom; St. Louis, Missouri; Wichita, Kansas; and Lafayette, Louisiana in the past six years. The company has recently added training locations in Brazil, China, Singapore, South Africa, Japan and the Netherlands for regional airline and aircraft maintenance training. A new simulator design and manufacturing plant will open this summer in Broken Arrow, Oklahoma. Operations will begin at FlightSafety’s newest aircraft maintenance training center in Wichita next year.

So how has life been for FlightSafety under Berkshire’s wing? President Bruce Whitman said in a Nightly Business Report interview (May 3, 2007):

Warren lets you run your business as though it was your own and spend money as though it was yours. And he’s a terrific supporter. He’s a cheerleader, but he’s available if you need him ... He doesn’t require budgets. He doesn’t require business plans. Because he thinks if you need to change them, you might be reluctant to do that if you had already committed to them.



ORIGINS OF THE PURCHASE

Sercer says of his wife, Alma Murphy, “As I told Warren, none of this would have happened if she had not discovered Berkshire back in 1987 by reading The Intelligent Investor.” Seems that Alma went to Harvard, M.I.T. and Yale. She speaks Italian and Spanish, and is an eye surgeon who is pretty smart, smart enough to read The Intelligent Investor early on. Maybe Alma is Berkshire’s secret sauce. Maybe shareholders shouldn’t fret so much about succession.

Even though Alma “bulled” the shares of Berkshire at $4,300, Sercer made the classic mistake of telling her it was too expensive without first understanding how the pizza was sliced. They did not become shareholders until March, 1990, when Alma made the first purchases in her pension.

Sercer, a graduate of M.I.T.’s Sloan School of Management as well as its graduate school of Flight Transportation, is president of Aviation Planning & Analysis in Tucson, Arizona. During assignments for corporate aviation clients, Sercer developed a good working relationship with Jim Waugh, Vice President of Marketing at FlightSafety International.

When Sercer read the Berkshire Acquisition Criteria, he could not help thinking about FlightSafety. Sercer felt that Berkshire Hathaway would provide the right home for FlightSafety given their strong management team and great business franchise. In addition, the Acquisition Criteria specified that Buffett was eager to be contacted by the principals or their representatives of businesses which satisfied the criteria.

On July 24, 1996, Sercer met with Jim Waugh at FlightSafety headquarters. As Sercer was always on the look-out for good potential Berkshire shareholders, he gave Waugh a copy of the “Owner’s Manual” and a sales pitch. In addition, Sercer gave Waugh copies of the Acquisition Criteria and some pages from the 1995 annual report concerning the acquisitions of Helzberg’s and R.C. Willey.

As their conversation progressed, Sercer figured, hey, why not come right out with it? Sercer screwed up his courage, got the idea out and Waugh latched onto it immediately. Waugh said that something had to happen at FlightSafety since Al Ueltschi was 78 years old, and there were uncertainties as to what would happen when he passed away. Waugh told Sercer that Ueltschi’s four children and twelve grandchildren would likely have to sell shares to settle estate-tax liabilities. Waugh expressed concern that outside acquirers might come in and throw out the existing management. Clearly, FlightSafety was operating in an environment of uncertainty.

Sercer asked Waugh to broach with Al Ueltschi the possibility of selling FlightSafety to Berkshire. Sercer told Waugh that, in his opinion, Berkshire would keep the current management and let them run the business the way they saw fit. The only difference would be that the “owner earnings” would

go to Omaha for reinvestment in the insurance business, equities, or other acquisitions.

While Waugh thought it was a great idea, he worried that Ueltschi might dismiss the idea out of hand if it came from someone other than a credible principal, such as Warren Buffett. With this in mind, Waugh told Sercer to call Warren Buffett and to ask Warren to call Al Ueltschi and say, “Hey, Al, how about telling me about your business over lunch?”

Sercer thought to himself: “That’s not as easy as it sounds. How am I going to get Warren Buffett on the phone?” At recent annual meetings, Warren had described how he had been getting so much mail that he had to set up a group to respond with form letters. Sercer was not sure he could structure something to pass Warren’s enhanced mail filters.

On the way back to Tucson, Sercer tried to figure out what to do now that Waugh had issued the challenge for him to do something. He was somewhat despondent, but continued to mull over the options. Finally, it occurred to Sercer to send a letter to Bob Denham of Salomon. Sercer had talked with him after a couple of the Salomon investor/analyst meetings, and thought he might bring this idea to Warren’s attention. During the “whistle-stop” at El Paso, Sercer got off the 737 and called Alma to run this by her. She suggested that he “chill out.”

The following day, Sercer sent a one-page letter to Denham along with the FlightSafety information package Waugh had given him via FedEx.

At about 5:15 AM on October 15, 1996, from a report on Bloomberg Business News, Sercer learned of Berkshire’s agreement to acquire FlightSafety International. Later that morning, Denham called him from Japan to let him know of the transaction, and to tell him that Buffett wanted to talk with him later that morning.

Buffett told Sercer that he would include a write-up of the FlightSafety acquisition in his 1996 annual letter to shareholders, and that he and Alma should be prepared for a standing ovation at the meeting.

Sercer was very excited that Buffett found FlightSafety International worthy of a place at the “business end” of the Berkshire Hathaway “conduit,” as well as very appreciative that the dream would become a reality.

FLIGHTSAFETY TIMELINE

60 Years Young



(Photo courtesy of FlightSafety)



Gulfstream G650 Simulator

(Photo courtesy of FlightSafety)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Preflight Checklist

Flight instructors Danny Robayo, Fabio Miguez, and John Vaughan-Johnson, man a Falcon 2000EX Easy simulator at FlightSafety’s Falcon Training Center in Teterboro, New Jersey, on July 13, 2006.

(Photo by Barb Skradski)



Al Ueltschi in his Pan Am Pilot Uniform

(Photo courtesy of FlightSafety)

Of Permanent Value Landing FlightSafety



Al Ueltschi in Simulator in 1990’s

(Photo courtesy of FlightSafety)



Insurance Guy and Flight Guy

Insurance guru Ajit Jain and FlightSafety’s Al Ueltschi at Berkshire’s annual meeting weekend festivities in 2003.

(Photo by Frank Betz)

Landing FlightSafety The Story of Warren Buffett



Pan Am Douglas B-23 Aircraft

Al Ueltschi, right, is inside the door looking out.

(Photo courtesy of FlightSafety)



FlightSafety’s Farnborough Learning Center

(Photo courtesy of FlightSafety)



Interior of Cessna Citation Sovereign Aircraft Simulator

(Photo courtesy of FlightSafety)

Of Permanent Value Landing FlightSafety



Air Force Recruitment Poster: Author, Executive, Founder, and Book Collector

Standing in front of the SR-71 at Omaha’s Strategic Air and Space Museum on May 2, 2004 are from left, author Bob Miles; Bruce Whitman, president and CEO of FlightSafety; Al Ueltschi, founder of FlightSafety; and Roland Schank, Buffett book collector.

(Photo courtesy of the

Roland Schank collection)



Richard Sercer

(Photos courtesy of Richard Sercer)



Alma Murphy

Landing FlightSafety The Story of Warren Buffett



FlightSafety Ad Featuring Buffett

(Photo courtesy of FlightSafety)

(Photo courtesy of FlightSafety)





(Photo courtesy of FlightSafety)

Of Permanent Value Landing FlightSafety





103





STAR FURNITURE CO.


Berkshire agreed to buy Star Furniture Co. of Houston, Texas, on June 24, 1997. The 85-year-old retailer, with annual sales of about $110 million, was Berkshire’s third furniture firm purchase. The first was the 1983 acquisition of the Nebraska Furniture Mart in Omaha and, later, the purchase of R.C. Willey in Salt Lake City in 1995. Berkshire has since added Jordan’s Furniture Co. and CORT Business Services, a furniture rental company.

Under the agreement with Star, Chairman Melvyn Wolff said he and his family, including sister and co-owner Shirley Toomin, received Berkshire stock in payment for their business which has 700 employees.

“We’ve made most of our deals in one meeting. This one took two hours and 20 minutes in a hotel room in New York. That’s par for the course,” Buffett said (San Antonio Express-News, March 20, 1999).

Wolff said that during the meeting, Buffett “asked the most piercing questions you can possibly imagine in those two hours. He said, ‘Melvyn, in your 1994 statement, there is a footnote in the back that said you were taking earnings on unrealized gross profits. Two years later, however, the auditor changed the wording of the footnote, though it seems to say the same thing. Can you explain why?’ That just blew me away. How can someone read three years of 30-page financial statements and note different wording of a footnote way in the back of two of them?”

In the end, Wolff said, “There was no due diligence, no employment contract, no noncompete agreement, and no one was ever sent to Houston to look at the company. There was a handshake” (Chief Executive, December 2002).

Since the sale, which came about for estate tax reasons, Wolff and his family have held on to the vast majority of the Berkshire stock they received.

Wolff told the Omaha World-Herald (June 24, 1997) that Buffett gave him the choice of taking either stock or cash and that he chose stock because “we like what he has done with his company and how he makes his stock values grow.”

After the acquisition, Buffett sent Wolff a four-by-six-foot “Colossal Gram” saying, “Melvyn … My enthusiasm for our marriage dwarfs the size of this telegram. Your partner for life. Warren.”

In 1950, Wolff joined Star Furniture where his father was one of the owners. The company started as a grocery in 1912, and found itself taking furniture as payment for grocery bills. The first store was in the ground floor of a building and the second and third floors were occupied, as Wolff tells it, “by a hotel of some questionable repute. My father told me that the people upstairs used to say that the downstairs of their brothel was occupied by a furniture store of questionable repute” (Robert P. Miles, The Warren Buffett CEO, p. 200).

Today, Star consists of 13 stores: 10 in Houston and one each in Austin, Bryan, and San Antonio.

The historical account continues:

The building was located on a corner of Milam and Rusk in downtown Houston which placed it at the end of what was known as “Furniture Row,” a two and a half block stretch containing 11 low-end furniture stores. The strategy was to offer credit to the blue collar trade. Nothing was sold that could not be financed for $1 down and $1 per week.



In 1962, the firm was preparing to celebrate its 50th anniversary when both senior partners died in a two-week period. There was no succession plan. Sales had only passed the $1 million mark in the preceding year. The firm believed itself to be somewhere between 15th and 20th in size in a very competitive market dominated by one firm thought to be approximately 15 to 20 times larger than Star. The cumulative earnings of the firm over the three preceding years was negative. The firm had considerable debt, and had current day accounting standards been employed, the balance sheet would have shown a negative net worth. Prospects were not promising.



Melvyn Wolff became president of the firm and a short time later the Wolff family purchased the interest of the Getz family by the transfer of real estate holdings and creation of some long term notes. Mr. Wolff attracted his sister, Shirley Toomin, to join the firm, and together they began changing the strategy of the company. Small stores were closed to support the opening of one large store on the Gulf Freeway. In subsequent years new locations were opened on major freeways and in more upscale neighborhoods. Mrs. Toomin’s expertise in design and display techniques, coupled with the firm’s execution of a unique advertising approach began to separate Star from the competition the company history said.



Berkshire’s purchase of Star was announced during a company-wide breakfast at the George R. Brown Convention Center in Houston where both Buffett and Wolff spoke.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1997 Annual Report: “On the Thursday before last year’s annual meeting, Bob Denham of Salomon told me that Melvyn Wolff, the long-time controlling shareholder and CEO of Star, wanted to talk. At our invitation, Melvyn came to the meeting and spent his time in Omaha confirming his positive feelings about Berkshire. I, meanwhile, looked at Star’s financials and liked what I saw.

“A few days later Melvyn and I met in New York and made a deal in a single, two-hour session. As was the case with the Blumkins and Bill Child, I had no need to check leases, work out employment contracts, etc. I knew I was dealing with a man of integrity and that’s what counted.”

Wolff said, “We couldn’t be more pleased than to have the opportunity to become a part of what we believe to be the finest family of companies ever assembled under one corporate name. Warren Buffett has demonstrated a legendary track record for growth, and we want to be part of it.”

Star Furniture was listed as the 32nd largest furniture store in the country at the time it sold to Berkshire. The Nebraska Furniture Mart was listed as 27th, and R. C. Willey as the 20th largest in the top 100 list of Furniture Today. Was Buffett slowly becoming the John D. Rockefeller of home furnishings?

In 2004, veteran retailer and former Rhodes Furniture executive William “Kim” Kimbrell, joined Star as its CEO in a restructuring of management. Kimbrell began his career with a company in Durham, North Carolina, which, ironically, was also named Star Furniture but had no connection to the Berkshire chain.

Longtime Star executive Bill Ward was named president and COO.

Wolff relinquished the CEO post he had held for 42 years but remained chairman, and Shirley Toomin remained as vice chairman.

Now head of the University of Houston College of Business Foundation, Wolff said in an interview with the Houston Chronicle (January 22, 2008) that Buffett always remained a hands-off owner but would take questions when needed. Wolff had one final question for Buffett: “We were going to build a store in Sugar Land I knew was going to cannibalize another store nearby. So the return on the investment of the new store might be less than on the return of a new store that didn’t take business from another. I asked him if that was a good policy, and he said, ‘Tell me how the two stores will look 10 years from now.’ And I said, ‘Well, the new store will look better.’ He said, ‘Then do it.’”



One of Berkshire’s Stars

A Star Furniture store in Houston, Texas

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Star Furniture Showroom and Service Center in Houston, Texas

(Photo by Ken Monroe)

Of Permanent Value Star Furniture Co.



104





SCOOPING UP DAIRY QUEEN


On the morning of October 21, 1997, Buffett, along with the likes of former President Jimmy Carter, attended the funeral of Coca-Cola Chairman Roberto Goizueta in Atlanta. Afterwards, he attended a Coke board meeting, then flew to Pasadena, California, where he shared his wisdom with students at Caltech that night.

In the middle of that busy day, Berkshire and International Dairy Queen, famous for its soft-serve ice cream, announced a merger. For about $585 million in stock and cash, Berkshire would buy the entire ice cream and hamburger chain. Again, Buffett trusted his gut instincts, much as he has with See’s, Coke, and McDonald’s. Dairy Queen’s revenue runs between $400 million and $500 million annually.

When the word got out that Buffett was buying Dairy Queen (the merger was effective January 7, 1998), more than one person asked, “Which one?”

“Buffett has loved ice cream and burgers since he was little. It’s the nature of the product,” says Berkshire shareholder and ice cream lover Michael Assael. “And since you can’t download calories from cyberspace, it’ll be difficult for Captains of Technology to eat much into Dairy Queen’s profits.”

The Minneapolis-based chain operates about 6,000 Dairy Queen stores featuring Blizzards and banana splits. The chain franchises almost all of its fast food/dessert restaurants in all 50 states and 18 foreign countries. Texas is home to 570 Dairy Queens. Illinois is second with 269. Only 70 of the stores, which serve hamburgers, hotdogs, dairy desserts, and beverages, are company owned. Pepsi, rather than Coke, is served by 40% of the stores because individual owners are allowed to make their own decisions about such matters. Most of the stores, recognizable by their red roofs and simple logos, are located in small towns and suburbs of larger cities. Most of Dairy Queen’s operating income is derived from franchise fees paid by each store. It’s the 18th-largest U.S. restaurant chain.

Among Buffett’s favorite offerings is the Blizzard, soft-serve ice cream mixed with cookies, fruit toppings or candies. Buffett has been a loyal customer of the Dairy Queen at the corner of Dodge and 114th Street in Omaha since 1963. That operation, formerly run by sisters Coni Birge and Deb Novotny, is one of nine Dairy Queens in Omaha. In Berkshire’s 1997 Annual Report, Buffett invited shareholders to join him at the Dodge Street Dairy Queen for a Dusty Sundae dessert after the traditional dinner at Gorat’s Steak House the night before the Berkshire annual meeting. Shareholders were given a coupon for a free 5-ounce cone.

Dairy Queen also owns more than 720 DQ/Orange Julius stores; 145 Orange Julius stores; and 12 Karmelkorn shoppes, which feature caramel-coated popcorn and other treats. Buffett particularly enjoys an Orange Julius, sometimes going to a mall to get one. Dairy Queen has started a Grill & Chill segment which features such items as Iron Grilled Sandwiches, burgers made to order, and added breakfast in some locations. The first Grill & Chill debuted in Chattanooga, Tennessee, in late 2001.

Berkshire paid $27 a share in cash or $26 in stock for a company whose stock was trading at $24 a share at the time the merger was announced.

Dairy Queen’s roots go back to 1939, when a Green River, Illinois ice cream maker joined forces with a refrigerator inventor. In 1938, J.F. “Grandpa” McCullough and his son Alex invented a machine for making soft ice cream and named it after his cow. The McCulloughs unveiled their product at Sherb Noble’s ice cream parlor on August 4, 1938. “We dished up over 1,600 servings in about two hours,” Noble recalled in a Dairy Queen corporate history (Boston Globe, July 28, 1999). A year later, McCullough partnered with Harry Oltz, who came up with a way to keep ice cream at a constant temperature. The two sold franchisees the right to use the machines, and the company soon flourished. The first Dairy Queen opened on June 22, 1940, in Joliet, Illinois.

The company grew during the 1950s and 1960s as the middle class thrived, flocked to the suburbs, and filled the highways. In 1970, a group of investors led by John Mooty bought Dairy Queen for $5 million.

Dairy Queen had about 600 employees and about 1,200 shareholders at the time of the buyout. It now has 2,200 employees.

Buffett’s purchase of Dairy Queen surprised some. “I did a double take when I saw it,” press reports quoted John Roberts, an analyst with J.J.B. Hilliard, W.L. Lyons, a brokerage firm based in Louisville, Kentucky. “It doesn’t sound like the normal investment [Buffett] makes.”

What’s normal is that most people upon hearing of a new Buffett investment do a double take. The truth is nothing ever sounds like the normal investment for Buffett. While Dairy Queen isn’t the biggest brand name in the world, it is a brand name and has its niche markets in small corners of the country.

John W. Mooty, Dairy Queen’s chairman at the time of the merger, said in a press release: “Our family will vote our entire 35% of the voting shares of Dairy Queen in favor of the merger and will elect to receive Berkshire common stock for all the Dairy Queen shares owned by us. We are not interested in trading our Dairy Queen shares for any other securities. I personally consider Berkshire shares to be one of the finest investments that our family could make, and we anticipate holding the shares indefinitely.”

John Gainor was named president and CEO in 2008, and Mooty remained chairman until the end of 2008.

Mooty told the The Wall Street Journal (November 5, 1997) that the idea of selling to Buffett had originated a year earlier and was rekindled after Minneapolis car dealer Rudy Luther, a Dairy Queen director and big shareholder, died in early 1997.

The story said when executors tried to sell some of Luther’s shares to Buffett to cover estate taxes, Buffett indicated he’d rather buy the whole company. Mooty said Buffett neither precluded other unsolicited bids for Dairy Queen nor did he seek any breakup fees for Berkshire if the deal didn’t go through.

Buffett said in a press release: “Dairy Queen is a business that I like, run by an outstanding management team. Dairy Queen will be a great addition to the Berkshire family.”

To clarify the transaction and squelch some negative rumors, Buffett wrote to the editor of the The Wall Street Journal the following letter which appeared November 6, 1997:

The Heard on the Street column yesterday on the Berkshire Hathaway-International Dairy Queen merger misstates a vital point, an error that led to several incorrect conclusions. We are offering IDQ shareholders $27 in cash or $26 in Berkshire stock, just the opposite of what the reporter stated ($26 in cash and $27 in stock). Ironically, The Journal had reported the correct figures in its original news story of Oct. 22.



Your error led you to conclude that IDQ has been trading above the cash offer and to speculate about the implications of that premium. In reality, the stock has been trading at a normal arbitrage discount.



The story also has quotes to the effect that John Mooty, IDQ’s chairman, may be benefiting to the detriment of other shareholders. That is wrong: The Class B shareholders with whom the voting power resides—Mr. Mooty among them—are receiving no premium whatsoever relative to the Class A shareholders. Furthermore, Mr. Mooty is electing to receive Berkshire shares having an immediate cash value below the cash price being offered to all.



You also characterize our acquisition of FlightSafety as “low-priced.” The FlightSafety shareholders who elected to receive Berkshire stock now have for each share they exchanged about $65 in value. Looking at the 1996 and 1997 earnings of FlightSafety, I estimate that this significantly exceeds what FlightSafety stock would now be selling for had the company remained independent.



Warren E. Buffett



Chairman



Berkshire Hathaway Inc.



Omaha, Neb.



Buffett told Ted Koppel of Nightline (March 2, 1999) in an interview at a Dairy Queen in Omaha, “It was a business that I could understand. Now, there’s all kinds of businesses I can’t understand, and I try not to buy into those because ... why should I expect to make money on something I can’t understand? So I’m not in any high tech businesses, for example. But I understand, you know, an Ultimate Hamburger or, you know, a Peanut Buster or a Dilly Bar and I can handle that. And I like the people that run it. I like the economics of the business. It’s a good business.”

At a Berkshire annual meeting, Buffett was asked about the possibility of investing in software. Unwrapping a Dilly Bar and biting into his own brand of software, Buffett said, “The Dilly Bar is more certain.”

Dairy Queen has been given unsolicited coverage in literature, in the news and in film. Pulitzer Prize–winning novelist Larry McMurtry (The Last Picture Show, Terms of Endearment, and Lonesome Dove) wrote a book-length essay in 1999 entitled Walter Benjamin at the Dairy Queen is about the decline of storytelling. He used an essay by the German literary critic Walter Benjamin as a springboard. He first read the essay at the Dairy Queen in Archer City, Texas. Folks, including McMurtry, still go there to catch up on local gossip in the small town (population 1,748). Archer City has one Dairy Queen, three convenience stores, a dozen or so small businesses and a hotel. McMurtry writes of small-town life and his love of books and bookstores. His bookstores in Archer City, Texas, and Washington, D.C. are called Booked Up.

To celebrate his Aunt Katie’s 94th birthday on June 14, 2000, Buffett sprang for a trip to Dairy Queen. “Nothing’s too good for her,” he said (Bloomberg, June 15, 2000).

After a report that a Dairy Queen accepted a bogus $200 bill with George W. Bush’s photo on it, Buffett called CNBC’s Joe Kernen (February 5, 2001) to set the record straight. He said it couldn’t have happened because Dairy Queen doesn’t take anything larger than a $150 Jesse Ventura bill.

Buffett and Kernen continued their fun later when Kernen joked on the air that if Buffett would give him partial ownership of one of Executive Jet’s larger planes, he’d give Berkshire favorable mention on CNBC. Buffett then wrote Kernen that he couldn’t promise him ownership of an executive jet, but he could deliver Joe a smaller one. Buffett enclosed two small models of jet planes which Kernen displayed on air.

Actor Jack Nicholson enjoyed a Blizzard at a Dairy Queen in Omaha on March 29, 2001. So much so that Mel Hanna, manager of the Millard Dairy Queen at 5071 South 136th Street, said the Blizzard there is now called the Jack Blizzard.

Nicholson was in Omaha to film scenes for About Schmidt, a movie directed by Omaha native Alexander Payne. Nicholson starred as the character Warren Schmidt, who is facing an empty life after losing his wife and retiring from his job as actuary at Omaha’s Woodman Insurance Company.

In the movie, Schmidt buys a Blizzard at a Dairy Queen in Omaha. Art really does imitate life.

Dairy Queen became the subject of extra publicity when the Dallas Mavericks’ basketball-team owner and Internet [he sold Broadcast.com to Yahoo at the peak of the dot-com era] billionaire Mark Cuban invoked the chain’s name when criticizing National Basketball Association’s director of officiating, Ed Rush, in early 2002.

“Ed Rush may have been a great ref, but I wouldn’t hire him to manage a Dairy Queen,” Cuban told the Dallas Morning News. This was only part of a comment that earned him a record $500,000 fine from the league. Dairy Queen said it appreciated the publicity and offered to let Cuban experience firsthand management at one of its restaurants. “Mr. Cuban may be surprised to find out how much it takes to manage a Dairy Queen,” a company spokesman said. “We invite Mr. Cuban in to manage a Dairy Queen for the day.” Cuban accepted the invitation and managed the restaurant in Coppell, Texas, for a day.

“Welcome to Dairy Queen. Can I take your order?” the Internet billionaire asked (The Dallas Morning News, January 21, 2002). Cuban spent the day serving cones and burgers, running the cash register, and signing autographs.

Cuban, Blizzard in hand, gave an interview to CNBC, giving Dairy Queen another shot of publicity. An appearance on the Today Show gave Dairy Queen yet another round of exposure.

A Berkshire shareholder who watched the interview said: “That had me thinking … I don’t think Ed Rush could run a furniture store, either … do you?”

To commemorate the 100th anniversary of the ice cream cone, Dairy Queen offered customers a free five-ounce vanilla ice cream cone on September 22, 2003.

Italo Marchiony is credited with inventing the ice cream cone. Marchiony, who immigrated to New York from Italy, first began shaping paper into a crude form of the cone. He later replaced paper with pastry; and on September 22, 1903, he applied for a patent.

Although Marchiony is credited with the invention, a similar creation was introduced at the 1904 World’s Fair in St. Louis. Earnest A. Hamwi, a Syrian concessionaire, made a crisp wafer-like pastry called zalabis which he rolled for the purpose of serving ice cream when the ice cream vendor next to him ran out of dishes. This marked the beginning of the evolution of today’s ice cream cone.

CHOCO CHERRY LOVE BLIZZARD

In early 2004, Dairy Queen and DQ Grill & Chill locations nationwide combined chocolate and cherries to create the Choco Cherry Love Blizzard. It blends tangy cherry topping and chocolate chunks with creamy Dairy Queen soft serve. It’s a great dish, especially if you’ve been driving a camel all day.

Dairy Queen, which had a 10% same-store sales increase in 2003, launched a humorous “Something Different” ad campaign in 2004. The company said it was not ignoring culinary trends for those customers who want low carb and low caloric items.

A Dairy Queen survey conducted in connection with National Ice Cream Day on July 17, 2004, revealed some discoveries: Donald Trump prefers to eat ice cream in a cup; Dallas Mavericks’ owner Mark Cuban likes it in a cone; and, Buffett doesn’t have a preference just as long as the ice cream comes in a “large serving.”

Ken Salazar of Colorado, owner of a Dairy Queen franchisee, was elected to the U.S. Senate in 2004. Salazar has a law degree from the University of Michigan and was Colorado’s Attorney General before being elected to the Senate. A fifth generation Coloradan, Salazar has been a farmer, natural resources lawyer, and small business owner. Salazar is now the U.S. Secretary of the Interior.

Salazar’s brother John is a U.S. Congressman, making service in Washington a family affair.

DQ IN CHINA

DQ began its invasion in China in 1992, when it opened its first store in Beijing.

On November 6, 2007, CEO Chuck Mooty announced plans to add 500 Dairy Queens in China over the next five years. He was in Shanghai at the time to celebrate DQ’s 100th restaurant in the country.

The new stores will be located in the 17 cities where it already has a presence as well as other second-tier cities, press reports said. The new restaurants would make China the third-largest market for DQ after the U.S. and Canada.

DQ IN MARTHA’S VINEYARD

DQ IN SAUDI ARABIA

In 2010, Dairy Queen reached an agreement with Al Sufwa Food Group to open 32 stores in Saudi Arabia by 2015. The largest and only two-story Dairy Queen Grill & Chill opened in Saudi Arabia in 2011.

A SPOONFUL FOR CHARITY

Buffett raised $4,500 for charity with the auction of an oversized Dairy Queen ice cream spoon bearing his autograph. The five-pound spoon was sold on eBay and the proceeds went to the Children’s Miracle Network, a group that helps raise money for children’s hospitals.



The Good Old Days

This painting was a gift to Buffett from Dairy Queen and hangs on the wall at Berkshire’s headquarters.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Buffett Banana No-split Blizzard

At this Omaha Dairy Queen located at Dodge and 114th Street, a “Buffett Banana No-split Blizzard” is one of the treats available. Dairy Queen sells such items as cones, sundaes, Buster Bars, Dilly Bars, and Peanut Buster Parfaits. The first Blizzard was whirled in 1985. In a year, 100 million were sold (Boston Globe, July 28, 1999).

(Photo by Ruth J. Muchemore)

Of Permanent Value Scooping Up Dairy Queen



A Baker’s Dozen

These young people at an Omaha Dairy Queen are happy to whip you up “The Warren Buffett Original ‘Dairy Queen’ Dusty Sundae.”

(Photo by

Robert

Sullivan)



John Gainor

Scooping Up Dairy Queen The Story of Warren Buffett



“What’s Taking So Long for the Hamburgers, Warren? Don’t You Have Any Pull?”

Ted Koppel of Nightline interviewed Buffett at a Dairy Queen in Omaha on March 2, 1999. “He [Leopold Bloom] liked the thick giblet soup, nutty gizzards, a stuffed roast heart, liverslices fried with crustcrumbs, fried hencods, roes. Most of all he liked grilled mutton kidneys.” James Joyce – Ulysses.

(Photo courtesy of

ABC News/Steve Fenn© 1999)



McMurtry relaxes inside the famed Dairy Queen in Archer City, Texas, where he read an essay by Walter Benjamin and received inspiration for his book, (Right) McMurtry’s Walter Benjamin At the Dairy Queen which is framed and displayed here.

(Left) This is the Dairy Queen in Archer City, Texas, where novelist Larry McMurtry often comes in for a breakfast of sausage and biscuits. Nearby visitors can stay at the Lonesome Dove Inn and relax in the “Terms of Endearment” suite. “I live in kind of my own theme park,” McMurtry said (The New York Times, July 23, 2001).



Larry McMurtry

Left) Novelist Larry McMurtry inside the Dairy Queen which has framed copies of his book covers on the wall.



Of Permanent Value Scooping Up Dairy Queen



Booked Up

Dairy Queen customer Larry McMurtry, author of more than 20 novels, has transformed Archer City, Texas, into the home of the largest collection of used and antique books in the country. His huge bookstore, Booked Up, is housed in four buildings near Archer City’s town square. He says, “Instead of herding cattle, I herd books.” His bookstore is set up for browsing with books arranged, “Erratically/Impressionistically/Whimisically/Open to Interpretation” (The Face of Texas, Michael and Elizabeth O’Brien). McMurtry, in a letter to the store’s Web site, said he planned a sabbatical at the end of 2005. He wrote: Dear Friends and Customers, I want to let you know that, as of the close of business on 31 December 2005, Booked Up will be closing its doors—for a term. My partner Marcia Carter and I, with the help of many fine assistants, have been happily buying and selling antiquarian books for thirty-five years and are by no means ready to say a final goodbye to the trade. I, however, need a sabbatical. I will soon enter my seventieth year and would like to travel a bit before I become too decrepit. The books will stay right where they are—they can slumber in their majesty until the next turn of the wheel. Thank you for your participation in the life of Booked Up. —Larry McMurtry

(Photograph by Michael O’Brien from his book The Face of Texas)



Maybe in the future Dairy Queen will accept only $100,000 Buffett Bills.

(Acme Brick handout at Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2001)



Jack Nicholson

Jack Nicholson, aka Warren Schmidt, should not be confused with Jack Schitt.

(AP/Wide

World

Photos)



Message for Jack

Scooping Up Dairy Queen The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by the Omaha World-Herald)

Conehead

Buffett stands with an all-you-can-eat ice cream cone at the Dairy Queen booth at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2001.



Dairy Queen Manager for a Day

“Welcome to Dairy Queen,” Dallas Mavericks owner Mark Cuban said as he greeted customers.

(AP/Wide World Photos)



DQ Grill & Chill Restaurant

(Photo courtesy of Dairy Queen)

Of Permanent Value Scooping Up Dairy Queen



Dairy Queen Customers

Debbie Bosanek, Buffett’s assistant; her husband Jerry; and son Jerry at Dairy Queen

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Dairy Queen

Dairy Queen booth at Berkshire’s 2006 Annual Meeting.



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Dairy Queen

Ice Cream Cone



Senator Ken Salazar



DQ to the Rich and Famous

This is the only franchise of any kind on Martha’s Vineyard.

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

Chuck Mooty





105





TRAVEL: NETJETS BUYS MARQUIS JET


Berkshire agreed to buy privately held Executive Jet Inc. on July 23, 1998, for $725 million in stock and cash. In 2002, the company changed its name to NetJets and took on the tag line, “Everything else is just a plane.”

Nets was founded in 1964 when actor James Stewart and U.S. General Curtis LeMay were among the early investors and invented the fractional ownership model when Goldman Sachs partner Rich Santulli bought the company.

Berkshire doesn’t own the bulk of the planes; the customers do. NetJets buys airplanes from manufacturers at big discounts then sells most of the jets to customers at list price. Berkshire is paid a stream of fees on the business to manage the operation.

NetJets chairman Richard Santulli had been looking for a way to cash out while being pressed to go public. He turned to Buffett for advice. He answered with the question: “Well, what if I buy the company?” (Forbes, September 21, 1998).

It took Santulli 15 minutes to sell Buffett on the company as they stood on the tarmac at Teterboro Airport in New Jersey. Santulli said, “It took me even less time to sell him the business than to sell him a share” (Wired, June 2001). Majority shareholder Santulli received more than half the purchase price, winding up with cash and 3,437 shares of Berkshire Class A stock.

“If he [Buffett] were 40 or 50 years old, I would borrow all the money I could and buy more Berkshire stock,” Santulli said (Robert P. Miles, The Warren Buffett CEO, p. 135).

Buffett first heard of the jet company from Frank Rooney, the manager of H. H. Brown, and he wrote about Rooney’s suggestion and its results in Berkshire’s 1998 Annual Report: “Frank had used and been delighted with the service and suggested I meet Rich to investigate signing up for my family’s use. It took Rich about 15 minutes to sell me a quarter (200 hours annually) of a Hawker 1000. Since then, my family has learned firsthand—through flying 900 hours on 300 trips—what a friendly, efficient and safe operation [NetJets] runs.”

Buffett now flies NetJets about 225 hours a year and is the sole passenger on about 85% of his flights. His family uses the service about 550 hours a year.

Buffett personally pays for his use of the NetJets service, although he uses it exclusively for business (Robert P. Miles, Warren Buffett Wealth, p. 621).

When Buffett bought the company, he said, “It’s clearly a field that is going to explode over the next decade.” He also predicted it would become the fastest-growing of any of the Berkshire businesses. In the Berkshire scheme, it is grouped in the aviation section, along with FlightSafety, a Berkshire unit that happens to train NetJets’ pilots.

NetJets, with 510 employees, has about 50 locations around the world.

Buffett first heard of NetJets and became convinced of its growth potential in 1995 when he looked into the company for his family’s use. Since that time, he’s been an unpaid spokesman for the company.

Buffett said in 1998, “My Aunt Katie now has a 1/16 interest. She’s 92 years old and still lives in the same house she has had for the past 65 years, and she’s in love with this program” (The Wall Street Journal, July 23, 1998). “Aunt Katie’s become a real swinger now” (Omaha World-Herald, April 14, 1999).

In 1997, Buffett appeared in a magazine ad for NetJets’ Santulli, who holds two advanced degrees in mathematics. Raised in Brooklyn, Santulli attended Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn, taught math, and served a stint at Shell Oil before joining Goldman Sachs. His hobby is investing in race horses. In the 1970s, he helped Goldman, Sachs (a.k.a. “Golden Slacks”) develop some of the earliest computer programs that applied quantitative techniques to investment banking. He went on to head a Goldman leasing operation, before leaving to found an aircraft-leasing concern of his own. In 1984, his company acquired then-struggling Executive Jet Aviation, which was founded in 1964 by former U.S. Air Force officers (The Wall Street Journal, July 23, 1998).

Actor/pilot James Stewart and TV personality Arthur Godfrey were on the original board. Among the early investors was one Jack Nicklaus. “It struggled for a while and I got out,” the Golden Bear told Golf Digest (May 1999). “Look at it now, typical of my luck,”

Santulli rolled out the company’s NetJets program in 1986, after using his math background to examine plane usage data to determine that a time-share program for aircraft was viable. He had to figure out how many jets and how many owners are needed to be able to assure availability of a jet at 4-hours’ notice.

“Santulli gathered up all of Executive Jet’s charter flight records—geographical patterns, seasons and times of day people tended to fly, frequency of mechanical breakdowns—and constructed a mathematical model, but he had to find the x factor. If he sold a certain number of shared planes to customers, how many extra planes would he have to own in order to cover all the overlaps in customer demand? After two days of doing equations, he arrived at the solution: For every 20 planes he sold to customers, he would need 51/4 extra planes of his own to bridge the gaps. This would allow him to guarantee 98% availability. If he tried for 100 percent guaranteed availability, the x factor shot way up, wiping out potential profit. Santulli’s plan was to use charter services to cover his 2% gap” (Wired, June 2001).

“A plane is an expensive piece of equipment.” Buffett said. “If you only use an airplane 100 hours a year, you’re only getting one-eighth the use. This makes a plane available for somebody who wants to use a plane 100 or 200 hours a year” (The Wall Street Journal, July 23, 1998).

A one-eighth share of a Citation VII allows as much as 100 hours of usage and guarantees the owner access to a piloted craft within a matter of hours. Clients pay $1.37 million as well as $9,600 a month in management fees and hourly operational costs.

Among the 6- to 18-seater jets available are Cessnas, Raytheon, Hawkers, Gulfstreams, and Dassault Falcon. NetJets ordered 20 Gulfstream V-SPs for more than $800 million in 2000.

Prices vary depending on the kind of aircraft. A sixteenth share of a midsized Cessna Citation VII, which holds seven passengers, costs $685,000 and allows 50 hours of flying time a year. A monthly management fee of about $7,000 is charged as is a fee of $1,700 for each hour the plane is used (The Columbus Dispatch, June 15, 2000). If you want a quarter share of a Gulfstream V jet, it’s $10 million down plus $50,000 a month and $3,000 for each flying hour.

Brigadier General Paul Tibbetts, who dropped a nuclear bomb on Japan from the Enola Gay (named for his mother), was a long-time company president from 1976 until his retirement in 1987.

Today NetJets, with about 60% of the U.S. fractional jet market, boasts

• 400 million miles of flight experience

• 487 NetJets aircraft in U.S.; 135 in Europe

• 2,100 pilots

• 3,890 customers

• 1,000 passenger flights a day

Most customers sign up for 100 to 200 hours a year, drawing on the large roster of pilots, a number of whom are past crewmen from Air Force One.

In 2006, NetJets, which offers 15 varieties of aircraft, flew about 370,000 flights to more than 150 countries. Its customers are provided with Mayo Clinic Preferred Response passenger care medical services.

On August 25, 1998, Santulli and Buffett turned over the first shovels of soil at groundbreaking ceremonies for the continuation of NetJets’ new operational headquarters at Port Columbus International Airport.

NetJets pioneered the idea of “time sharing” for corporate jets. Customers can buy “fractional ownership” of business jets through the company’s program. The idea is that private jets, a great convenience for the wealthy, can be shared with fellow rich folks, thus bringing down the cost by not leaving a plane idle. Today NetJets is the equivalent in size to the world’s fourth-largest airline. (Could “NetYachts” be far behind?)

The 200,000-square-foot, $35-million facility opened in 1999, and was dedicated in 2000. The company’s old offices converted into a training facility for pilots, technicians, and support staff.

Forbes did a story on the NetJets purchase (September 21, 1998). In it, Buffett boasted about the company’s service: “Look, I drink the same Coke that you do. I eat the same McDonald’s and I bet our houses are not that different. But the big difference is that for sure I travel one hell of a sight better than you do!”

When Aviation International News (reported on the company’s expansion (October 1, 1998), Buffett spoke of a key deciding factor in his purchase: “I’ve never done what you could call real due diligence when buying a company. I look for people who are in love with their businesses. Anyone who spends five minutes with Rich Santulli can tell that about him. Rich is a managerial artist. It’s my job to bring him the canvas, paint, and brushes. He was the one who, in 1986, saw an opportunity over the horizon for something that didn’t exist yet, and made it work—through tough times. That’s the kind of vision and commitment I look for.”

The same story quoted Santulli as saying: “Obviously, my best choice was to get backing from someone like Mr. Buffett. Warren is a long-term player with the capital and independence to make it work. And he is a hands-off manager. Not that we don’t talk all the time. We do. But, it’s like this. He asked me, ‘Who’s the competition in Europe?’ I said, ‘No one.’ He said, ‘What do you need to make sure it stays that way?’ ”

In Berkshire’s 1998 Annual Report, Buffett wrote of plans to display NetJets’ latest product at the next annual meeting:

The piece de resistance of our one-company trade show will be a 79-foot-long, nearly 12-foot-wide, fully outfitted cabin of a 737 Boeing Business Jet (BBJ), which is NetJets’ newest product. This plane has a 14-hour range; is designed to carry 18 passengers; and offers a bedroom, an office, and two showers. Deliveries to fractional owners will begin in the first quarter of 2000.



The BBJ will be available for your inspection on May 1-3 near the entrance to the Aksarben hall. You should be able to minimize your wait by making your visit on Saturday or Sunday. Bring along your checkbook in case you decide to make an impulse purchase.



In 1999, Buffett made the rounds in London, Frankfurt, and Paris promoting the NetJets wing in Europe, which was launched in 1997 and is headquartered in Lisbon, Portugal. He flew on a Gulfstream IV-SP to London, had lunch in Frankfurt and dinner near Paris … then returned to Boston for a board meeting of Gillette … all within three days. Fractional-jet salesman Buffett says, “Difficult to do that flying commercial.”

In September 2002, Buffett made a pitch for NetJets at a business forum in London at Waddesdon Manor, former home of the Rothschild banking dynasty, and at Spencer House. Buffett walked into Waddesdon Manor with the Terminator at his side—NetJets’ customer Arnold Schwarzenegger. Buffett invited Bono, the U2’s lead singer who is also known for his campaigns to reduce world debt. Buffett said he was hiring Schwarzenegger as his personal trainer, adding, “I want to be the Uberlord of the financial world until I’m 110—while eating as many Dilly Bars as humanly possible.”

In 1999, National Air Service, the Saudi affiliate of NetJets, was set up. It serves a region including 22 Arab states, Turkey, and Greece. Plans were underway for service in Asia and South America. “The business grows as fast as we can get planes,” Buffett says (Forbes, October 9, 2000).

Competitors of NetJets are Canada’s Bombardier, Inc.; Raytheon; and Flight Options.

At Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2001, Buffett and Munger were dismissive of United’s efforts to get into the fractional jet business. Buffett spoke of confidence in NetJets’ strength: “No one’s going to catch us. We’ve had dumb competitors in the past and they bleed. We’ve got more blood than they have.” Munger spoke of United’s weaknesses: “United’s pilots’ culture won’t work for the fractional jet business. They have an extremely high cost structure. I don’t know why they are doing it.” In early 2002, United shut down its fractional jet business after failing to drum up enough financial backing. Raytheon sold its unprofitable fractional jet subsidiary to rival Flight Options. Bombardier stopped its plan to expand in Europe.

Buffett has offered an overiew of the fractional jet business: “The customer owns the planes so that it’s not a capital-intensive business, even though we move large amounts of capital around. Our customers have the capital investment, but less than if they bought the whole plane.”

A Business Week story (July 5, 1999) discussed Buffett’s interest and involvement in his fractional jet business: “As for Santulli’s business, Buffett is intrigued not just by the novel challenges posed by EJA’s rapid growth, but also by the logistical complexities of the fractional-shares business. ‘He likes the mental challenge of it,’ says Santulli. ‘He calls it 3-D chess.’ Even so, Buffett is careful not to impinge on Santulli’s operating authority. EJA’s chief once asked Buffett for advice when making a decision and was rebuffed. ‘Don’t bother with that!’ Buffett told him. ‘Just decide.’”

––––––––––––––––––––

Who are the company’s customers? They are often celebrities from the worlds of both sports and entertainment. Customers from the big screen include Sylvester Stallone and Arnold Schwarzenegger. Those from the “little screen” include David Letterman and Kathie Lee Gifford. Calvin Klein; Vin Gupta, head of database tcompany InfoUSA; Patrick Byrne, Overstock.com’s CEO; and the band N’ Sync have also been customers.

In 2005, Barbra Streisand entertained 350 other NetJetters at the home of composer David Foster (The New York Times, June 25, 2006).

Everyone in Buffett’s family and all but one of Berkshire’s board members have shares in NetJets as do at least nine Berkshire managers who are in the NetJets Program (the rest still travel by bus).

Tiger Woods has been a NetJet user since 1997 and flies on a Gulfstream 450. Other athletes who fly in style are Roger Federer (Falcon 2000 EX), Pete Sampras, Andre Agassi, Ernie Els, and Martina Hingis. The average net worth of a NetJets’ customer is $20 million.

NetJets corporate customers include Gillette, Seagram, Texaco, Dow Chemical, and General Electric—the latter being NetJets’ largest customer.

“It allows you to go places that you normally wouldn’t be able to go,” said NetJets customer and national radio personality Don Imus. “The limo is there. They take your luggage. You can take your gun on the plane.… It’s great.” In the summer of 2000, he used NetJets to fly from New Mexico to New York for surgery on his collar bone.

In 1999, Kevin Russell, NetJets senior vice president, said the company had more than 40 entertainers among its customers, as well as a similar number of professional athletes, mostly pro golfers (Columbus Dispatch, December 12, 1999).

The newspaper said golf pro Davis Love III, told Golf Digest that NetJets allowed him an extra 25 nights a year at home. In addition to Love and Woods, NetJets’ golf pro customers include Ben Crenshaw, Curtis Strange, and Tom Kite. In all, NetJets’ customers include about 55 professional golfers, making NetJets a sort of golf channel. Golfer Dana Quigley said NetJets has extended his career by 10–12 years. At the Masters in 2002, about 80 of the 300 planes at the Augusta, Georgia, airport were NetJets.

Two non-golf NetJets customers are Charles Munger and Bill Gates. Gates has been a customer since 1999.

In Berkshire’s 1999 Annual Report, Buffett reported on their fractional jet business:

Still, most of the planes we fly are owned by customers, which means that modest pre-tax margins in this business can produce good returns on equity. Currently, our customers own planes worth over $2 billion; and in addition, we have $4.2 billion of planes on order. Indeed, the limiting factor in our business right now is the availability of planes. We now are taking delivery of about 8% of all business jets manufactured in the world, and we wish we could get a bigger share than that. Though EJA was supply-constrained in 1999, its recurring revenues —monthly management fees plus hourly flight fees—increased 46%.



The fractional-ownership industry is still in its infancy. EJA is now building critical mass in Europe, and over time we will expand around the world. Doing that will be expensive—very expensive—but we will spend what it takes. Scale is vital to both us and our customers: The company with the most planes in the air worldwide will be able to offer its customers the best service. ‘Buy a fraction, get a fleet’ has real meaning at EJA.



At a NetJets promotional conference in London on March 27, 2001, Buffett commented on NetJets’ spending: “We’re not doing much buying of stocks at the moment. We’re buying more airplanes than we are stocks.”

––––––––––––––––––––

On August 28, 2001, NetJets made a special flight for a different sort of celebrity—20 small sea turtles. The eggs of this threatened species of loggerheads were scooped up from a storm-torn beach by a former science teacher, Martha Bowling. She took 27 of them home where she hoped to share them with inner-city children, even though she thought the eggs were exposed and no longer viable. She stored them in her basement for two weeks, and, remarkably, most of the turtles survived. She turned them over to the zoo in Columbus, Ohio. NetJets officials read about the turtles and offered to fly them to Palm Beach, Florida, where they were released offshore by environmental specialists (South Florida Sun-Sentinel, August 28, 2001).

––––––––––––––––––––

Once, while attending a promotional event for NetJets, Buffett, who was dressed casually, got cold. NetJets employee Sandra Gibson, acting on Buffett’s behalf, asked fellow employee, Dan Dugger, for the ultimate sacrifice—his coat. Buffett returned to Omaha before realizing he had left with Dugger’s coat. He asked Debbie Bosanek to personally return the coat to the employee when he came to Omaha. Along with the coat was a Berkshire shirt and a note from Buffett thanking Dugger for giving him “the shirt off his back.”

––––––––––––––––––––

DOES GOD WANT YOU TO HAVE A JET?

Berkshire shareholder Mick Rhodes ended an e-mail to the AOL Berkshire board one day saying, “The more I think about it, the more convinced I become that God wants me to own a jet.”

Other shareholders pitched in saying he was right and that God wanted them to ride with him. Another posted, “What about the rest of us potted plants?” Some began computing the cost if, say, 200 Yellow BRKers went in on the plane. Someone added that God had called on his cell phone saying he wanted AKPE to upgrade so the books could be flown out for the next annual meeting.

God willing, maybe the Yellow BRKers will one day own 1/16 of a jet.

In 2002, NetJets became a sponsor of the National Thoroughbred Racing Association/Breeders’ Cup as well as the Ascot and Longchamp race courses.

That same year, NetJets ordered 50 planes with options to buy 50 more from Gulfstream in a deal potentially worth $1.5 billion. Also 62 small jets were ordered from Cessna Aircraft.

––––––––––––––––––––

In 2002, Santulli bought singer Celine Dion’s home in Admirals Cove, Florida, which carried a price tag of $20 million (Palm Beach Post, November 5, 2002).

Santulli and his wife, Margaret, paid an undisclosed sum for the 15,000-square-foot home, which has a rooftop terrace that sprays cooling mist. It came fully furnished. Dion had put her home, located in the gated boating and golfing community, on the market in August 2002, before moving to Las Vegas for a $100-million, 3-year gig at Caesar’s Palace.

The Santullis also own a place on Fishers Island in Miami-Dade County, Florida. The paper said property records showed they paid $4.8 million in 1998 for that three-bedroom apartment.

––––––––––––––––––––

Berkshire reportedly offered $485 million for Britain’s Jet Aviation, a fuel company that could have provided support capacity for NetJets. Other companies were also bidding, but in the end the sale of the fuel company remained in the hands of the Hirschmann Group of Companies.

NetJets has operations in Russia.

NetJets and all other fractional jet services hit an air pocket in 2003, with a sharp decline in all air travel. Berkshire wrote down the value of some of its jets and was losing money. Cessna and General Dynamics announced plans to suspend production of jets for a while. Santulli said the lingering effects of the high-tech bust cost NetJets a lot of business as about 200 owners from Silicon Valley reduced or sold off their jet stakes (Dow Jones News Wire, August 22, 2003).

MARQUIS JET

For the ultra chic and rich, the Marquis Jet Card is an option. Marquis Jet has an exclusive deal with NetJets allowing customers to buy a private jet with 25 hours’ flying time a year. Actresses Elizabeth Hurley and Catherine Zeta-Jones are among the 1,000 owners of the card with black numbers and silver type. Other celebrity card holders include Ben Affleck, Matt Damon, Jennifer Lopez, Michael Jordan, Jim Furyk, LeBron James, and Kelly Ripa. The card fee ranges in price from $109,000 to $299,000.

Marquis Jet reported strong growth in 2003, with sales in the last quarter up 150% over the quarter a year before. The company also got a boost from being featured on the second episode of Donald Trump’s TV series The Apprentice. In the second episode, teams had to deliver an ad campaign for Marquis Jet.

Marquis Jet ran an ad in The Wall Street Journal stating, “This Valentine’s Day Just Send a [Marquis Jet] Card.”

In 2004, Merrill Lynch picked Marquis Jet as its exclusive private aviation partner. In 2007, Neiman Marcus and Bergdorf Goodman also picked Marquis Jet as an exclusive private jet partner.

In 2005, American Idol winner Carrie Underwood received a NetJet card, with 24/7 access to a Hawker 400XP as part of her winnings. Marquis Jet cards are also used by Usher, Hilary Duff, and Wayne Gretzky.

With the retirement of the Concorde service in 2003 by Air France and British Airways after three decades in the air, NetJets tried to move in on that market with the slogan, “You flew Concorde—now it’s time for an upgrade.” NetJets announced plans for a new trans-Atlantic service that would link small private airports outside cities like London and New York. The service is aimed at former passengers of the Concorde.

NETJETS EUROPE

In 2004, NetJets Europe ordered 25 Hawker 400XP light jets from Raytheon. The seven-seat jets are the unit’s entry-level offering (Financial Times, November 23, 2004).

By the end of 2006, the NetJets fleet in Europe had grown to 119 planes. NetJets Europe turned profitable in 2005, and was expected to land its 1,200th customer by the end of 2006.

German airliner Lufthansa was the first commercial airliner to offer its long-haul first- and business-class passengers the option of continuing their journeys in Europe by private business jets. Lufthansa hooked up with NetJets inaugurating services in Munich in 2005.

In late 2005, Raytheon agreed to sell 48 executive jet planes and maintenance service worth more than $1 billion to NetJets. The Hawker 4000 models, which carry six passengers and cost $18.9 million each, were to be delivered to NetJets between 2007 and 2013. NetJets ordered 48 more Hawker aircraft in 2007.

In 2006, NetJets agreed to buy 24 Falcon 7X long-range jets from Dassault Aviation in France in a deal worth $1.1 billion. It was the largest contract ever in Europe for business planes.

“To make an order of this magnitude, we feel positive about growth in Europe,” Santulli was quoted in press reports. “Four years ago we had 14 planes and 89 customers. Today we have 112 planes and 1,250 customers. The European market is very, very strong today.”

For all its growth and celebrity passenger list, NetJets—in the face of increasing competition, the expensive launch into Europe and business complexity—lost money in 2001, 2002, 2003, and 2005, but did squeeze out a $10-million profit in 2004.

Then things improved. In Berkshire’s 2006 Annual Report, Buffett penned encouraging words: “Our move to Europe, which began in 1996, was particularly expensive. After five years of operation there, we had acquired only 80 customers. And by mid-year, our cumulative pre-tax loss had risen to $212 million. But European demand has now exploded, with a net of 589 customers having been added in 2005–2006.”

In 2008, NetJets in Europe invested $715 million for 39 new jet aircraft and planned to bring its number of 900 pilots to 1,500 by 2011. NetJets has 1,000 flights a day now.

BUFFETT’S IDEA OF FLIGHT INSURANCE

When it was time for Buffett to attend the 60th reunion of Woodrow Wilson High School in 2007, he called up classmate Al Zanner, a retired dentist from Gaithersburg, Maryland, and asked him to plan it (The Washington Post, October 10, 2007).

Zanner picked up Buffett at the Embassy Suites Hotel in Chevy Chase (half the price of the Four Seasons or Ritz).

A group went to La Ferme Restaurant on the evening of October 5, 2007, where Buffett ordered vanilla ice cream and asked the waiter to leave the entire container of chocolate syrup. “I do not like skimpy sundaes,” he was quoted in the story.

The party continued the next day at the Columbia Country Club where about 50 surviving Wilson Tigers and spouses gathered.

Afterwards Zanner drove Buffett to a private air strip at Dulles airport where he got a tour of Buffett’s NetJet and an invitation to the Berkshire annual meeting. Zanner demurred, saying he was afraid to fly.

“I’ll tell you what. You send me a dollar, and I’ll give you $1 million if anything goes wrong with your flight,” Buffett offered.

“But what if it crashes and I die?” Zanner replied.

“Then your kids get the money,” Buffett said.

JENNIFER LOPEZ

In 2008, a NetJets flight attendant hit Jennifer Lopez with a lawsuit claiming Lopez’s guard dog chomped her pant leg on a plane trip in 2006 and was seeking $5 million from the singer.

Lisa Wilson, 40, filed the suit in Brooklyn Federal Court, saying the guard dog’s attack caused her to fall and suffer back injuries and surgery that prevented her from working (Los Angeles Times, June 30, 2008).

The flight was taking songbird J-Lo in a Gulfstream IV from Long Island, New York, to Burbank, California.

The story said Lopez warned Wilson about the dog. When Wilson walked by, the dog attacked, and Wilson fell, trying to flee.

BUYING AN AIRPORT IN GERMANY

In early 2009, NetJets bought a small airport in Egelsbach, Germany for $4.7 million to give its customers quicker access since the Frankfurt airport is so busy.

TOO MUCH TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

Anna Chapman, a 28-year-old entrepreneur and one-time employee of NetJets, was one of 11 people accused by the U.S. as working as a secret agent. She claimed contact with Buffett but in reality had never met him. Those accused were returned to Russia in exchange for four spies who worked for the U.S.

Last seen, Chapman was enjoying tabloid-star status back in Russia, posing in provocative photos for men’s magazines.

BUYING MORE JETS

In October 2010, NetJets announced it would buy 125 jets from Brazil’s Embraer to upgrade its fleet. In 2011, NetJets ordered up to 120 jets from Bombardier. The firm order was for 50 Global business jets and includes an option to buy 70 more. The entire package would be at a cost of $6.7 billion. In 2011, NetJets had a fleet of 800 planes.

NETJETS BUYS MARQUIS JET

NetJets announced on November 4, 2010, that it had bought Marquis Jet which offers prepaid cards that let business travelers use the NetJets fleet. The companies had an ongoing relationship when the two companies announced their deal on CNBC for undisclosed terms.

Founded in 2001, Marquis provides cards that offer access to NetJets planes 25 times a year, with prices beginning at $115,000. Marquis has about 4,000 cardholders.

On the CNBC show, Marquis Jet founder Ken Dichter said he was seeing an “uptake” in demand for NetJets.

JORDAN HANSELL IN THE COCKPIT

David Sokol had run NetJets since mid-2009. With his resignation on March 28, 2011, lawyer Jordan Hansell was named chairman and CEO.

Hansell was recruited to NetJets by Greg Abel, chairman of MidAmerican Energy, from a Des Moines law firm that had done work for MidAmerican Energy.

Hansell is a product of Duke University and received a law degree and a master’s in public policy from the University of Michigan. His resume includes a clerkship with Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia.

NetJets’ performance has begun to level out, but still has lost $173 million since Buffett bought it in 1998. NetJets now operates 776 aircraft, more than many airlines. It has 4,000 shareowners and 3,500 card customers for its Marquis brand. It employs 6,400 people.

LAWSUIT AGAINST THE IRS

NetJets sued the IRS in November 2011 over a $642.7 million ticket-tax assessment.

NetJets sought a refund in taxes and penalties assessed against the company which claimed that Congress intended the tax to apply to passengers who use commercial or charter aircraft owned by others. “The ticket tax was not intended to apply to private aircraft owners and the fees they pay to maintain and operate their aircraft,” NetJets said in a statement.

NetJets Posterboys,

Bill Gates and Buffett

Buffett says of his good treatment on NetJets, “They treat me like any other five-year-old.”



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



“Fly Me to the Moon”

NetJets Chairman Richard Santulli with Buffett at a groundbreaking ceremony in Columbus, Ohio, August 25, 1998. Santulli headed NetJets until he stepped down August 4, 2009, and MidAmerican Energy head David Sokol stepped in on a temporary basis. At the dedication of the new headquarters June 14, 2000, Buffett, a constant pitchman, said, “I’m not much of a salesman, but I’ve had probably a dozen [sales] so far.” He added, “It didn’t require any more than an IQ of 60 to realize this is going to grow.” (Bloomberg, June 15, 2000).

(Courtesy of the Columbus Dispatch)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Berkshire’s Pilot at Mission Control

Buffett in front of the NetJets trade show display on May 1, 1999, during the weekend of Berkshire’s annual meeting. The fuselage (nose to tail) was at Ak-Sar-Ben in Omaha for shareholders to visit. Berkshire shareholder John Gass recalls the moment Buffett arrived: “There were about 30 of us in line waiting to enter the plane on Saturday afternoon and take a tour. Then an older gentleman in a navy blazer walks up and gets in line at the end. No one noticed Warren, Astrid, and Susie [Jr.] at first. Then people started getting out of line and moving to the back. For awhile, no one entered the plane as they just kept moving to the back of the line to get their photo with Warren. One big circle. As always, Warren was more than gracious, chatting and posing for pictures until he had moved up in line to enter the plane.”

(Photo by John Gass)

Of Permanent Value Jet Set Flies NetJets

Family Heirloom

Buffett’s Aunt Katie by marriage to his Uncle Fred Buffett, the third- generation son in the Buffett & Son grocery, died at age 98 in 2004. A longtime teacher and bird-watcher, she was a benefactor of the Katherine and Fred Buffett Forest Learning Center of Fontenelle Forest in Omaha. She could listen to a call of a bird and immediately identify it. Her favorite bird was the western meadowlark, Nebraska’s state bird. Aunt Katie enjoyed her interest in NetJets.



(Photo courtesy of Omaha World-Herald)

Jet Set Flies NetJets The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

“Look, Ma, No Wings.”

In the trade show associated with Berkshire’s 1994 Annual Meeting, an Executive Jet is displayed outside the Aksarben Coliseum. In 2000, Berkshire displayed a number of types of jets at the airport in Omaha. Maybe someday Buffett will order up the whole fleet.

Of Permanent Value Jet Set Flies NetJets



N’ Sync N’ Jets

The former N’ Sync band performed at the first Latin Grammy Awards in Los Angeles September 13, 2000. The group flew via NetJets.

(Photo by AP/Wide World Photos)



Customer and Poster Child

Tennis champion Roger Federer not only is a customer but also has appeared in company ads.

(AP/Wide

World Photos)



Imus Rides

Don Imus is a

NetJets customer.

Jet Set Flies NetJets The Story of Warren Buffett



“Coat Check” Girl for the Day

NetJets’ Sandra Gibson borrowed a coat for Buffett in his time of need.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



God Said, “Later, Lee.”

Berkshire shareholder Lee Armstrong of Atlanta checks out a jet at the Berkshire shareholders’ weekend in 2001 to see if God wants her to have a jet. God—who can be harsh about these things—told her not right now, but perhaps later.

(Photo courtesy

of Lee Armstrong)



“Father, May I”

Lee Armstrong and her friend Elizabeth Spiegel were still smitten with the NetJets exhibit in 2004, No “yes” has come yet.

(Photo courtesy

of Lee Armstrong)

Of Permanent Value Jet Set Flies NetJets

NetJets Customers

This ad for Executive Jet (now NetJets) features such customers as Buffett and tennis star Pete Sampras. Another NetJets ad in Fortune in early 2001 featured a full-page shot of Buffett with text stating, “Warren Buffett has big news …” On the next page was a picture of Buffett sitting alone with a newspaper in the splendor of an Executive Jet—his homespun persona a bit nicked—surrounded by the caption, “Introducing the world’s most powerful business tool at a fraction of the cost.” Buffett himself now flies in a Gulfstream IV-SP. NetJets offers 15 aircraft ranging from the light-cabin Cessna Citation V Ultra, the Excel, and Raytheon Hawker 400 through the midsize Hawker 800 and Citation X to the large-cabin Gulfstreams, Falcons, and the long-range Boeing Business Jet. The Gulfstream 550, which can fly nonstop from New York to Bombay, was recently added to the fleet.



(Courtesy of Executive Jet)



NetJets in Action

This flying high poster was displayed at the NetJets Booth at Berkshire’s annual meeting

in 2003.

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

Jet Set Flies NetJets The Story of Warren Buffett

(AP/Photo)



American Idol

Carrie Underwood

Of Permanent Value Jet Set Flies NetJets

“A hawklike man flying sunward above the sea, a prophecy of the end he had been born to serve and had been following through the mists of childhood and boyhood, a symbol of the artist forging anew in his workshop out of the sluggish matter of the earth a new soaring impalpable imperishable being?”

(James Joyce, A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man)

Jennifer Lopez





Anna Chapman



Jordan Hansell



106





SANTULLI STEPS DOWN; SOKOL STEPS UP


Rich Santulli, who had been considered among the possible candidates to

succeed Buffett, stepped down as head of NetJets on August 4, 2009.

On the same day, Buffett named MidAmerican chairman David Sokol as interim head of NetJets.

Santulli, in his mid 60s, led the company he created for 25 years. He said he was stepping down to “spend time with my young family and pursue other interests.” Santulli is known for his love of racing horses.

Buffett said in a statement he accepted Santulli’s resignation “with reluctance.”

Sokol also has been in the short list of names to succeed Buffett. Buffett’s pick of Sokol to fill the NetJets job quickly fueled more such speculation.

But Buffett’s closely held secret as to succession remained just that. After all, anything can happen. Few would have guessed either that Santulli would step down THEN resurface in 2010 heading a venture called Milestone Aviation Group of Dublin to help provide helicopters for oil companies and police, or that Sokol would succeed him.

With Santulli’s departure, Daniel Rosenthal, the next highest-ranking at NetJets, also stepped down. Further, the corporate headquarters was moved from New Jersey to Columbus, Ohio, where the core of its operations are.

In addition to his posts with MidAmerican Energy and NetJets, Sokol is

also chairman of Johns Manville, Berkshire’s insulation company and is a director of BYD, the Chinese electric car company in which Berkshire has an investment.

Sokol, who has engineering, math, and logistics abilities, took over the reins at a time when the world’s financial crisis was battering NetJets. More than 300 jobs were cut immediately after Sokol took over and in an effort to cut costs and tighten up operations at NetJets, 495 pilots were let go in November 2009. NetJets canceled $2.6 billion worth of jets which were to have come from Hawker Beechcraft.

Sokol stopped the losses, which came in at $711 million in 2009; and in 2010 he said that the company was solidly profitable, making $50 million in the first quarter of 2010. Buffett said of Sokol in Berkshire’s 2009 Annual Report, “His leadership has been transformational.”

Berkshire also cut hundreds of jobs at a number of its units, including Clayton, Shaw, Borsheims, and The Buffalo News.

In all, Berkshire had 21,000 fewer employees at the end of 2009 than a year earlier, an 8.6% decline. Berkshire ended 2009 with 225,000 employees, down from about 246,000 employees. That was before completion of the Burlington Northern railroad deal which added about 37,000 railroad employees.

Berkshire had about 260,000 employees toward the end of 2010 after adding back about 3,000 jobs during the year.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Santulli Steps Down; Sokol Steps Up



107





SOKOL STEPS DOWN


After a meteoric career, David Sokol, widely regarded as a top candidate to succeed Buffett as CEO, abruptly resigned on March 28, 2011.

The resignation came about after revelations that Sokol had bought shares of Lubrizol, a company Berkshire soon bought outright. Sokol’s $10 million investment in Lubrizol quickly yielded a $3 million profit. Sokol and Buffett said the trading was not illegal and that Sokol had been thinking for several years of resigning to pursue family and foundation interests.

Sokol maintained that the Lubrizol stock he bought was done so from public information and that he had no say in Buffett’s decision as to whether Berkshire would buy Lubrizol.

Buffett issued the following full-dress account press release on March 30, 2011:

This press release will be unusual. First, I will write it almost as if it were a letter. Second, it will contain two sets of facts, both about Dave Sokol, Chairman of several Berkshire subsidiaries.



Late in the day on March 28, I received a letter of resignation from Dave, delivered by his assistant. His reasons were as follows:



“As I have mentioned to you in the past, it is my goal to utilize the time remaining in my career to invest my family’s resources in such a way as to create enduring equity value and hopefully an enterprise which will provide opportunity for my descendents and funding for my philanthropic interests. I have no more detailed plan than this because my obligations from Berkshire Hathaway have been my first and only business priority.”



I had not asked for his resignation, and it came as a surprise to me. Twice before, most recently two or so years ago, Dave had talked to me of resigning. In each case he had given me the same reasons that he laid out in his Monday letter. Both times, I and other Board members persuaded him to stay. Berkshire is far more valuable today because we were successful in those efforts.



Dave’s contributions have been extraordinary. At MidAmerican, he and Greg Abel have delivered the best performance of any managers in the public utility field. At NetJets, Dave resurrected an operation that was destined for bankruptcy, absent Berkshire’s deep pockets. He has been of enormous help in the operation of Johns Manville, where he installed new management some years ago and oversaw major change.



Finally, Dave brought the idea for purchasing Lubrizol to me on either January 14 or 15. Initially, I was unimpressed, but after his report of a January 25 talk with its CEO, James Hambrick, I quickly warmed to the idea. Though the offer to purchase was entirely my decision, supported by Berkshire’s Board on March 13, it would not have occurred without Dave’s early efforts.



That brings us to our second set of facts. In our first talk about Lubrizol, Dave mentioned that he owned stock in the company. It was a passing remark and I did not ask him about the date of his purchase or the extent of his holdings.



Shortly before I left for Asia on March 19, I learned that Dave first purchased 2,300 shares of Lubrizol on December 14, which he then sold on December 21. Subsequently, on January 5, 6 and 7, he bought 96,060 shares pursuant to a 100,000-share order he had placed with a $104 per share limit price.



Dave’s purchases were made before he had discussed Lubrizol with me and with no knowledge of how I might react to his idea. In addition, of course, he did not know what Lubrizol’s reaction would be if I developed an interest. Furthermore, he knew he would have no voice in Berkshire’s decision once he suggested the idea; it would be up to me and Charlie Munger, subject to ratification by the Berkshire Board of which Dave is not a member.



As late as January 24, I sent Dave a short note indicating my skepticism about making an offer for Lubrizol and my preference for another substantial acquisition for which MidAmerican had made a bid. Only after Dave reported on the January 25 dinner conversation with James Hambrick did I get interested in the acquisition of Lubrizol.



Neither Dave nor I feel his Lubrizol purchases were in any way unlawful. He has told me that they were not a factor in his decision to resign.



Dave’s letter was a total surprise to me, despite the two earlier resignation talks. I had spoken with him the previous day about various operating matters and received no hint of his intention to resign. This time, however, I did not attempt to talk him out of his decision and accepted his resignation.



Effective with Dave’s resignation, Greg Abel, presently President and CEO of MidAmerican Holding Company, will become its Chairman; Todd Raba, President and CEO of Johns Manville, will become its Chairman; and Jordan Hansell, President of NetJets, will become its Chairman and CEO.



I have held back nothing in this statement. Therefore, if questioned about this matter in the future, I will simply refer the questioner back to this release.



Berkshire Hathaway and its subsidiaries engage in diverse business activities including property and casualty insurance and reinsurance, utilities and energy, finance, manufacturing, retailing and services. Common stock of the company is listed on the New York Stock Exchange, trading symbols BRK.A and BRK.B.



The incident set off a firestorm of controversy in the press about whether Sokol’s trading in Lubrizol stock was legal or illegal or unethical.

Sokol on CNBC (March 29, 2011) said he did not think he had done anything wrong and mentioned that Munger had bought BYD shares, the Chinese car maker, before Berkshire invested in it.

Munger told Bloomberg News (April 5, 2011) that his family was invested in BYD “for years” before Berkshire took a stake in BYD and that he informed Buffett. “I certainly suggested that Berkshire look at investing in something the Mungers were already invested in, but we’d been in for years.” Munger said he stayed out of the talks when Berkshire did the deal to invest in BYD.

“I recused myself,” Munger was quoted as saying. “But there’s no doubt about it, that I caused Dave’s original interest.” Munger had asked Sokol to have a look at the company.

Munger said his family invested with money manager Li Lu in BYD through a partnership that has a stake of about 3% of BYD.

Berkshire invested $230 million in BYD in 2008.

For several weeks the press reported on this story often criticizing Buffett’s press release of the matter as the matter festered.

On April 27, 2011, Berkshire’s audit committee (consisting of Tom Murphy, Donald Keough, and Charlotte Guyman) issued a report finding fault with Sokol’s behavior in the matter saying Sokol offered “misleadingly incomplete disclosures” about the timing and size of his Lubrizol trades. Sokol’s lawyer said in a statement that Sokol was a man of “uncommon rectitude and probity.”

But the report said Sokol had violated Berkshire’s standards of ethics in his purchase of shares of Lubrizol.

The audit committee found that Sokol’s conversations with Buffett and Berkshire were “intended to deceive” and “its effect was to mislead.”

It said Sokol’s purchases came to light as a result of a call from Citigroup:

On the morning of March 14, Berkshire Hathaway and Lubrizol announced the signing of the merger agreement. A Citi representative with whom Berkshire Hathaway did business congratulated Mr. Buffett on the merger agreement, and told Mr. Buffett that Citi’s investment bankers had brought Lubrizol to Mr. Sokol’s attention. This was the first time Mr. Buffett heard that investment bankers played any role in introducing Lubrizol to Mr. Sokol, and did not square with Mr. Sokol’s remark in January that he had come to know Lubrizol by owning the stock.



At Mr. Buffett’s request, Berkshire Hathaway CFO Marc Hamburg phoned Mr. Sokol on March 15. Mr. Hamburg asked Mr. Sokol for the details of his Lubrizol stockholdings. Mr. Sokol provided the dates and amounts of his Lubrizol purchases. Mr. Hamburg also asked about Citi’s role in introducing Mr. Sokol to Lubrizol. Mr. Sokol answered that he thought he had called a banker he knew at Citi to get Mr. Hambrick’s phone number. When Mr. Hamburg commented that it sounded as if the banker must have exaggerated his role when he spoke with his colleagues, Mr. Sokol did not contradict him.



The report said Mr. Sokol’s response “fell short of the degree of candor required of a corporate fiduciary, and suggests his answer to Mr. Buffett’s earlier inquiry noted above was intended to deceive.”

The report said that Mr. Sokol has “voluntarily resigned” from all his Berkshire positions and that he would not receive any severance benefit as a result.

On March 29, Mr. Buffett provided Mr. Sokol an opportunity to review for accuracy a draft Mr. Buffett had prepared of a press release announcing Mr. Sokol’s resignation and disclosing Mr. Sokol’s Lubrizol trades. At Mr. Sokol’s request, Mr. Buffett deleted from the release the one passage Mr. Sokol said was inaccurate: a passage that implied that Mr. Sokol had resigned because he must have known the Lubrizol trades would likely hurt his chances of being Mr. Buffett’s successor. Mr. Sokol told Mr. Buffett that he had not hoped to be Mr. Buffett’s successor, and was resigning for reasons unrelated to those trades. Except for that deletion, Mr. Sokol concurred in the accuracy of the press release. For example, Mr. Sokol left unchanged the statement that when Mr. Sokol made his purchases, he “did not know what Lubrizol’s reaction would be” if Mr. Buffett developed an interest in a transaction. Mr. Sokol also left unchanged Mr. Buffett’s statement that he had “held back nothing in this press release.”



The report also said:

On January 14 or 15, Mr. Sokol proposed to Mr. Buffett the idea for purchasing Lubrizol, and told Mr. Buffett that he had an opportunity to meet with Lubrizol’s CEO. Mr. Buffett was initially unimpressed with Lubrizol as a potential acquisition, but told Mr. Sokol to let him know what he learned at the meeting. He also told Mr. Sokol that he was unfamiliar with the lubricants and additives part of the chemicals industry. During the conversation, Mr. Buffett asked Mr. Sokol how he had become familiar with Lubrizol. Mr. Sokol mentioned that he owned the stock. He did not disclose:



• the amounts and timing of his purchases;



• the fact that he bought the shares after discussing Lubrizol with Citi and after Mr. Sokol had narrowed the bankers’ initial list of 18 chemicals companies to one, namely Lubrizol;



• the fact that Mr. Sokol had bought shares after Mr. Sokol (acting as a senior representative of Berkshire Hathaway scouting acquisition candidates) had asked for Citi’s help arranging a meeting with Lubrizol’s CEO to discuss Lubrizol and Berkshire; and,



• the fact that Mr. Sokol bought shares after learning that Citi had discussed his request for a meeting with Lubrizol’s CEO, who told Citi that he would discuss Berkshire Hathaway’s possible interest in a transaction with the Lubrizol board.



It did not cross Mr. Buffett’s mind at that time that Mr. Sokol might have bought Lubrizol shares after seeking through investment bankers to initiate discussions with Lubrizol concerning a possible Berkshire Hathaway acquisition of Lubrizol. Because Mr. Sokol’s comment about owning the shares was in response to Mr. Buffett’s question how Mr. Sokol had come to know the company, it implied that Mr. Sokol had been following Lubrizol as an owner of its shares, and in that way came to think of Lubrizol as a possible Berkshire Hathaway acquisition.



Further, the report said:

Key officers and employees (“Covered Employees”) of Berkshire Hathaway and its subsidiaries are required to certify their familiarity with, and adherence to, the company’s Insider Trading Policies and Procedures (the “Trading Policy”). Mr. Sokol signed such a certification in May 2010. The Trading Policy expressly forbids the trading of securities of any public companies while the trader is in possession of material nonpublic information relevant to those companies. Consistent with Berkshire Hathaway’s aversion to conduct that might be considered close to the line, the Trading Policy identifies several specific categories of information that must be considered material for purposes of the policy—even if the information might not be material as insider trading law defines materiality.



The report also said questions at Berkshire’s annual meeting about Sokol would be posted on the Berkshire website.

At the Berkshire annual meeting in 2011, Buffett said he had made mistakes handling the Sokol matter, saying his original press release was inadequate and that he should have been quicker to rebuke Sokol’s behavior. “What I think bothers people is that there wasn’t a big sense of outrage in the release. I plead guilty to that,” Buffett said at the annual meeting. Although Buffett did praise Sokol’s work at Berkshire in the release, there was a rebuke that only emerged later. The day the press release was issued, Berkshire notified the Securities and Exchange and told them about Sokol’s trades. “Calling the head of the enforcement of the S.E.C. and laying out a pattern of trading that you know was going to result in something—Dave probably thought that it was pretty harsh,” Buffett said at the annual meeting. And he said he should have questioned Sokol more carefully about Sokol’s trading in Lubrizol stock.

Buffett did point out that new information had developed, namely that Sokol had been talking with investment bankers (Citigroup) without Buffett’s knowledge. Still, both Buffett and Munger said the original press release was not the best job in communicating the matter.

Buffett joked that what he had learned from the experience was to let Munger write the next press release. But Munger rejoined that he had approved every word of Buffett’s press release.

Buffett told CNBC (February 27, 2012) that he believes there is an going investigation of Sokol by the SEC because Berkshire keeps getting legal bills to the tune of more than $1.4 million in the matter. Berkshire has to pay Sokol’s bills unless Sokol were to be found guilty of some charge. Buffett said the board’s pick has been the same person for some time and never was Sokol.

The Story of Warren Buffett



David Sokol

Of Permanent Value Sokol Steps Down

Sokol Steps Down The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Sokol Steps Down



108





JORDAN’S FURNITURE COMPANY


If ever an iconoclastic, irreverent company existed, Jordan’s Furniture Company of Massachusetts is it. Berkshire announced on October 11, 1999, that it was buying the privately held firm run by two brothers who share a flair for the unusual, particularly in advertising. Buffett was in Boston for a Gillette board meeting when he called Jordan’s owners and said he’d like to talk about buying their company.

“Jordan’s Furniture is truly one of the most phenomenal and unique companies that I have ever seen. The reputation that Eliot and Barry [Tatelman] have earned from their employees, their customers, and the community is unparalleled. This company is a gem!” Buffett said. Barry Tatelman left the company and headed for Broadway to produce Dirty Rotten Scoundrels and to Hollywood where he is the owner of a film company.

When discussing the sale, Barry Tatelman said, “Nothing in the company will change … except for the fact that our growth potential is huge with the financial support of Berkshire Hathaway.”

He added: “We wanted to share the excitement of this merger with our incredible group of employees. Therefore, we are rewarding every single J-Team member with 50 cents for every hour that they have ever worked for us. Many of our people have been with us for 10 years, 20 years.” That meant long-time employees received $10,000 to $20,000 each. Earlier that year Jordan’s flew all its employees to Bermuda for a one-day beach party as a reward for their hard work.

Barry Tatelman once wrote in a column: “At Jordan’s Furniture the single most telling characteristic of our culture is that Eliot and I want to have fun, and we want our employees and customers to have fun as well.”

Jordan’s (the name was picked out of a hat; there’s no Jordan in the family) was founded in 1918 by Samuel Tatelman in Waltham, Massachusetts. He sold furniture out of the back of his truck until 1926. In the late 1930s, his son Edward joined the effort; but it was Edward’s sons, Eliot and Barry, who put the store on the map.

When Barry and Eliot joined the firm in the 1950s and 1960s to help out on the weekends, Eliot got 10 cents an hour to dust and Barry, 5 cents. Barry said that Eliot was overpaid. The brothers took over the store in 1973, and by 2005, they had grown from eight employees to 2,000.

In 1983, they opened a wildly successful store in Nashua, New Hampshire. Later, in 1987, when a store opened in Avon, Massachusetts, it created the largest traffic jam ever on Route 24. The store broadcast messages on the radio begging people not to come.

Under their leadership, the firm has flourished. Stores have been built in Natick and Reading, Massachusetts. Jordan’s sells more furniture per square foot than any other firm in the United States. An average furniture store turns over inventory one to two times a year. Jordan’s turns over inventory 13 times a year. Jordan’s doesn’t hold sales, sticking to a single-price policy.

Jordan’s (known for greeters who race to wash customer’s car windows), operates a “shoppertainment” within its store. The Avon location has a 48-seat flight simulator movie theater called Motion Odyssey Movie Ride (MOM), a full-blown movie theater with a giant screen and seats that move while you watch.

In the Natick store, customers walk through a re-creation of New Orleans’ Bourbon Street, complete with a riverboat, a “Streetcar Named Dessert,” a man handing out beads, full-scale French building facades, and a 9-minute multi-media Mardi Gras show. Every 45 minutes, a Louis Armstrong doll emerges from a wall and plays “When the Saints Go Marching In.” At other times animatronic versions of Elvis Presley, The Supremes, and The Village People pop out.

A screen displays some of the Tatelmans’ goofy ads. In one, the brothers ride up a ski lift in one of their easy chairs; and in another, they play drums, closing their performance with, “Just trying to drum up some business.”

Jordan’s ads are known as irreverent, sometimes spoofing the ads of other

products. For example, one ad has the Tatelman brothers dropping a ball bearing on a couch to mimic a Lexus ad that did the same thing to bring attention to the luxury car’s sleek lines and precision engineering. Another ad features a woman sitting on a Jordan’s couch, making uncomplimentary remarks—in Swedish—about the brothers who couldn’t understand what she was saying.

Another poked gentle fun at a hip commercial aired by the Gap clothing chain. In the Jordan’s version, a group of dancers dressed in Gap-like chinos are on stage while the Tatelmans stand behind a sofa. A dancer flips over the sofa and a tagline flashes: Jordan’s Swings.

In the early days when they were not well known and Jordan-Marsh was a big retailer in the area, their motto was: “Jordan’s Furniture, not to be confused with Jordan-Marsh.”

Far from shunning Martha Stewart—the “diva of domesticity”—for her legal troubles, the Tatelmans brought her into one of their ads to boost her new line of furniture (Associated Press, September 11, 2003).

“Eliot and I aren’t saying innocent or guilty,” Barry Tatelman was quoted. (She was later found guilty of lying to the government.) “What we’re saying is she’s really good at what she does, and we love the furniture,” Tatelman told The Boston Globe.

In one of their typically self-deprecating ads, the Tatelmans attempt to create a centerpiece for a table. They walk over to get approval from Stewart who says, “Not enough hydrangeas—never enough hydrangeas.”

In August 2002, Jordan’s store in Natick became the first retail outlet to open its own giant-screen IMAX theater. The 262-seat theater is in the center of 123,000 square feet of furniture displays. The IMAX screen is half the size of a football field. “With entertainment, we get more bodies,” Eliot Tatelman told The Wall Street Journal (October 4, 2002). Buffett was on hand for the opening, munching popcorn.

The Tatelmans’ community efforts include a camp where HIV-infected children can just be kids having a fun outdoors experience. It is a labor of love for the Tatelman family and also a living memorial to the Tatelmans’ brother, Milt, who died of AIDS in the mid-1990s (Boston Globe, August 10, 2000).

It was Buffett who approached the Tatelmans about selling. They had not planned to sell until Buffett came calling, and they took him on a tour of the Natick store. “We never put the company up for sale. Ever,” said Barry Tatelman.

The sales price was not disclosed, but some say the top furniture stores often sell for the same amount as their annual revenues—in this case $250 million. Sales in 2004 were about $450 million.

Furniture Magazine named Jordan’s Natick store as the best store in the business in 2001.

All of Berkshire’s furniture stores buy at least some furniture from La-Z-Boy, and Berkshire’s furniture store managers occasionally come together for group buys and tell each other what’s selling. But basically, they all buy their furniture independently of one another (The Wall Street Journal, August 19, 2002).

In the fall of 2004, Jordan’s opened its largest store to date in Reading, Massachusetts, featuring another three-dimensional 500-seat IMAX theater.

Back in 1983, when Buffett bought Nebraska Furniture Mart, he asked the Blumkin family, “Are there any others like you out there?”

The Blumkins gave him the names of three stores.

Other Berkshire furniture acquisitions followed:

1995 Berkshire acquires R.C. Willey

1997 Berkshire acquires Star Furniture

1999 Berkshire acquires Jordan’s Furniture

And the beat goes on:

2000 Berkshire acquires CORT Business Services

Buffett was asked in an interview with the Boston Globe (December 6, 2004) if he had his eye on any more furniture stores. “I don’t see anything, but if something came along, we’d consider it. We’re expanding all the ones we have.”

WATCHING THE RED SOX

Jordan’s promised free furniture to customers who bought between March 7 and April 16, 2007—IF the Boston Red Sox won the World Series. Company officials didn’t comment on the possible exposure. About 30,000 orders were taken during the contest. One customer bought $140,000 worth of furniture. The company won’t have to pay out, in any event, because it has insurance for more than $20 million.

The Red Sox swept the World Series against the Colorado Rockies, and Jordan’s was on the hook for all the furniture it sold during the promotion.

It’s not known if the insurer was Berkshire itself. “Where we got the insurance and how it works is totally private,” Eliot Tatelman was quoted as saying.

$35 MILLION INSURANCE POLICY

Berkshire has insured Jordan’s against the possibility of having to pay $35 million should a Red Sox batter at Boston’s Fenway Park hit a two-and-a-quarter-foot wide baseball painted on a sign 420 feet in right center field (Vanity Fair, February 2011).



Got Furniture?

The Tatelman brothers, Eliot and Barry, who are referred to as “the furniture dudes” in some of their ads, sell their products via witty, goofy ads, such as this one shot on the wing of an airplane. When the “Got Milk?” ad campaign caught fire, the Tatelmans aired a “Got Furniture?” commercial. With Barry Tatelman splitting his time between Broadway and Hollywood, Eliot Tatelman continues to run the company with his two sons.

(Photo by Michael O’Brien)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Jordan’s Furniture Company



Martha “Not Enough Hydrangeas” Stewart

(AP/Wide World Photos)

Jordan’s Furniture Company The Story of Warren Buffett



Beantown

Inside the Jordan’s Furniture Superstore in Reading, Massachusetts, is an entire city within the store called Beantown, made of Jelly Belly jelly beans.



Go Sit

This sign is Jordan’s version of the famous Citgo sign, seen over Fenway Park’s left field “Green Monster” wall.



Jordan’s Furniture Store in Reading, Massachusetts



Sleep Lab

The Sleep Lab technicians dress in lab coats and have a “medical” approach to selling a bed.

(Photos by Michael Chung)



Sweet House

Jordan’s version of Boston’s “State House”



What More Could You Want?

Where else can you buy furniture, watch an IMAX movie, eat a meal, and buy jelly beans? You can also be entertained by a water show and learn how to fly on a trapeze.

Of Permanent Value Jordan’s Furniture Company



109





MIDAMERICAN ENERGY


Berkshire launched into an entirely new business on October 25, 1999, with an announcement that it would buy MidAmerican Energy Holdings Co., a utility company based in Des Moines, Iowa. The utility company now has 17,000 employees and $12 billion in annual sales. It provides electric and gas services to about 5 million customers and earns more than $1 billion a year for Berkshire.

Vanity Fair (February 2011) reported that one Saturday before the deal, David Sokol gave Buffett a report called “Energy 101,” a one-and-a-half-inch thick summary. Buffett didn’t read the report, but did settle on a deal within 30 minutes to invest in MidAmerican Energy.

The deal closed on March 14, 2000, with Berkshire investing $1.24 billion. In 2002, Berkshire raised its stake in the utility, investing another $725 million,

making Berkshire’s economic interest in MidAmerican 80.2%. In the end, Berkshire invested more than $3 billion in MidAmerican, which has seen rapid growth.

Buffett wrote about the deal in Berkshire’s 1999 Annual Report: “Acquisitions in the electric utility industry are complicated by a variety of regulations including the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935. Therefore, we had to structure a transaction that would avoid Berkshire gaining voting control. Instead we are purchasing an 11% fixed-income security, along with a combination of common stock and exchangeable preferred that will give Berkshire just under 10% of the voting power of MidAmerican but about 76% of the equity interest. All told, our investment will be about $2 billion.”

In short, the deal, including assumed debt, gave MidAmerican greater financial strength because Berkshire became the parent assuring a better credit rating. This meant MidAmerican could borrow money in a cheaper fashion. In reality, the deal increased MidAmerican’s competitiveness in the energy sector as the industry was being deregulated. MidAmerican gave Berkshire a platform to make acquisitions in a fragmented, consolidating industry wracked by inefficiencies—an industry which was becoming more deregulated after a century of regulation.

Joining Berkshire in the buyout were Walter Scott, former chairman of Peter Kiewit Sons’; and David Sokol, then chairman of MidAmerican. Both were big shareholders of the power-generating company. Scott, a member of Berkshire’s board, is the one who brought the deal to Buffett.

The buyout was set in motion one evening at the Carmel, California, home of Buffett’s sister, Bertie. “For me, MidAmerican started here, you know. In this house,” he told Fortune (November 11, 2002). “Walter [Scott] pulled me aside and asked if he could speak with me a minute in another room.” Scott told Buffett they could take the company private and asked if he was interested. “I said yes,” Buffett added.

An Omaha native, Sokol, who graduated from the University of Nebraska at Omaha with a B.S. degree in engineering, joined Kiewit Energy, a unit of Kiewit Construction in 1990. Kiewit Energy started with four employees

and grew into MidAmerican Energy by buying CalEnergy and other power companies.

The buyout group of Berkshire, Scott, and Sokol bought MidAmerican’s equity for $2.3 billion in cash. The ownership group assumed $7 billion in debt from MidAmerican and paid the rest in cash by buying common and preferred stock. Berkshire ended up with a 75% stake in MidAmerican. Scott and Sokol received the other 25%, with Scott getting about 20%.

Over time, Berkshire has invested $3.4 billion in MidAmerican, including the cost of two pipelines purchased through MidAmerican in 2002.

“We buy good companies with outstanding management and good growth potential at a fair price, and we’re willing to wait longer than some investors for that potential to be realized,” said Buffett (MidAmerican Energy Holdings press release, October 25, 1990). “This investment is right in our sweet spot. If I only had two draft picks out of American business, Walter Scott and David Sokol are the ones I would choose for this industry.”

MidAmerican, which kept that name after CalEnergy bought the company in 1999, is the largest utility in Iowa. CalEnergy was formed to tap the electricity-generating potential of superhot underground water in California. MidAmerican owns MidAmerican Energy and had owned United Kingdom-based Northern Electric, which was part of a swap for Yorkshire Electricity in 2001. CalEnergy paid $1.3 billion for Northern Electric in 1996.

MidAmerican had been hit by CalEnergy’s exposure in Asia, particularly Indonesia. After its government fell, Indonesia’s state-owned electric company refused to buy power from the two plants CalEnergy had built there.

Sokol told the Omaha-World Herald (October 26, 1999) that Buffett already had researched the energy industry when Scott first talked to him a month before about the possibility of Berkshire’s buying MidAmerican. Most of the discussions were about determining a fair price. Scott originally came up with the idea of approaching Buffett.

“He had some knowledge that Warren had an interest in getting Berkshire’s arms around this industry,” Sokol said.

MidAmerican’s decision to seek a buyer, Sokol added, stemmed from the fact it had to turn down a number of acquisition possibilities because MidAmerican’s slumping stock price gave the company weak currency. MidAmerican’s stock had peaked at $40 a share in 1997, only to slip back to $27 a share in the fall of 1999—about 10 times earnings.

To stay competitive, Sokol said MidAmerican needed to make acquisitions fast at a time when that might depress earnings further and hurt the stock price (Fortune, March 6, 2000). “We were afraid the confusion factor among shareholders was going to slow us down right when the long-term strategy called for taking advantage of acquisition opportunities.”

On August 19, 1999, MidAmerican’s board authorized a look at finding ways to increase shareholder value. Sokol discussed a buyout possibility with Walter Scott, a director of MidAmerican. At a social gathering on September 23, 1999, Scott asked Buffett if Berkshire would be interested in looking at a possible investment, and Buffett expressed preliminary interest, according to a notice of a meeting for a shareholder approval vote.

MidAmerican sold to Berkshire for $35 a share, a 29% premium, taking itself private into the Berkshire fold.

MidAmerican offers power generation in the U.S., the U.K., and Indonesia. In the Philippines, MidAmerican owns CE Casecnan Water and Energy Company. It was formed in 1994 to develop, own, and operate an irrigation and hydroelectric power facility located on the island of Luzon in the Philippines. A large hydroelectric project is helping revive the Luzon rice bowl, largely destroyed by the fiery Mt. Pinatubo volcano in 1991.

The MidAmerican shareholder proxy explained anticipated efficiencies that the buyout would provide:

Because our common stock will be privately held, we will enjoy certain efficiencies, such as the elimination of the time devoted by management and certain other employees to comply with the reporting obligations of the Exchange Act with respect to the common stock, and the directors, officers, and beneficial owners of more than 10% of the common stock will be relieved of their reporting requirements and restrictions under Section 16 of the Exchange Act. In addition, we will be relieved of certain listing and reporting requirements under the rule of the stock exchanges on which our common stock is listed.



We will be able to reduce certain costs, which we expect will result in combined savings of approximately $1 million per year, including the costs of preparing, printing, and mailing annual reports and proxy statements, the expenses of a transfer agent and registrar, the costs associated with the number of members of our Board and the costs of certain investor relations activities.



In April 2000, Buffett personally made the rounds at Congress on behalf of restructuring the nation’s utility industry, arguing for deregulation. The Dow Jones News Wires (April 7, 2000) reported on his efforrs:

Buffett, an icon of value investing, used his Berkshire Hathaway Inc. holding company to take MidAmerican Energy Holdings Co. private in a deal completed earlier this year.



The acquisition is reported to be just the first foray into the electricity sector that Buffett intends to take.



But before he can easily accomplish any further acquisitions, he needs Congress to repeal the 1935 Public Utility Holding Company Act, which restricts the geographic and business operations of multi-state utility holding companies.



And Buffett knows that politics dictate that any holding company act repeal must be part of a comprehensive bill promoting power market competition.



Buffett and MidAmerican have hired former Rep. Robert Livingston, R-La. to lobby Congress on their behalf.



On Wednesday, Buffett had personal meetings with (Rep. Thomas) Bliley, the Commerce Committee chairman, and Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich., the committee’s ranking Democrat and former chairman.



At the meeting with Bliley, Buffett was accompanied by Kenneth Lay, chairman of Enron Corp. [which later collapsed into bankruptcy], an ardent proponent of congressional action to restructure electricity markets.



Buffett further hosted a luncheon for Commerce Committee Democrats and a dinner for Republican members of the panel, and met with Energy Secretary Richardson to discuss restructuring legislation.



Industry officials advocating congressional action this year saw Buffett’s visit as significant in that it helped focus lawmakers’ attention to the issue.



In 2000, MidAmerican took out a $400-million line of credit from Credit Suisse First Boston. The credit line was a loan to help transform MidAmerican into more of an investment-grade holding company.

MidAmerican’s CalEnergy unit sued Edison International for $45 million for electricity sales during California’s power crisis of 2001.

In early 2001, MidAmerican said it expected to spend $223 million that year on utility construction and $871 million between 2002 and 2005. The company hoped to finance all that utility-construction spending with cash generated from its utility operations.

In mid-2001, it said it planned to spend $1.5 billion to build two electric plants in Iowa, the first near Des Moines and the second at a site not named at that time. The new plants were part of a settlement between MidAmerican and the Iowa Consumer Advocate’s office over the company’s rates, which were to be frozen for five years.

Because of regulations related to Berkshire’s voting privileges in MidAmerican, Berkshire could only offer a “one-time” consolidation of its earnings and equity in its financial statements. Therefore, Berkshire can’t report the $5 billion it receives in revenues. Still, the net income remains the same.

Buffett said he planned to invest more than $10 billion in utility companies if Congress repealed that old law enacted to curb abuses in the industry and if market conditions remained desirable (The Wall Street Journal, April 23, 2001).

The Depression-era Public Utility Holding Company Act (PUHCA)—“melodiously named” says Buffett (“pooh-ka,” actually, or more melodiously, “puke-ah”)—places limits on how much control and ownership holding companies or investment companies can have in utility companies. It also limits the geographic scope a utility can serve.

In an interview with Bloomberg.com (August 3, 2001), Sokol talked of the advantages of being owned by Berkshire as MidAmerican undertook more projects around the globe:

I think there are two advantages. One, obviously having Warren Buffett and Berkshire Hathaway as a 76 percent owner is enormously helpful because there’s really no question of our access to capital. But being privately held just has an enormous advantage in a world where, if you’re publicly held, everyone wants to weigh your cents per share, per quarter and the energy sector just doesn’t work that way. Our investments at a minimum, are 30- or 40-year investments. And so we have to be able to look for the long haul. And that was really the motivation to take the company private. It was to give us the ability to invest in countries like the Philippines for a 30- and 50-year horizon and not worry about what that does on a weekly and monthly basis.



In a prepared statement May 17, 2001, Sokol endorsed President George W. Bush’s energy policy:

President Bush’s plan provides an opportunity to enact the first real energy policy this nation has had since the 1930s. The plan is as bold and comprehensive as it must be to overcome decades of neglect, while remaining sensitive to our social and environmental values. It is a sound and realistic plan that balances increased supply with more efficient use of energy and traditional sources of energy with clean, renewable sources. Renewable power plays a very important role in the plan, which is especially important to MidAmerican as a major provider of renewable energy. The public will reap the benefits of all of this as implementation of the plan results in more reliable electricity at reasonable prices without harm to our environment. Without this plan, we will travel backward—the crisis now faced in California will spread.



At MidAmerican, we are eager to help modernize our industry by employing new technologies and generating new investments essential to our country’s growth, prosperity and security. We are especially pleased to see that the plan calls for repealing the obsolete Public Utility Holding Company Act, or PUHCA. PUHCA is 66 years old this year—ready for retirement. This Depression-era law has been superseded by numerous other investor and consumer protections. The SEC, the very agency responsible for enforcing PUHCA, favors its repeal along with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee, which recently voted to repeal by a bipartisan 19-1 margin. Retiring PUHCA will permit MidAmerican to fulfill its promise to make significant additional investments in America’s energy future—building on our current investments in traditional and renewable energy generation in the Midwest and elsewhere—and we are sure other companies will do the same.



Our primary investment partner, Berkshire Hathaway, has already signaled its willingness to invest more than $10 billion in our industry through MidAmerican. This should be good news for Iowans and the Midwest. Currently, under PUHCA, our partner Warren Buffett—whose company has one of the few AAA-rated bond ratings anywhere—can invest in almost any industry except ours.



Retiring PUHCA is a short-term fix that will have long-term impact. It will be good for consumers by injecting new investment, new ideas and new efficiencies into our industry at a time when they are needed most.



In 2003, a bill called for the repeal of PUHCA, long a mainstay of consumer protection in the utility industry, which limited mergers between utility holding companies. Doing away with the law was expected to attract new investment by non-utility companies in the nation’s overworked transmission lines.

YORKSHIRE ELECTRICITY

British power group Innogy agreed on August 6, 2001, to swap the distribution assets of its Yorkshire Electricity business for the electricity and gas customer base of MidAmerican’s Northern Electric unit. Under the deal, Northern Electric bought Yorkshire’s power wires and local pumping stations for about $338 million plus assuming more than $1 billion in debt.

In turn, Innogy, Britain’s biggest electricity supplier, bought Northern’s supply business—the right to bill customers—for almost the same cash amount that Northern Electric paid for Yorkshire’s assets.

In terms of cash, the deal was close to a pure swap resulting in a net payment of about $7 million to Innogy, but the deal significantly lowered Innogy’s debt.

MidAmerican’s Greg Abel said the swap would let both companies focus on their strengths. MidAmerican became the third-largest electricity distribution company in Britain, with 3.6 million customers in a region of about 10,000 square miles—about the size of Vermont—including the cities of Leeds, Sheffield, and Bradford. The largest electricity distributor is a joint venture supplying London. The efficiencies of the deal for MidAmerican came from combining the electric distribution systems for two contiguous regions into one.

EXELON CORP.

MidAmerican owns 25% of Exelon Corp.’s Quad Cities plant in Illinois and 50% of CE Generation and its geothermal project. CE Generation has capacity in California, New York, Texas, and Arizona.

The deal to buy into CE Generation was done with TransAlta, Canada’s biggest investor-owned power generator, under an alliance between the two companies formed in 2001. Chicago-based Exelon announced it would buy the New Jersey holding company of Public Service Enterprises Group in a $12-billion deal.

Buffett wrote of the acquisitions in Berkshire’s 2002 Annual Report:

Berkshire also made some important acquisitions last year through MidAmerican Energy Holdings (MEHC), a company in which our equity interest is 80.2%. Because the Public Utility Holding Company Act (PUHCA) limits us to 9.9% voting control, however, we are unable to fully consolidate MEHC’s financial statements.



Despite the voting-control limitation—and the somewhat strange capital structure at MEHC it has engendered—the company is a key part of Berkshire. Already it has $18 billion of assets and delivers our largest stream of non-insurance earnings. It could well grow to be huge.



In 2003, MidAmerican hired Baker, Donelson, Bearman, Caldwell & Berkowitz to lobby for investment reforms and a production tax credit for wind power.

EDGE TECHNOLOGIES

MidAmerican has an undisclosed amount invested in Edge Technologies, parent of ETREMA Products, a small privately held company in Ames, Iowa, whose primary product is Terfenol-D. An alloy of rare-earth elements that makes “smart material,” Terfenol-D can change shape in a magnetic field as it converts electrical energy into mechanical power, and vice versa. Terfenol’s ability to change shape 10,000 times a second is being harnessed, for example, to make windows and walls that radiate sound. Maybe this is the dawn of Berkshire’s entry into the world of high tech.

PIPELINE

Former MidAmerican CEO David Sokol answered the question as to why Berkshire got in the pipeline business through MidAmerican. “Because change creates opportunity,” Sokol said in a talk to the Colorado Oil & Gas Association’s Rocky Mountain Natural Gas Strategy Conference (Petroleum Finance Week, August 25, 2003).

“Less than a year and a half ago, we were a nonentity in the pipeline business and today we are number two in the field,” Sokol said. “I say that not to brag, but to illustrate the dramatic changes in that industry, We see opportunities to bring stability back to that industry.”

Buffett has said the pipeline business is one that he can understand. “There’s gas at one end and a customer at the other end.” (Buffett may understand the pipeline business, but not everyone interested in energy understands who he is. One poster at the AOL board wrote, “Who is WEB and what is the new energy ad, please?”)

The industry has been in turmoil. “In this sector, we have seen 17 CEOs replaced—that can have a real dampening effect on leadership,” Sokol said. “We’ve seen enormous amounts of time spent on cash triage within their respective companies, rather than focusing on long-term infrastructure needs, the energy bill and where new pipelines should be built. Industry could spend another $60 or $70 billion just in the pipeline sector alone in the next 10 years, just to keep up with demand. Things cannot continue as they have.”

On September 9, 2003, MidAmerican broke ground on a $1.2 billion electric generation project, the first in the U.S. to incorporate “advanced supercritical” technology. Supercritical boilers create steam at higher temperatures and pressures than traditional plants. The coal-fueled plant, the biggest in Iowa’s history, became MidAmerican’s largest electric generation project.

Completed in 2007, the project has created more than 1,000 construction jobs. The plant itself employs 70 people.

The Council Bluffs plant across the river from Omaha, is expected to create enough electricity for 650,000 homes. Utilities in Nebraska have contracted to buy some of the Iowa electricity.

At the ground-breaking ceremony, MidAmerican President Greg Abel, now chairman, referred to the plant as costing $1.2 million instead of $1.2 billion before correcting himself. Buffett commented on that slip of the tongue: “When Greg misspoke, I got kind of excited. I thought I was going to get off light.”

ZINC

In late 2003, CalEnergy Minerals’ 30,000-ton Imperial Valley zinc plant in California started full production after years of delays. The plant opened in July 2000, but start-up was delayed by mechanical problems, equipment testing, and a West Coast energy crisis that directed workers from the plant (Reuters, October 14, 2003). The Zinc Recovery Project is designed to produce about 30,000 tons of special high-grade zinc annually.

In mid-2004, Berkshire announced that it was reviewing rights to proprietary processes for the extraction of zinc, manganese, silica, and other elements used in energy production at MidAmerican. Berkshire’s review of the $400-million project was to determine its economic viability. The company said alternatives, such as partnerships as well as a sale of the unit were being explored.

In the end, Berkshire opted to cease operations of its mineral extraction facilities and as a result recorded a $340-million noncash after-tax impairment charge to write off MidAmerican’s Zinc Recovery Project. The project had generated losses of $25 million for the first eight months of 2004 and after-tax losses of $27 million and $17 million for the years ended December 31, 2003 and 2002, according to a Berkshire statement.

Sokol later said he had offered Buffett his resignation over the bad call and write-off. He said Buffett told him that if that was the worst mistake he made over his career, he’d have a fine career (Bloomberg, Betty Liu interview, August 7, 2009).

GEOTHERMAL PLANT

California is likely to approve a geothermal power plant that would be the largest in the U.S. to be built by MidAmerican for a cost of $405 million and put in service in 2005.

Power from the facility will supply customers of the Imperial Irrigation District east of San Diego in southern California and is sold into the California wholesale power market.

Buffett gave the following numbers for MidAmerican Energy in Berkshire’s 2008 Annual Report:

Earnings (in $ millions)

2008 2007

U.K. utilities $ 339 $ 337

Iowa utility 425 412

Western utilities 703 692

Pipelines 595 473

HomeServices (45 ) 42

Other (net) 186 130

_______ _______

Operating earnings before corporate interest and taxes 2,203 2,086

Constellation Energy* 1,092 —

Interest, other than to Berkshire (332 ) (312 )

Interest on Berkshire junior debt (111 ) (108 )

Income Tax (1,002 ) (477 )

_______ _______

Net earnings $ 1,850 $ 1,189

_______ _______

_______ _______

Earnings applicable to Berkshire** $ 1,704 $ 1,114

Debt owed to others 19,145 19,002

Debt owed to Berkshire 1,087 821

*Consists of a breakup fee of $175 million and a profit on our investment of $917

million.

**Includes interest earned by Berkshire (net of related income taxes) of $72 in 2008 and $70 in 2007.

DAVID SOKOL

MidAmerican Energy chairman David Sokol had been mentioned as one of a handful of people who might succeed Buffett at Berkshire (some thought he was in the pole position) until his resignation in 2011 after he traded in Lubrizol stock when he was pitching for Berkshire to buy the whole company. That was not the reason for his resignation. After his resignation, Sokol said he wanted to build a “mini-Berkshire.” When he gave up his CEO post to Greg Abel in 2008, some speculation arose that it might be in preparation for Buffett’s job, but Sokol said the move freed him to work on acquisitions.

“Some energy industry analysts criticize Sokol as having an abrasive approach to business dealings, while friends say he’s a visionary with uncontainable ambition” (Associated Press, June 27, 2004). Former Omaha Mayor Hal Daub, who worked with Sokol on many city projects discussed Sokol’s personna: “If you really know him, those are his strengths. He’s quick, and that could be perceived as being short, or not listening very well. But that’s not true. He’s very fast and moves quickly.”

“You can sit down with him and propose an issue. You walk away and you say, ‘Boy, that’s a good idea, why didn’t I think of that.’ Bob Danenhauer, University of Nebraska former Director of Athletics and close friend of Sokol’s, said, ‘God gave him a great ability for common sense.’”

A former football player at the University of Nebraska at Omaha, Sokol jets from a home in Omaha to a sprawling ranch in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, where he and his wife, Peggy, vacation. He also has a home in Columbus, Ohio, the base for NetJets. The two met while working in a grocery store in Omaha. The couple have a daughter, Kelly. A son, D.J., died at age 18 of Hodgkins disease shortly after graduating from high school.

Born in 1956 in Omaha, Sokol, after his schooling, worked as a structural engineer for Henningson, Durham and Richardson (HDR) and was promoted to manager. He moved to Citicorp and then Ogden Corp. and was featured in Forbes for his achievements in 1991. After serving a year as president and CEO of Peter Kiewit Energy, he became chairman and CEO of CalEnergy.

Sokol’s reply to reports about him being on a short list to replace Buffett one day was, “I want to be the guy who replaces the guy who replaces Warren Buffett. First of all, Warren’s not going anywhere, and whoever replaces him doesn’t have a prayer of a chance because who replaced Einstein? And Warren is easily the brightest business mind in two generations” (Bloomberg, February 19, 2008).

Even when actively regarded in news reports as a possible successor to Buffett, Sokol once said that Buffett never said a word to him about succession. “Never a word,” Sokol told Bloomberg News (April 28, 2009).

His work ethic is unquestioned. Up before 5 a.m. every day, he jogs five miles and lifts weights five days a week. He’s on the road half the year. “He gets more done in a day than probably I get done in a week, and I’m not kidding,” Buffett has said (CNNMoney.com, August 2, 2010).

STOCK CONVERSION

In 2005, the Iowa Utilities Board granted clearance for a proposed stock conversion by which Berkshire would exchange its convertible preferred stock for common stock in MidAmerican. The transaction did not result in any change in the ownership of MidAmerican, but did result in Berkshire having a voting interest equal to its economic interest.

The move came about as a result of the federal energy law in 2005, which repealed the Public Utilities Holding Company Act effective February 8, 2006. Under PUHCA, Berkshire had to keep its voting interest in MidAmerican under 10%. When Berkshire converted its preferred stake into common stock, MidAmerican became a subsidiary of Berkshire rather than only an investment.

COAL

In 2006, MidAmerican bought 8,500 acres of coal-rich land in Wyoming with the intent of creating power generation plants. Sokol was quoted as saying buying the property is part of MidAmerican’s long-term plan to meet the energy needs of the West.

MIDAMERICAN WEIGHS AND DROPS THE NUCLEAR OPTION

MidAmerican notified the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission that it was looking at the possibility of building a nuclear plant near Boise, Idaho (The Wall Street Journal, December 7, 2007). The story reported that MidAmerican had picked a pastureland site of about 3,000 acres northwest of Boise, the state capital, for its first site.

It would have been the first nuclear investment for Berkshire. MidAmerican as yet doesn’t operate any nuclear plants, but does have a 25% stake in the Quad Cities nuclear plant that is majority-owned by Exelon Corp. of Chicago.

MidAmerican’s nuclear unit is headed by William Fehrman, the former head of Nebraska Public Power District. The project, despite many regulatory and building obstacles to overcome, could furnish electricity to PacifiCorp and other utilities owned by MidAmerican.

On January 28, 2008, MidAmerican announced it was canceling its plans to build a nuclear reactor, citing the poor economics and high costs of nuclear power, leading to such comments as, “If Warren Buffett can’t figure out how to make money from a nuclear reactor, who can?”

INVESTING IN WIND

In 2008, MidAmerican spent $1.8 billion on wind generation, making it the top company in the country in wind capacity among regulated utilities. The state of Iowa ranks second after Texas in wind generation. By 2011, MidAmerican had 2,909 megawatts of wind generation, more than any other regulated utility in the country, all at an investment of $5.4 billion.

LAWSUIT

In April 2011, a judge in Omaha found that David Sokol, who resigned from Berkshire in 2010, changed future profit calculations in a way that eliminated a joint-venture shareholder’s stake in a project in the Philippines in the 1990s. The judge ruled that Sokol acted “willfully and intentionally” and imposed a $32 million fine against MidAmerican Energy.

MIDWEST TRANSMISSION PROJECT

MidAmerican Energy and American Electric Power signed agreements in late 2010 to develop two extra-high voltage transmission projects in the Midwest expected to cost $2.25 billion.

About $675 million is slated to come from the joint venture for the projects intended to strengthen electricity infrastructure in the Midwest by stringing the transmission lines from the Indiana-Ohio border into Iowa.

The projects would be supported by a SMARTransmission Study (Strategic Midwest Area Renewable Transmission Study) in an effort to develop a 20-year transmission plan for the Midwest.

WORLD’S LARGEST WIND FARM

Berkshire, via MidAmerican Energy, entered the wind farm business with what is billed as the world’s largest land-based wind project, the Des Moines Register reported (March 25, 2003).

MidAmerican planned to build a 310-megawatt wind farm in northern Iowa at a cost of $323 million. The project has 180 to 200 wind turbines with blades that spin in 225-foot circles. The 200-acre farm has the capacity to generate electricity for more than 300,000 homes. Farmers who have these turbines will reap a cash crop of about $4,000 a year for each turbine.

The project’s first units came online at the end of 2004, and the wind farm was completed in 2006. The company now operates 459.5 megawatts of wind energy facilities in Iowa—making MidAmerican the owner of more wind energy facilities than any other rate-regulated electric utility in the U.S.

As fast and as long as Buffett talks at an annual meeting, it might be cheaper to generate wind by hooking Buffett to a propeller apparatus during his speech. That should amount to a year’s supply of energy for all of Iowa.

Once again, Buffett looped back to entering businesses of his youth. His early investments in windmills may have been a passing phase, but turned out to be “cyclic” interest.

The paper said MidAmerican intended to freeze state electric rates through 2010 as other generating units, one coal-fired and the other natural gas-fired, come online.

MidAmerican President Greg Abel said the company’s goal is to “continue to diversify our fuel source [and] make sure we have a secure supply of energy for our customers.”

Iowa is ranked as the 10th windiest state, and it comes in third in environmentally friendly, wind-energy production. California and Texas lead the nation.

Iowa utility regulators agreed to let MidAmerican set rates to let the company have a return of as much as 12.2% on its $132.3 million investment, or $49 million a year over the projected 10-year lifespan of the wind farm.

MidAmerican uses wind to comply with an Iowa requirement that utilities have 1,200 megawatts of generating capacity from renewable sources by 2010.

Late in 2009, Iowa regulators approved a new $2 billion wind project that will nearly double MidAmerican’s wind capacity in the state.

Wind farming—the fastest-growing form of electric power generation in the U.S.—now accounts for about one half of 1% of the U.S.’s electrical capacity, enough to power about 1 million homes.

More than half of the world’s wind turbines are sold by GE.

ORDER FOR 258 WIND TURBINES

In late 2010, MidAmerican announced it was expanding its wind-generating capacity by buying 258 turbines from Siemens AG, Europe’s largest engineering company.

MidAmerican also said it would buy a wind project underway in Iowa.

The turbines will be located in five Iowa counties in 2011 and have a combined capacity to power 190,000 homes. Fifty of the turbines will be at the Laurel Wind Project, a facility 50 miles northwest of Des Moines.

MidAmerican planned to buy the Laurel Wind Project from RPM Access for an undisclosed price.

THREE MORE WIND FARMS

In early 2012, MidAmerican bought three wind-energy projects in Iowa

that will have a combined generating capacity of 404.8 megawatts upon completion.

MidAmerican purchased from RPM Access LLC a 103.5 megawatt Vienna wind project to be built in Marshall and Tama counties.

Also, it bought two projects from Clipper Windpower Development Co., including the 200 megawatt Eclipse project in Guthrie and Audubon counties and the 101-megawatt Morning Light project in Adair County. The projects are to be completed by the end of 2012. MidAmerican will have invested $4 billion in Iowa wind farms once the plants are in service.

BUYING AN INVENERGY WIND PROJECT

In early 2012, Berkshire bought an 81-megawatt-power project from Invenergy Wind LLC to expand production in Illinois. The project, called Bishop Hill, is under construction.



Raising Berkshire’s Profits

A MidAmerican Energy truck was exhibited

during Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2004.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Greg Abel

Abel was named CEO of MidAmerican Energy in 2008 and named chairman in 2011 after Sokol resigned. Abel is on the Drake University board of trustees, the executive board of the Mid-Iowa Council Boy Scouts of America, and the board of the American Football Coaches Foundation.

Of Permanent Value MidAmerican Energy



Turning Energy into Money

This MidAmerican Energy plant south of Council Bluffs, Iowa, converts coal into energy.

(Photo courtesy of Omaha World-Herald)

MidAmerican Energy The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value MidAmerican Energy

MidAmerican Energy The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value MidAmerican Energy



(Photo by Omaha World-Herald)

Buffett Illustrating the Margin of Safety Principle: Hanging on with

Both Hands

Iowa Gov. Tom Vilsack, left,

and Buffett were all smiles at a groundbreaking ceremony in 2003 in Council Bluffs for a $1.2-billion MidAmerican power plant. About 250 union workers are readying Iowa’s largest coal power plant that opened in 2007.

MidAmerican Energy The Story of Warren Buffett

Energy Center

MidAmerican Energy and other joint owners of the Walter Scott, Jr. Energy Center Unit 4 in Council Bluffs, Iowa, began service on June 1, 2007. The 790-megawatt plant, the first of its kind to use advanced supercritical technology, can produce enough electricity to power 650,000 homes and businesses. With new technology at the $1.2-billion facility, carbon dioxide emissions are reduced by about 15%. MidAmerican also has built 323 wind turbines in Iowa, making the company first in the nation in wind energy generational facilities. MidAmerican doubled its electric generation from wind turbines by the end of 2008.





Pleased But Not Satisfied

This short book by David Sokol, outlines business principles for success. The preface is by Walter Scott, Jr. The foreword is by Buffett.

Of Permanent Value MidAmerican Energy

Wind Power

Thomas Budler, MidAmerican Energy’s wind project manager, stands on a corn, soybean—and wind—farm in Schaller, Iowa.



(Photo courtesy of Omaha World-Herald)



110





MIDAMERICAN ENERGY BUYS PACIFICORP


On May 24, 2005, MidAmerican Energy announced an agreement to buy PacifiCorp in a $9.4 billion deal. By March 21, 2006, PacifiCorp became part of MidAmerican.

MidAmerican bought the electric utility company which serves customers in six Western states, for $5.1 billion in cash and the assumption of $4.3 billion in debt. At that point, Berkshire bought $3.4 billion more of MidAmerican stock. MidAmerican then added $1.7 billion in borrowed money to complete the purchase. This raised Berkshire’s stake in MidAmerican to about 88%.

Portland, Oregon-based PacifiCorp has 6,500 employees and serves 1.6 million customers. It will keep its base in Portland and retain its name and continue to operate as Pacific Power in Oregon, Washington, and California, and as Rocky Mountain Power in Utah, Wyoming, and Idaho.

Buffett said in a statement on the day of the announcement, “The energy sector has long interested us, and this is the right fit. We are excited to be making this long-term investment through MidAmerican, in the premier energy company in the West. PacifiCorp is a great company with outstanding assets.”

Buffett said Berkshire wants to buy other energy assets around the world and that “there is no limit to the money we have to spend.”

“I hope the war chest continues to grow,” Buffett said. “We have $40 billion in cash at present. We like big transactions and investments in entities that will utilize cash over time. Our favorite holding period is forever, so utilities fit the bill.” The acquisition of PacifiCorp is Berkshire’s largest since the purchase of Gen Re in 1998.

PacifiCorp cited hefty ongoing capital investment as its reason for selling. Berkshire and MidAmerican were expected to handle the $1 billion a year in capital investment more easily than U.K.-based Scottish Power which PacifiCorp was a unit of prior to its acquisition by MidAmerican.

Buffett said the large capital needs actually made the asset attractive to Berkshire. “We have major capital inflows at Berkshire Hathaway to invest in various businesses. We look for businesses where we can put capital in,” he said.

The company still had the regulatory hurdle of getting by the Public Utility Holding Company Act (PUHCA), a 1935 law that places many restrictions on utility mergers. MidAmerican CEO David Sokol was quoted at the time as saying, “I don’t think we’ll have any issues of any difficulty to deal with.”

The deal resulted in a MidAmerican-PacifiCorp combined company with assets of more than $32 billion, including $25.3 billion in the U.S., giving MidAmerican about $10 billion in annual revenues, with about $8.5 billion coming from the U.S. The combined company has 3 million electric and natural gas customers in 10 contiguous states and 6.6 million customers worldwide.

PacifiCorp is a major player in the expanding western region, particularly Utah where the population is growing rapidly. Formed in 1984, PacifiCorp merged in 1989 with Utah Power & Light and operated as PacificPower and Utah Power. In 1999, PacifiCorp merged with Scottish Power in a $10 billion acquisition. Profits were $914 million in fiscal 2004, down 13% from 2003.

After the announcement of the merger, Buffett told a group of utility commissions from western states at a meeting in Boise, Idaho, he was willing to invest even more than the $10 to $15 billion he had previously said he would invest in the energy sector. “The bigger the better. It’s better to do a $10 billion deal than 10 $1 billion deals,” he said (The Wall Street Journal, June 22, 2005).

Buffett also said he’d keep an “open mind” about investing in a new generation of nuclear plants, but he cautioned, “The price of making a mistake is such that you should err on the side of the planet.”

He said Berkshire would be a long-term player in the energy sector, adding, “For the rest of your lifetimes, you’ll have one owner” for PacifiCorp.

MidAmerican plans to spend at least $5 billion in new projects, it said in filings in connection with regulatory approval of the deal. MidAmerican will spend $1 billion for at least five years to install pollution equipment at power plants, develop new transmission lines, and add 100 megawatts of new wind power generation.

With the deal done, Sokol was quoted saying, “This is an exciting day in the history of MidAmerican Energy Holdings company and PacifiCorp. We look forward to supporting PacifiCorp as it builds upon its record of outstanding service to customers in Oregon, Utah, Idaho, Washington, Wyoming, and California.”

Sokol also announced the leadership changes and restructuring of PacifiCorp into these business units: electric generation, commercial and energy trading functions and coal-mining operations. Sokol’s right-hand man, Greg Abel, was named chairman and CEO of PacifiCorp. He is also on the board of HomeServices of America.

By buying PacifiCorp, Berkshire’s additional investment in MidAmerican rose to about $6 billion. The PacifiCorp purchase made MidAmerican one of the five largest energy companies in the U.S.

Berkshire brings many advantages to utility holdings—a long-term, predictable owner and good credit ratings so that borrowing is not prohibitive. After the deal closed, Sokol was quoted as saying he would be happy to look at new deals of quality assets at reasonable prices, adding that he’d be particularly interested in companies outside the 16 states where MidAmerican operates to bring more diversity to operations in terms of weather, regulations, and regional economies.

VENTURE IN TEXAS

In 2006, MidAmerican agreed to set up a 50/50 venture with American Electric to build and run electric transmission assets in Texas.

American Electric said it would contribute transmission assets that are under construction and have a value of about $100 million. MidAmerican planned to contribute an undisclosed amount of cash to the venture, which was to start operations in the second half of 2007 and have up to $1 billion in projects in coming years.

GROUP WANTS BUFFETT TO REMOVE DAMS

A coalition has asked that Berkshire remove four dams operated by PacifiCorp to restore fish migration on the Klamath River along the California-Oregon border. One compromise under discussion is to build fish ladders. Buffett said at the Berkshire annual meeting in 2007, that any resolution would have to come from regulators since he is required not to speak publically about such issues. Also, a lawsuit filed by the Klamath River keeper has accused PacifiCorp of endangering human health and the environment in the river because of toxic algae produced by dams on the river.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value MidAmerican Energy Buys PacifiCorp

Headquarters: Des Moines Total employees: 16,800 Chairman: David Sokol

Total assets: $41.4 billion Operating revenues: $12.7 billion Web site: www.midamerican.com

Subsidiaries

MidAmerican Energy Holdings Co.

MidAmerican Energy Co.: Provides electricity to 720,000 customers and natural gas to more than 702,000 customers in Iowa, Illinois, Nebraska and South Dakota.

PacifiCorp: Serves approximately 1.7 million customers in the mountain states and West.

CE Electric UK: Serves 3.8 million customers in northeastern England.

CalEnergy Generation: Develops and produces energy from geothermal, natural gas and hydroelectric fuel sources.

Kern River Gas Transmission Co.: Delivers natural gas over 1,700 miles from Wyoming to as far west as Bakersfield, Calif.

Northern Natural Gas Co.: Operates

interstate natural gas pipelines from Texas to

the upper Midwest, serving approximately 77 utilities.

HomeServices of America Inc.: Nation’s second-largest, full-service independent residential real estate brokerage.

(Omaha World-Herald, August 6, 2009)



111





HOMESERVICES OF AMERICA


A majority stake in HomeServices.com of Minneapolis was not enough for MidAmerican Energy. In 2001, MidAmerican, already owning 83% of HomeServices, made a tender offer for the shares it did not own. In the end, it paid $25 million for HomeServices.com, which has more than 300 offices in 19 states and is involved in the sales of more than 100,000 homes a year through its 16,000 sales associates. HomeServices.com, now called HomeServices of America, offers the latest services in decorating, remodeling, gardening, and home security.

In 2005, HomeServices earned $148 million and participated in $64 billion transactions. But during 2006–2008, earnings plunged in the worst housing slump since the Great Depression.

HomeServices is the second-largest residential real estate brokerage firm in the U.S. after Cendant Corp.’s NRT, the New Jersey firm that owns Caldwell Banker and ERA chains.

MidAmerican closed 204,000 home sales or purchases in 2004, compared with 498,000 for NRT, whose parent is Realogy Corp., which is owned by Leon Black’s debt-strapped Apollo Management. HomeServices had the lead in extra services—186,700 vs. 182,900. For example, 60% of HomeServices’s customers used it for title insurance and other title services (BusinessWeek, May 30, 2005).

Beginning with Edina Realty and Iowa Realty as the main players, HomeServices began in 1998 when MidAmerican bought it as a preemptive move ahead of energy deregulation. With the purchase, MidAmerican gained entry to new home buyers in need of utility hookups. In turn, HomeServices gained capital needed to buy new companies to expand its move of cross-selling services to new home buyers.

HomeServices is now the largest settlement service provider in the U.S., offering brokerage services, mortgage originations, title and closing services, home warranties, and property and casualty insurance.

In 2001, HomeServices bought Jenny Pruitt & Associates, a residential real estate company in Atlanta. Founded in 1988, Jenny Pruitt has more than 300 sales associates, four offices, and about 60 employees. Jenny Pruitt left the company in 2007 to focus on speeches, a book project, and her charity work. In 2006, the company sold nearly 3,800 homes valued at $1.5 billion. HomeServices also acquired Prudential California Realty in 2001, which was at the time the nation’s largest privately owned and operated franchised real estate company.

In June 2002, HomeServices bought Woods Bros. Realty of Lincoln, Nebraska, the second largest real estate firm in Lincoln. The company employs 275 people at six offices. Woods Bros. did about $500 million of business in 2001.

“I was approached about it in late May,” said F. Pace Woods, the principal owner. “I’ve known Mr. [Ron] Peltier [HomeServices CEO] a long time but never seriously thought he was interested. All of a sudden everything came in at warp speed” (Lincoln Journal, June 20, 2002).

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 2001 Annual Report: “Last year, operating under various names that are locally familiar, we handled about 106,000 transactions involving properties worth nearly $20 billion. Ron Peltier has built this business for us, and it’s likely he will make more acquisitions in 2002 and the years to come.”

An honors graduate of the University of Minnesota and a former hockey player, Peltier began his career as an agent with Edina Realty in Minneapolis in 1977.

Peltier says, “The HomeServices business model is not predicated on a single brand. On average, HomeServices affiliate companies have an operating history of 52 years. We respect and remain committed to the local brand that established them as a market leader. We’re not a franchise. And as we continue on our path to identify real quality brokerage operations, our mission is to find the number one or two companies in our target markets.”

The company operates under the slogan: “Local connections with a national presence … to find the home of your dreams” (National Relocation Real Estate, August 2004).

HomeServices bought RealtySouth of Birmingham, Alabama, on August 13, 2002. Alabama’s largest real estate firm accounts for about 40% of the home sales in Birmingham. With more than 1,200 agents in 20 metro Birmingham offices, RealtySouth has about $3 billion in the value of real estate transactions in which it’s an agent.

RealtySouth traces its roots to 1955, when Johnson-Rast & Hays was founded. The company became RealtySouth when it merged with Brigham-Williams in 1998. In 2000, RealtySouth bought First Real Estate and Ray & Co., which had bought CKM Realty and Poynor Properties. RealtySouth’s services include HomeServices Insurance Services, MortgageSouth, TitleSouth, relocation services, and career development.

Former RealtySouth CEO Tommy Brigham said HomeServices has brought “to the table so many strong backroom services, from technology to human resources. On a local level, Buffett’s strategy is to allow a local, parochial market to remain just that. We operate in a locally driven, community environment. In fact, I venture to say that employees haven’t seen any changes in how RealtySouth functions on a day-to-day basis” (Birmingham Business Journal, June 16, 2003).

In 2003, HomeServices bought HOME Real Estate of Lincoln, Nebraska, which has more than 300 sales associates and 7 offices. Between HOME Real Estate and Woods Bros., HomeServices accounts for the vast majority of agents in Lincoln. Also in 2003, HomeServices bought Rector-Hayden Realtors of Lexington, Kentucky, which has 213 agents, 7 offices and 30 employees; and Esslinger-Wooten-Maxwell Realtors of Coral Gables, Florida. Esslinger closed $2.2 billion in transactions in 2003 from 12 offices and 850 associates in Miami-Dade and Broward counties. In 2005, EWM bought South Florida’s J. Poole & Associates, a firm of 80 people with $200 million in sales..

In early 2004, MidAmerican’s RealtySouth in Birmingham acquired First Realty of Auburn, Alabama, which has a 41% share of the Auburn area market. (Auburn is second only to Mountain Brook in property value in the state.)

In April 2004, HomeServices’s bought Prudential Carolinas Realty which has 16 offices including one in Charlotte. It employs 750 sales associates. Prudential Carolinas Realty had transactions of $2.3 billion in 2003.

With the purchase of Prudential Carolinas, HomeServices annualized transactions of more than $50 billion.

In July 2004, HomeServices’s Prudential California unit bought the residential real estate brokerage business of Elkins Rothermund Rudman, which does business as Prudential California Realty in Palm Desert and LaQuinta. The move expanded HomeServices’ presence in California. Prudential California Realty has about 4,600 sales associates and 82 offices in San Diego, Orange, Los Angeles, Ventura, Santa Barbara, San Luis Obispo, and Riverside counties.

In yet another acquisition in 2004, HomeServices bought Graham & Boles Properties, based in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, and merged it with Prudential Carolinas Realty which HomeServices had acquired earlier in the year. Graham & Boles, a 110-agent, two-office company, had $390 million in transactions in 2003. It was the third largest residential real estate brokerage in the Triad of North Carolina; and with the merger, Prudential Carolinas became the clear leader in the area. The combined firm has about 40% of the Triad market.

Katy Boles, CEO of Graham & Boles, was named president and CEO of the enlarged Prudential Carolinas. Until starting her company with two other women, she had worked for Prudential Carolinas’ CEO Robert Helms.

In the fall of 2004, HomeServices bought HLH Enterprises, a real estate brokerage firm in Palm Springs, California, that operates under the name of Prudential California Realty. “This acquisition, along with the previously announced acquisition of Prudential California in Palm Desert and La Quinta, gives us a significant presence in the rapidly growing Coachella Valley,” Peltier said in a statement.

In 2005, Edina Realty of Minneapolis expanded in the area by buying Fahey Sales Agency which has three offices in south central Minnesota. The company has 18 agents in Belle Blaine, New Prague, and Hutchison. Fahey continued to operate an auction and appraisal business, but the real estate company became known as Edina Realty.

In 2006, HomeServices bought The Guiltinan Group, a real estate brokerage firm in San Diego with about 100 associates operating out of four offices, adding to HomeServices’ large presence in Southern California.

HomeServices of America operates in 19 states and includes:

• Carol Jones REALTORS

• CBSHOME Real Estate

• Champion Realty

• Edina Realty

• EWM REALTORS

• Prudential First Realty

• Harry Norman REALTORS

• HOME Real Estate

• Huff Realty

• Iowa Realty

• Jenny Pruitt and Associates REALTORS

• Long Realty

• Prudential California Realty

• Prudential Carolinas Realty

• RealtySouth

• Rector-Hayden REALTORS

• Reece & Nichols

• Roberts Brothers, Inc. REALTORS

• Semonin REALTORS

• Woods Bros. Realty

• Realty Center

• Koenig & Strey

• Yost & Little

• Dauphin Realty

• Prudential Northwest Properties

CEO Ron Peltier, in an interview with CNBC (March 9, 2004), said HomeServices makes more than a 13% return on capital. He said he didn’t think it necessary to have a national brand name. “We believe real estate is a local endeavor. We don’t think a national brand name serves any specific purpose.”

In 2004, HomeServices had profits of $130 million. At the end of 2004, HomeServices had grown 30% a year during the preceding four years.

In the summer of 2004, HomeServices held its annual leadership conference in Omaha. More than 160 of HomeServices’ top people attended the three-day conference. Buffett, Sokol, and Peltier were there.

In 2005, HomeServices bought the Roberts Brothers real estate firm in Mobile, Alabama, which operates six offices in the area and employs more than 200 sales associates and accounted for about $400 million in transactions in 2004. The acquisition of Roberts Brothers along with previously purchased RealtySouth gave HomeServices about 1,400 sales associates and 28 offices in Alabama.

In 2006, HomeServices bought Huff Realty, a northern Kentucky firm which has 12 offices and 700 employees in the Cincinnati area. Jim Huff, who founded the company in 1975, stayed on as chairman and CEO. In 2005, Huff Realty closed more than 7,900 transactions—representing either buyer or seller—valued at $1.2 billion.

Also in 2006, HomeServices bought Atlanta’s third-largest homeseller. Terms of the deal were not disclosed. Harry Norman has 20 Atlanta offices and almost 1,200 realtors. In 2005, Harry Norman closed more than 9,400 home sales with a volume of $3.6 billion. HomeServices also bought Harry Norman’s interest in Academy Financial Services, Heritage Title, and HN Insurance.

Realty Center, with its 28 agents, merged into Edina Realty in Minneapolis in 2008.

The parent company of Prudential Carolina Realty, one of the companies owned by HomeServices, bought York Simpson Underwood in late 2008. Winston-Salem-based Prudential Carolinas has offices in Triangle, Triad, and Charlotte. The transaction brought in about 1,300 agents.

In 2009, HomeServices bought Koenig & Strey, one of Chicago’s largest real estate firms which has 900 real estate agents in 21 local offices. Its 2008 sales were $2.6 billion.

HomeServices, which lost $45 million in 2008, bounced back in 2009 with a profit of $43 million. In 2010, it earned $42 million.

In April 2010, HomeServices bought Schiller Real Estate in suburban Elmhurst, Illinois. It became part of Koenig & Strey, a residential brokerage that HomeServices bought in 2009. The move furthered the presence in the Chicago area.

With the addition of Schiller, Koenig & Strey has 22 offices and 1,000 agents and staff. Schiller founded in 1970, has 70 employees.

In late 2010, HomeServices bought Yost & Little Realty to expand into the Greensboro, North Carolina housing market.

In late 2011, HomeServices bought the residential real estate firm of Dauphin Realty, of Mobile, Alabama, which has four branches and 85 agents.

In early 2012, HomeServices bought Prudential Northwest Properties, one of the biggest brokerages in the region with 500 salespeople and more than $900 million sales.



The Story of Warren Buffett



Ron Peltier

HomeServices CEO Ron Peltier, a former history teacher and hockey coach, said Berkshire companies submit financial reports to Buffett on the sixth of each month. “If you talk with him, he probably could cite you chapter and verse of our past year, probably last month” (Reuters, February 27, 2004).

Of Permanent Value HomeServices of America



Ty Dodge

President and CEO of RealtySouth in Birmingham

(Photo courtesy

of RealtySouth)

HomeServices of America The Story of Warren Buffett

MEMORIES FROM HOMESERVICES – 2004 ANNUAL LEADERSHIP CONFERENCE



David Sokol, then head of MidAmerican Energy, Buffett, and Ron Peltier, head of HomeServices of America



RealtySouth CEO Tommy Brigham of Birmingham, Alabama, and Buffett at a HomeServices’s leadership dinner held in Omaha on July 22, 2004.

(Photos courtesy of

HomeServices of America)



RealtySouth agent Sally Bergquist of Birmingham and Buffett during the HomeServices’s leadership event

Tommy Brigham with Buffett and RealtySouth agents Anna Lou Hemphill and Julie Kim of Birmingham



Of Permanent Value HomeServices of America



HomeServices of America display at Berkshire’s 2007 Annual Meeting

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



112





WILLIAMS’ KERN RIVER GAS TRANSMISSION CO.


On March 7, 2002, Berkshire’s MidAmerican Energy agreed to buy the Williams Company’s Kern River Gas Transmission Company. The company, headed by Bob Sluder, has 170 employees and owns and operates a 926-mile interstate pipeline that transports natural gas from the Rocky Mountains and Canada to California, Nevada, and Utah. The price tag was $450 million in cash and the assumption of $510 million in debt.

Under the agreement, MidAmerican continued a planned expansion of the Kern River system, a project that more than doubled its capacity. The value of the pipeline, together with the planned expansion project, was more than $2 billion. As of May 1, 2003, the Kern River Expansion Project brought huge new supplies of natural gas to customers in the three western states it serves.

“We are extremely pleased to be acquiring the Kern River Gas Transmission Company, which we view as one of the finest natural gas pipeline assets in Northern America,” said David Sokol, MidAmerican’s CEO.

Constructed in 1992, the Kern River pipeline extends from Opal, Wyoming through Utah, to the San Joaquin Valley near Bakersfield, California. It had a design capacity of 835 million cubic feet per day.

In August 2001, Williams filed with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to more than double the capacity of the Kern River system by adding more than 900 million cubic feet per day of additional capacity.

Nearly all of the 700 miles of pipeline for the expansion were laid at 25 feet away from the existing pipeline. Some segments along the right-of-way—about 200 miles in Utah, Nevada, and California—did not require additional pipeline.

With the completion of the $1.2 billion expansion, Kern River, based in Salt Lake City, is now able to transport 1.7 billion cubic feet of natural gas per day. When converted to electricity, that’s enough energy to light 10 million homes.

In eight months crews worked six 10-hour days a week laying 700 miles of pipe, doubling Kern’s capacity at a time of soaring natural gas prices.

Along with Kern executives, Buffett toured the pipeline by helicopter as the expansion project was being built. He learned about the cost of pipe and other details and also attended a barbecue, posing for photos with workers.

“I know what a billion dollars looks like,” Buffett told executives during his visit, “but I’ve never seen it strung out on the ground before” (Omaha World Herald, June 29, 2003).

In addition to the purchase of the Kern River system, MidAmerican also invested $275 million in Williams itself in exchange for shares of 97/8% cumulative preferred stock of Williams, a nearly 3% stake in Williams. The MidAmerican investment in Tulsa-based Williams amounted to 1.47 million shares of the security at a purchase price of $187.50 per share. Each share is convertible into 10 shares of Williams’ common stock.

“We believe this equity investment, along with the additional steps we’ve taken or are in the process of taking, gives us a level of financial strength and flexibility comparable to, or better than, that which was the basis for the rating agencies’ reaffirmation of our investment-grade audit ratings,” Williams’ chairman Keith Bailey said in a press release. Bailey has since retired, and Steven Malcolm now heads Williams.

For Williams, the MidAmerican investment provided immediate cash for additional liquidity, debt reduction, and eliminated large capital expenses.

Long well-regarded, Williams reported a loss in 2001 after taking a large charge related to its struggling former subsidiary, Williams Communications. Williams spun off Williams Communications in April 2000, but retained a 5% stake in the company.

Williams’ fortunes suffered during 2002, and its interests in fiber optics and energy trading faltered badly. As part of a restructuring of the company, Lehman Brothers and Berkshire led a group of investors that pumped $900 million (Berkshire’s part was $450 million) into Williams under a senior secured credit agreement. The loan was secured by substantially all of the oil and gas interests of Barrett Resources which Williams had bought in 2001 for $2.8 billion. The loan, which expired July 25, 2003, had an interest rate of an incredible 30 percent (Tulsa World, August 17, 2002). That’s not counting fees for the loan.

In mid-2003, Williams and MidAmerican reached an agreement under which Williams repaid the $275 million loan and also the 1-year loan made by the Berkshire group of investors on which Berkshire reaped $150 million profit. The closing of the loan and the sale of the preferred shares ended MidAmerican’s investment in Williams.

As for Kern River, it is still going with the flow. Its pipeline carries 99% capacity and runs 24 hours a day.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Williams’ Kern River Gas Transmission Co.



113





NORTHERN NATURAL GAS CO.


On July 29, 2002, MidAmerican agreed to buy Northern Natural Gas, a pipeline company, from Dynergy, Inc., for $928 million in cash and the assumption of $950 million in debt at the time U.S. energy traders were cash-strapped. Dynergy had originally bought Northern for $2.45 billion.

With the acquisition of Kern River Gas Transmission Co. and the purchase of Northern Natural Gas, MidAmerican became a leading owner of interstate natural gas pipeline systems in the U.S., transporting about 8% of the nation’s natural gas. MidAmerican is the second largest U.S. pipeline owner after El Paso Corp.

Northern owns a 16,600-mile pipeline transporting 4.4 billion cubic feet of natural gas daily from Texas to the upper Midwest. The system provides transportation and storage services to about 70 utility customers in a particularly cold region that uses a lot of natural gas.

About 1,100 Dynergy employees working for Northern became employees of MidAmerican.

The transaction undid a move in the mid-1980s when Northern Natural’s parent company left Omaha for Houston. About 180 jobs moved from Houston to Omaha when Northern returned.

“It took 16 years, but we brought it back to Omaha,” Buffett said. “When the deal is done, it won’t leave Omaha again” (Omaha World-Herald, July 29, 2002).

Back in 1985, Omaha-based Northern employed thousands of people and backed civic causes from the city’s corporate headquarters at 2600 Dodge Street. Northern was formed in Omaha in the 1930s and eventually set up a holding company, InterNorth, Inc. It had been under seige by corporate raider Irwin Jacobs.

A 1985 merger with the smaller Houston-based Natural Gas Co., which created Enron, wound up with Kenneth Lay in charge. It was Lay who moved the headquarters from Omaha to Houston, a substantial blow to Omaha.

Fast forward to recent times: Enron, where deceptions escalated into towering financial trouble, used Northern as collateral for a $1.5 billion advance in 2001 from Dynergy, Enron gave up its ownership when it couldn’t repay the loan. Then Dynergy itself ran into financial problems and put Northern on the block.

“So they call us on a Friday and say we need a deal by next week that we’re sure will close for cash. So we sent a team down, and we sign a contract by the following Monday morning,” Buffett said (Fortune, November 11, 2002).

Berkshire now owns a large portion of pipeline assets west of the Mississippi.

“Why these pipelines?” posed Buffett. “It’s a question of what’s available. We

didn’t look at the whole group and select two” (The Wall Street Journal, August 2, 2002).

With the return of Northern to Omaha, Berkshire shareholder John Gass said: “It’s nice to have Northern back in Omaha and to once again have a piece of it myself. Northern was the first equity security I ever owned. I was working on my MBA at Creighton University and chose to study the company for a security class. Impressed by my own analysis, I took what little money I had and purchased a few shares in the middle of the 1973-1974 bear market, but later sold it to get married and pay for our honeymoon. It was, in fact, the daughter of Northern’s chief financial officer, Dale Tekolste, who introduced me to my wife.” Gass, originally from Omaha, is now a tax consultant in Denver.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 2010 Annual Report that, “Shortly after MidAmerican purchased Northern Natural Gas pipeline in 2002, that company’s performance as a pipeline was rated dead last, 43 out of 43, by the leading authority in the field. In the most recent report published, Northern Natural was ranked second. The top spot was held by our other pipeline, Kern River.”



Northern Natural Gas Company occupied this building at 2223 Dodge Street in Omaha from the 1950s to the mid-1980s. It’s across the street from Omaha Central High School and the Joslyn Art Museum. After Northern’s departure from Omaha, it was occupied by the First National Bank of Omaha.

(Photo by John Gass)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Northern Natural Gas Company

This was the Northern Natural Gas Company building under construction at 2600 Dodge Street when Northern merged with Houston Natural Gas. It is now occupied by Physicians Mutual Insurance Company. Northern Natural currently occupies a building at 103rd and Pacific Streets. Enron logos, a last vestige of the former corporate parent, were removed and replaced with Northern Natural signs.

(Photo by John Gass)

Of Permanent Value Northern Natural Gas Co.



(DAVE CROY/THE WORLD-HERALD)

Pumping Gas

Berkshire’s Kern and Northern pipelines distribute 8% of all natural gas in the U.S.



Cooking With Gas

Current headquarters for Northern Natural Gas is in Omaha at 103rd Street and Pacific Street. The sculpture to the right of the building is a stylized natural gas flame. The sculpture to the left of the building is an assemblage of gas transmission pipelines.

(Photo by Charles Gass)



114





AN ALASKAN PIPELINE DREAM


Berkshire’s MidAmerican unit was part of a group which applied to the state of Alaska in early 2004 to build a large pipeline that would bring natural gas to the lower 48 states. The plan was later scrapped because of the inability to get exclusive rights from Alaska which rejected MidAmerican’s request for a five-year period without a completing pipeline contract.

Alaska has been trying to land a natural gas project—similar to the trans-Alaska oil pipeline—since the 1970s. Estimates are that Alaska possesses enough natural gas to supply all of the U.S. demand for more than a decade.

Other bids were expected which could also include bids for tax breaks. A lead competitor is a joint venture of Exxon, ConocoPhillips, and BP, the three major oil producers with rights to natural gas on the North Slope.

MidAmerican’s $6.3 billion, 745-mile, 48-inch-diameter high-pressure line, designed to carry 4.5 billion cubic feet of gas a day, would bring gas reserves from the North Slope of Prudhoe Bay southward to the Alaska-Canadian border and would there tap into an existing network in Alberta.

The pipeline would have interconnected with a new pipeline in Canada from which delivery would be made to virtually every market in Canada and to the lower 48 states. Alaska Governor Frank Murkowski said, “We have achieved a very big step in moving along the process of marketing Alaska’s 35 trillion cubic feet of stranded gas on its North Slope.”

MidAmerican’s CEO David Sokol said, “Development of Alaska’s enormous natural gas reserves has long been hampered by unfavorable economics related to the remote location of the reserves and the difficulties and costs of delivering Alaskan natural gas to markets. We believe those circumstances are rapidly changing and believe by the end of this decade Alaskan gas will begin to play a critical role in meeting North American gas demand.”

“The importance of getting the stranded Alaskan natural gas to the lower 48 United States cannot be overemphasized,” Buffett said. “I strongly support David’s team in moving this important infrastructure project forward.”

The Alaskan pipeline application was made by a MidAmerican unit called MAGTC which would be responsible for the Alaska segment of the project. The application wasn’t a promise to build a pipeline.

Robert Sluder was named president of MAGTC. He has been president of MidAmerican’s Kern River Transmission Company since 2002.

“This is an opportunity for MidAmerican to do something for the country as a whole,” Sluder said at the time (The Salt Lake Tribune, February 10, 2004).

By 2006, the political scene in Alaska was in flux with new faces favoring

re-opening the floor to alternative proposals which possibly could include MidAmerican’s offer as well as others.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value An Alaskan Pipeline Dream



115





ENERGIZING ENERGY COMPANY


Buffett came to the rescue of yet another troubled energy company in 2002, when he supplied money to CenterPoint Energy, the discredited energy trading company that began life long ago as Houston Lighting and Power. Berkshire and Credit Suisse First Boston made a three-year $1.3 billion loan to CenterPoint, which carried a steep interest of 12% and was secured by utility mortgage bonds.

Created in 2002 as a regulated utility company with a significant amount of debt, CenterPoint of Houston, Texas, owns power plants and operates regulated electric-distribution and natural gas systems. With 9,000 employees, CenterPoint is one of the largest natural gas companies in the U.S. with nearly 3 million customers in Texas and five other states. The company had recently separated itself from the risky energy marketing and trading business. CenterPoint was created when Reliant Energy separated into two companies, Reliant Resources and CenterPoint Energy. Reliant Resources is now an independent energy services company; whereas, CenterPoint, which has a slogan of “Always There,” remaining in the more traditional and regulated electric and natural gas businesses. In 2004, CenterPoint sold its Texas Genco unit to pay down debt.

The loan came soon after Berkshire had offered lifelines to Williams Cos. and Dynergy in 2002. Berkshire was becoming a lender of last resort in the hard-hit energy sector.

PAYDAY FROM TXU

In late 2002, DLJ Merchant Banking Partners, a fund managed by CSFB Private Equity, sold Berkshire $250 million of exchangeable subordinated notes in the Dallas-based TXU Energy Company. The biggest electricity seller in Texas with 2.3 million customers, TXU also has energy concerns in other parts of North America and Australia. The notes were eligible for exchange into 19 million common shares, or 5.6% of TXU’s outstanding stock.

DLJ Merchant Banking Partners had acquired $750 million of notes previously. The notes Berkshire acquired had the same terms and conditions. The 10-year notes, which have a 9% interest rate, are convertible into TXU common shares at $13.15, a discount to the then price.

CSFB Private Equity, the global private equity arm of Credit Suisse First Boston, is one of the largest managers of assets in the world. CSFB and Buffett, who rarely uses investment bankers, have worked together in the past. Back in 2000, CSFB advised Berkshire on its buyout of MidAmerican Energy; and in 2002, the firms made a $1.3 billion loan to CenterPoint Energy.

TXU announced in April 2004, that it planned to sell significant assets and repurchase the convertible preferred shares it sold in 2002. The pricetag: $1.8 billion (The Wall Street Journal, April 26, 2004).

So the original $750 million investment, of which Berkshire had $250 million, was highly lucrative for CSFB as well as for Berkshire. For TXU, it was an expensive outing but avoided possibly damaging dilution.

Berkshire more than doubled its money while collecting 9% interest.

Private equity firm, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, and Texas Pacific Group offered to buy TXU in 2007.



Buffett’s Pole Climbing Instructor

Berkshire’s loan helped with the rescue of CenterPoint Energy.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Energizing Energy Company



116





GOING AFTER CONSTELLATION ENERGY


During the 2008 meltdown of the world financial markets, Berkshire’s MidAmerican Energy agreed to buy Constellation Energy for about $4.7 billion on September 18. With this purchase, MidAmerican tried to buy a company which consisted of the largest U.S. power marketers at less than half of what its value was just days before.

Constellation, the parent of Baltimore Gas and Electric, gave Baltimore the

country’s first gas streetlights in the early 1800s.

Constellation put itself up for sale in mid-September as investor fears about the liquidity of its trading business—specifically its ties to Lehman Brothers, which went bankrupt September 15, 2008—drove its shares down nearly 60% in three days. Constellation said it would issue $1 billion in the form of preferred equity yielding 8% to MidAmerican. This cash infusion to Constellation was expected to help its credit rating. Constellation shares had closed at $24.77 on September 17, before the announcement that MidAmerican would buy the company for $26.50 a share. The stock had traded at more than $100 earlier in 2008.

Back in 2005, Florida’s FPL Group agreed to buy Constellation for $12.4 billion, but Maryland lawmakers blocked the deal.

According to mid-September 2008 reports, Electricite de France SA (EDF), Constellation’s top shareholder, also considered buying a larger stake or even the whole company. Paris-based EDF, an energy producer controlled by the French government, missed out on the deal as Berkshire swept in with electrifying speed over a two-day period even though in the end the French company won out.

The day after the Lehman collapse, Sokol called Buffett and said, “I see an opportunity here.” Buffett had noticed the same thing and replied, “Let’s go after it” (CNN Money.com, August 2, 2010).

MidAmerican Chairman David Sokol said he called Buffett and explained the deal. Buffett replied, “That makes sense” (Fox Business Network, September 18, 2008). Sokol then called Constellations CEO Mayo Shattuck and was told he couldn’t be interrupted. Sokol told Shattuck’s representative to hand him a note with two words: David Sokol (Bloomberg, interview with Betty Liu, August 9, 2009). The story goes that at first Sokol was told that Shattuck’s assistant told him she might lose her job if she interrupted the meeting. Sokol told her she might lose her job if she didn’t interrupt it (CNN Money. com, August 2, 2010).

In a statement, Buffett said, “MidAmerican has been a wonderful steward of its energy assets and the acquisition of Constellation Energy, when completed, will prove beneficial to all constituents.”

Ranked in the top 125 companies in the S&P 500, Constellation is the nation’s leading supplier of electricity to industrial customers and is one of the nation’s biggest power sellers. Constellation had revenues of $21 billion in 2007 and 1.7 million customers at that time.

The swift unraveling at Constellation came amidst fears it might not be able to get a $2-billion line of credit previously promised by banks. Shattuck was quoted as blaming the need to sell on a “contagion” at the nation’s financial institutions which affected Constellation’s energy-trading business and its credit outlook.

Constellation owns about 9,000 megawatts of generating capacity, including its nuclear reactors. It is also a partner with EDF in a nuclear development company, UniStar Nuclear Energy, which intends to build plants in the United States.

Later reports showed the deal occurred very quickly under pressure. At 2:15 p.m. on September 16, 2008, MidAmerican’s Sokol called Shattuck to ask about a possible deal. Shattuck asked Sokol to be at Constellation’s Baltimore headquarters by 6 p.m. (Baltimore Sun, October 19, 2008).

Shattuck’s board told him to raise money quickly as its debt was under threat of being downgraded by rating agencies. Shattuck met with MidAmerican’s Sokol and Greg Abel twice that evening. At 1:30 p.m. on September 17, 2008, MidAmerican made a formal offer. Executives from both companies stayed up all night going over details; and at 8:45 a.m. on Friday, September 18, news of the deal was made public. The following Monday, MidAmerican provided the $1 billion cash infusion that Constellation needed.

Electricite de France made an offer for $35 a share and called the Berkshire offer inadequate. EDF’s offer was made with private equity firms Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. and TPG Capital, but Constellation’s CEO Shattuck said his company had accepted what it considered to be the best offer. A short time later, EDF pulled its bid, citing the current state of the financial markets. Later EDF made a higher offer, but EDF had to pay a breakup fee of $593 million ($175 million termination fee plus $418 million in cash).

Constellation paid off the $1 billion Berkshire loaned to it at 14% by December 31, 2009. Berkshire also received 20 million common shares, or 9.9% of Constellation’s shares. Berkshire sold all those shares by the first half of 2009. The last 11 million shares were reportedly sold to Barclays Capital.

Constellation was later was sold to Exelon Corp.



Mayo Shattuck

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Going After Constellation Energy



117





BYD


MidAmerican announced on September 26, 2008 that it would buy a 10% stake for $232 million in the Hong Kong rechargeable battery firm of BYD Co. Ltd to support “green” technologies. BYD, which began building cars in 2003, is the second-largest maker of lithium batteries in the world. BYD makes electric cars, batteries, electronics, and solar power equipment.

Berkshire’s investment was approved by China on July 30, 2009, by which time it was worth about $1.2 billion and then worth $2 billion at the end of 2009.

The investment in plug-in electric cars gave MidAmerican a position in BYD’s development of fully-electric cars that BYD has started selling in China and expects to sell in the U.S. in 2010 and Europe in 2011.

MidAmerican Chairman David Sokol said that the technologies being developed by BYD will be integral for the care of the environment, especially related to global climate change. He was quoted as saying, “I think the world has concluded we need to solve the CO2 problem. One area we must seriously affect is transport.”

Munger suggested the investment to Buffett (Fortune, April 13, 2009). At the time, BYD was an unknown Chinese battery, mobile phone, and hybrid electric car company. It was Munger’s description of the man behind BYD that intrigued Buffett. Wang Chuanfu was described by Munger as “a combination of Thomas Edison and Jack Welch—something like Edison’s solving technical problems, and something like Welch in getting done what he needs to do. I have never seen anything like it” (Fortune, April 13, 2009).

Munger has said that of the more than one billion people in China, only the best are admitted to its engineering schools. Chuanfu was a top student at a top Chinese engineering school, and has succeeded at one thing after another. Munger said since he’s no expert on rechargeable batteries, he made the investment by betting on the person who does understand it.

Buffett asked MidAmerica’s David Sokol to go to China and have a look.

Wang, a chemist and government researcher, originally raised $300,000 in 1995 from relatives then rented 2,000 square meters of space when he began making rechargeable batteries. BYD is now the world’s largest maker of cell phone batteries. Wang entered the automobile business in 2003, buying a nearly defunct Chinese state-owned car company.

Shenzhen-based BYD began selling a plug-in electric car with a backup gasoline engine, eventually surpassing the big car makers.

The company’s plug-in, called the F3DM, goes 62 miles on a single charge and sells for $22,000. It is now China’s leading compact car model in sales.

BYD employs 130,000 in 11 factories in China and one each in India, Hungary, and Romania. The U.S. operations have 20 people in sales and marketing in Elk Grove, Illinois. Another 20 work in San Francisco. The company is known for its frugal operations. Chuanfu, 43, though being the richest person in China, nevertheless eats at the company canteen and lives at a company housing complex with his wife and daughter.

In 2009, Volkswagen signed a memorandum of understanding with BYD to explore “options for partnership in the areas of hybrids and electric vehicles powered by lithium batteries.”

Also in 2009, BYD landed a contract to supply one of China’s car makers with lithium-ion batteries for hybrid cars. Also, BYD won Chinese government subsidies for production of its plug-in hybrid car.

On January 25, 2010, BYD announced its plans to invest $4.4 billion over five years to build China’s largest solar battery plant. Further, BYD announced a partnership with Daimler to develop electric cars for the Chinese market.

BYD opened an office in Los Angeles in 2011.

Not only that, it is planning to offer its own version of the tablet PC, one that would retail for $300, be powered by an Intel chip, and hit the market in 2011.

Munger has said the big test for BYD is whether it can deliver on plans to develop the most effective lithium battery on the market. Most promising is the potential to use the lithium battery to store battery power from other energy sources like solar and wind. “The big lithium battery is the game changer,” Munger said (The Wall Street Journal, July 30, 2010).

In September 2010, BYD agreed to buy an 18% stake in a Tibetan lithium and boron mine. BYD paid $30 million for the stake in Tibet Shigatse Zabuye Lithium High-Tech Co. The requisition was aimed at improving BYD’s rechargeable battery business.

But in the midst of the ambitious plans, car sales slumped in 2010 and the Chinese government accused BYD of building factories that may have been put on lands reserved for agriculture. After soaring since Buffett’s purchase, the stock suffered a big decline in 2010 and 2011 as car sales came to a screeching slowdown.

BYD was fined $443,000 and seven of its factories were confiscated after the Chinese government said BYD used the land illegally.

Throughout 2010 and 2011, the stock suffered severely as sales of conventional-fueled cars slumped, hurting profits so much that BYD had to cut back its spending on “green” technologies.

With the failure to deliver its promised green car plan and delays in the U.S. launch of the electric sedan, BYD’s sales continued to plunge and the company reportedly cut its headcount from 2,600 to 800.

BYD’s plummeting fortunes also were tied to China’s uncertain interest in electric cars. Further, BYD was hit with accusations of stealing technologies, charges which it denied.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Buffett Invests in Electric Cars

An article about Buffett’s investment in electric car

company BYD was the cover story in Fortune’s April 27, 2009 issue.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value BYD: Build Dreams and Billions



Electric Car

This is BYD’s F3DM plug-in hybrid compact segan with an all-electric range of 40 to 60 miles and a hybrid electric powertrain that can extend the range an additional 300 miles. On display at the Berkshire annual meeting in 2010, it was the world’s first mass produced hybrid car.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



118





SOLAR INVESTMENTS


MidAmerican Energy agreed in December 2011 to buy the $2-billion Topaz project in California, entering the solar power industry after it was hit hard during the year. The Topaz Solar Farm in San Luis Obispo County will be one of the two largest photovoltaic power plants in the world when completed in 2015 and is being developed by the seller, First Solar of Tempe, Arizona. Terms were not disclosed for the $2-billion project. The 550-megawatt project is slated to provide electricity for 160,000 homes in California.

The sale put MidAmerican squarely into the industry of turning sunlight into electricity. MidAmerican already operated many conventional power plants and wind farms.

The deal, at a turmoil-filled time of bankruptcies (for example, Solyndra, a failed solar company) and less demand in the industry, was made after First Solar failed to get a loan guarantee from the U.S. Government to finance construction of the project which will use First Solar’s thin-film solar panels. First Solar’s shares had dropped about 65% during the year in line with a similar drop for the general solar industry. Pacific Gas and Electric Co. will buy the electricity from Topaz under a 25-year agreement that began in 2008. The project is expected to reap good, steady prices over many years. The project may qualify for some government incentives.

MidAmerican CEO Greg Abel said in a statement, “As energy needs continue to increase, the Topaz project will allow MidAmerican to produce renewable energy for thousands of Californians. This project also demonstrates that solar energy is a commercially viable technology without the support of governmental loan guarantees and reflects the type of solar and other renewable energy generation that MidAmerican will continue to seek to add to its unregulated portfolio.”

THE AGUA CALIENTE PROJECT

MidAmerican made a second foray into solar energy a little more than a week after the Topaz project announcement, saying it will buy 49% of an Arizona power plant from NRG Energy based in Princeton, New Jersey.

Berkshire’s utility unit said it would take a stake in the 290-megawatt $1.8 billion Agua Caliente project in Yuma County, Arizona, expected to be completed in 2014. The plant is being built by solar power company First Solar and is supported by a $967 million loan guarantee from the U.S. Department of Energy. The plant has a 25-year contract to sell power to Pacific Gas & Electric.

Located 65 miles east of Yuma, the building of the Agua Caliente Solar Plant will involve 400 construction jobs and is expected to bring clean energy to about 100,000 homes.

“We are aggressively pursuing opportunities to expand our presence in the renewable energy sector, and the Agua Caliente project is another important step toward that goal,” MidAmerican CEO Greg Abel said in a statement.

Berkshire’s solar investments came when the industry was starved for capital and at a time when the government was encouraging such investments with cash-back incentives.

In early 2012, MidAmerican formed a new business to aid investments in unregulated renewable generation, including solar, wind, geothermal, and hydroelectric projects. Bill Fehrman was named president of the renewables unit.



Topaz Solar Farm Location



The Sun

93 million miles away

5 billion years old

The Story of Warren Buffett



Agua Caliente Solar Farm in the Arizona Desert

Of Permanent Value Solar Investments



119





CORT


Berkshire’s Wesco announced January 14, 2000, that it was buying CORT Business Services in a cash transaction valued at $467 million, including about $83 million of assumed debt.

The addition of CORT to already owned Nebraska Furniture Mart, R.C. Willey Furniture, Star Furniture, and Jordan Furniture Company makes Berkshire a huge force in the furniture industry. Now the eighth-largest furniture retailer in the U.S., Berkshire is turning itself into a furniture powerhouse.

CORT, of Fairfax, Virginia, is the leading provider of rental furniture, accessories, and related services in the “rent-to-rent” furniture industry. With 2,975 employees, CORT went public in 1995 after 23 years in business.

As the industry’s biggest renter of residential and office furniture, CORT estimates it rents to more than 80% of the Fortune 500 companies. The company rents to business executives in need of temporary furnishings for either office or home. Warner Brothers, EDS, ExxonMobil, and Pepsi are among its customers. CORT also rents tradeshow and meeting furniture such as display tables, conference tables and chairs. After an average of three rentals, the furniture is moved to CORT’s clearance centers and sold.

Wesco bought CORT for $28 a share. Citigroup Venture Capital (CVC), which owned about 44% of its shares, agreed to tender its shares.

Wesco’s Munger said: “CORT is a classic example of a fine company that can be even better as a result of the strength and stability that result from inclusion in the Berkshire Group of companies.”

Buffett said: “CORT is the kind of ‘best in class’ business that Charlie and I like to add to the Berkshire Group of companies. Paul Arnold and his managers are exactly the kind of people with whom we like to be associated in business. We are certain this is going to be a great relationship.”

The company operates 119 showrooms, 85 clearance centers, 79 warehouses in 35 states and the District of Columbia, and has Internet sites relocationcentral.com, cort1.com, and corttradeshow.com.

Beginning in the second half of 1998, its board began talking about ways to increase shareholder value. In the spring of 1999, top executives hooked up with a leveraged buyout firm and offered to buy CORT from shareholders at $26.50, but shareholders showed insufficient interest in selling at that price. The stock had hit a peak of $48 in April 1998. Another offer for the company came from Fremont Partners and Brook Furniture Rental Inc., but the offer was rejected.

Wesco’s filing stated, “On November 23, 1999, Mr. Arnold received a call from Bruce Cort, an acquaintance of Mr. Arnold. Mr. Arnold returned the call later that day. In their discussions Mr. Cort informed Mr. Arnold that earlier that day he had forwarded a recent Washington Post article about the Company to Warren E. Buffett, Chairman of Berkshire Hathaway, and that Buffett had responded that Berkshire would be interested in a friendly transaction for the Company at $28.00 per share. Mr. Arnold requested that Mr. Cort arrange a meeting with Mr. Buffett.”

It continued: “Mr. Arnold, who was accompanied by Mr. Cort, met Mr. Buffett in Omaha on November 29, 1999. They talked about the business of the Company and the Company’s recent history. Mr. Buffett indicated an interest in acquiring the Company at $28.00 per share, and said he would need to talk to the company’s largest shareholder, CVC.”

CORT had profits of $33 million in 2000. But business fell sharply in 2001

following the dot-com bubble and the September 11 attack. It made only $13 million that year, then plummeted to $2.4 million in 2002. In 2003, it went in the red with a loss of $6.3 million which stemmed from CORT’s Relocation Central business. It made a profit of $5 million in 2004, and continued to rebound with profits of $20.7 million in 2005 and $26.8 million in 2006.

Acknowledging CORT’s woes, Munger wrote in the 2003 Wesco Annual Report: “With the burst of the dot-com bubble, the events of September 11, and continued weakness in the economy, CORT’s operations have been hammered. Obviously, when we purchased CORT we were poor predictors of near-term industry-wide prospects of the ‘rent-to-rent’ sector of the furniture business.”

Berkshire made its merger agreement known on January 14, 2000. That same day Lou Simpson, GEICO’s CEO, told Buffett he personally owned 200,000 shares, and that members of his family and their trusts owned up to 100,000 shares, all of which were acquired in February and March 1999, and which he anticipated tendering in the offer.

The total Simpson investment of roughly $5 million quickly turned into about $8 million.

Immediately upon purchase by Berkshire, CORT started broadening its territories.

CORT bought Cost Plus Enterprises’ rental contracts and certain other assets on February 14, 2000. The privately held company in Stamford, Connecticut, rents furniture to accounts in New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut. Annual sales were almost $7 million in 1999.

CORT and NextOffice.com, an online source for business furnishings based in San Francisco, announced a strategic partnership March 29, 2000, that includes development of an online rental center, a co-marketing agreement, and investment by CORT in NextOffice.com.

In early 2001, CORT formed CORT’s RelocationCentral unit, now called CORTline, a Web consumer management center that finds location leads.

Munger wrote in Wesco’s 2003 Annual Report: “We expect to report in due course that CORT operations have become more satisfactory. CORT has operated at a positive cash flow, and the general distress in its field has permitted various small expansions. During the past three years it invested $61 million in business expansion through acquisitions of several small businesses and reduced its line-of-credit and other debt by $50 million. CORT remains the national leader in its market segment and would not be making these acquisitions if we believed its furniture rental prospects were permanently impaired.”

SPECTRUM

In early 2003, CORT bought Spectrum Apartment Search. By combining RelocationCentral by CORT with Spectrum and forming RelocationCentral Apartment Search, CORT created the first national apartment locator resource with more than 705 showrooms in 21 markets.

Spectrum Apartment Search, a privately held company based in San Diego, was the largest apartment locator in the U.S. RelocationCentral Apartment Search and now leads the market with more than 500 apartment location and relocation specialists nationwide.

ROOMSERVICE GROUP

In early 2008, CORT bought Roomservice Group as part of an expansion in the U.K. Terms were not disclosed. The U.K. operation, now called Roomservice by CORT, provides rental services and decorator goods to multi-national corporations and residential and commercial properties. The purchase followed a long-standing relationship between CORT and Roomservice. Roomservice, based in Surrey, U.K., had been CORT’s main customer in

the U.K.

AARON RENTS

In 2008, CORT bought a division of Aaron Rents, an Atlanta rental business. CORT paid $72 million for the unit.

LOUNGE 22

In 2010, CORT bought the rental operations of Lounge 22, including all product and rights to market the rental brand. It made CORT’s Trade Show and Event Furnishings unit the sole provider of Lounge 22 designs in the trade show, event, exhibit, and party rental industry.

CORT BUYS

ABC SPECIAL EVENT RENTALS

In early 2011, CORT bought ABC Special Event Rentals of Mukilteo, Washington. The firm supplies rental equipment such as tents, canopies, flooring, and tables and chairs for events.



“Wherever You’re Heading, We’ll Be There,” Says a CORT Ad Featuring Buffett

CORT Business Services showroom in Pleasanton, California

v(Photo courtesy of CORT Business Services)

The Story of Warren Buffett

CORT President Paul Arnold



(Photo courtesy of CORT Business Services)

Of Permanent Value CORT



Live Like a King

Exterior of a CORT showroom in Louisville, Kentucky

(Photo courtesy of CORT Business Services)

When to Rent

Berkshire’s spokesman in a CORT Furniture ad. He says, “Successful investing means knowing when to buy, when to sell, and when to rent.”

(Photo by Mary Porter)





120





BEN BRIDGE JEWELER


Berkshire dove deeper into the jewelry treasure chest when it agreed to buy Seattle-based Ben Bridge Jeweler headed by Ed and Jon Bridge. The announcement was made on May 18, 2000.

The company, which employs more than 700 people, operates more than 70 jewelry stores in 12 states and competes with Helzberg’s in Seattle and throughout the West.

“This arrangement will provide for the smooth transition from this generation to the next—a concern that has been at the center of this action,” Jon Bridge said in a press release.

Ed Bridge added, “We’re pleased to have the opportunity to become a part of what we believe to be the finest family of companies ever assembled under one corporate name.”

In the release, Buffett said: “I can’t tell you how pleased we are to enter into association with Ben Bridge. Run by an outstanding management team, Ben Bridge will be a great addition to the Berkshire family.”

In 1912, Samuel Silverman, a watchmaker, founded a store in downtown Seattle, then sold the business to his son-in-law, Ben Bridge. Bridge gave the store its current name and ran the company for 25 years before turning it over to his sons, Herb and Bob, who later sold it to their sons, Ed and Jon. Today the company is still run by the Bridge family, including President/Co-CEO Ed Bridge and Vice Chairman/Co-CEO Jonathan Bridge. Jonathan’s wife, Bobbe J. Bridge serves as a judge on the Washington State Supreme Court.

The conception of the transaction was described in Fortune (February 1, 2001): “Ed Bridge, 44, the 4th-generation co-head of Ben Bridge Jeweler, got to thinking a couple of years ago, in a period when he was ill, that he should sell his family’s much-treasured, privately owned company. He considered an IPO, or an LBO, or selling to a ‘strategic’ buyer, meaning someone in a related business. But he also got a push toward Berkshire from Barnett Helzberg of Kansas City, who’d sold his own jewelry store business to Buffett in 1995. Bridge couldn’t quite see why Buffett would be interested in his relatively small company, described by Bridge as ‘65 doors in 11 Western states.’ Bridge nonetheless talked by phone to Buffett early last year and then sent him some financial data. Back came Buffett’s enthusiastic reply, recalled by Bridge as ‘You guys are great, great, great.’”

At one time, you could visit the company’s Web site, BenBridge.com, and see a gift-wrapped box with an interesting caption: “Think inside the box.”

Company spokesman Steve Davolt said that after the buyout announcement, Buffett met with many employees of the company, taking any and all questions and joking about everything from stock tips to Bill Gates. “He took the same care answering the CFO’s questions as he did the shipping guy’s question.”

Recently Ben Bridge has opened stores in Houston, Sacramento and Santa Clara, California. Stores in Seattle and Everett, Washington were remodeled, and a store in Minneapolis-St. Paul was opened in 2005.



Treasure Chest

This 2,000-square-foot Ben Bridge store holds many treasures.

(Photo courtesy of Ben Bridge Jeweler)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Ben Bridge

A Ben Bridge store in the Mall of America in

Bloomington, Minnesota.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Ben Bridge Jeweler



121





JUSTIN BRANDS AND BOOTS


Quick! What do Lyndon Johnson, Ronald Reagan, Barry Goldwater, Bob

Hope, George Strait, Garth Brooks, Jane Russell, Jack Benny, Edward G. Robinson, Andy Devine, Gene Autry, Roy Rogers, and George W. Bush have in common?

They have all worn boots made by Justin Brands of Fort Worth, Texas. The Northwest Mounted Police, the National Park Service, the Texas Rangers, and the U.S. Border Patrol also are Justin customers. Buffett, however, didn’t want just a pair of boots; he wanted the entire company. He bought Justin Industries in 2000, and the “boots” business became Justin Brands, and the “bricks” business became Acme Brick Co.

John Justin’s grandfather, H.J. Justin, came from Indiana in 1877 and became a cobbler. He settled beside the Yellow Bank Crossing of the Red River on the part of the Chisholm Trail where six million Longhorns were herded up to market at Kansas railheads. Many of the cowboys controlling the passing livestock found their way to a little house with the small sign: “H.J. Justin, Bootmaker.”

Boots at that time were ill-fitted and poorly-made, not suited for rough wear. Justin hand-fitted each customer and developed a stitching pattern that strengthened the boots. “The boots that Joe Justin began producing in his little shop were made to last, to withstand the rigors to which they would be subjected in the saddle, on the trail, and on the ranch. They were made to fit comfortably, but above all, they were crafted to meet the needs of men who would literally live in them and depend on them. They were tight-fitting to provide sure footing on the ground. They had high leather tops that protected the wearer’s legs against rattlesnakes, brush, and the elements. And they, of course, had the traditional high heels that set cowboy boots apart from more pedestrian footwear” (Irwin Farnam, Standard of the West, p. 11).

The company flourished and later moved to Fort Worth where John Justin, Sr., expanded into field and lace boots. His son diversified Justin Industries into hats and belts and even published Western books through its Northland Press unit.

“Justins”—now made in more than 400 styles—remain the company’s essence. From its beginning, Justins—as its motto says—has been “The Standard of the West.” Justin Brands owns Justin Boot Co., Nocona Boot Company, Tony Lama Company, Chippewa Shoe Company, and Justin Original Workboots.

“The Justin name is still synonymous with cowboy boots, not only in cow country but around the world. Justin boots are as routinely seen on Fifth Avenue in New York, Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills, the Via Veneto in Rome or the Champs Elysees in Paris as they are in Fort Worth” (Irvin Farman, Standard of the West: The Justin Story, p. 3).

A story in The New York Times (May 3, 2001) said: “According to Art of the Boot by Tyler Beard (Gibbs Smith, 1999), a glossy coffee-table book for the true bootist, the Mona Lisa of custom boots is the pair known as the Tony Lama ‘El Rey III.’ Made with black alligator and English calf, inlaid with 24-karat gold and encrusted with 384 diamonds and rubies, the boots are valued at $50,000. Both the El Rey and the El Rey II pair were stolen during traveling exhibitions, so the El Rey III pair has constant security. Custom boot makers say boots like these take months to create.”

Justin Brands CEO Randy Watson says, “Permanent value [see there!] is what we have tried to achieve over the last 121 years in the boot business.”

Today, Justin Brands employ about 900 employees.

Buffett called Justin Chairman John Roach in late May 2000 about a possible deal. Buffett than flew to Fort Worth and spent six hours with Roach, former CEO of Tandy Corp., and John Justin, Jr. Other top Justin executives at the meeting were J. T. Dickerson, Harrold Melton, Randy Watson, and Rick Savitz. Melton, the former CEO of Acme, is a former university professor of finance who earned his Ph.D. at LSU.

Berkshire and Justin Industries announced an agreement on June 20, 2000, to merge for a cash offer of $22 a share, or about $600 million.

John Justin, Jr., who owned 20% of the stock, supported the acquisition; and Berkshire wound up paying a 23% premium to Justin’s closing price of $177/8 the day before the agreement was reached.

Buffett said in a statement: “Berkshire has over 60,000 employees, but only 13 people work in our 4,000-square-foot home office. We not only encourage extraordinary autonomy in our operating businesses, we depend on it. Justin will fit this pattern perfectly. It is an absolutely first-class business run by first-class people. The managers who have produced Justin’s outstanding results will continue to run operations from Fort Worth as they have in the past. If they needed me in Fort Worth, we wouldn’t be buying it,” Buffett said (Fort Worth Star-Telegram, June 21, 2000).

“Berkshire Hathaway is getting a tremendous value,” said Eve Boyce, an analyst with Baldwin Anthony & McIntyre in Dallas. “They’re buying the brick division for a good value and essentially getting the boot division for free.”

The company also had about $60 million in overfunded pension assets and 60 to 70 years of clay reserves, an unusually high amount in the brick business.

Roach described his dealings with Buffett: “He pretty much drove the pace of the deal. We almost had to slow him down he moved so fast. … Anytime I called and asked him a question, I usually had a response in writing in a minute. He’s the only person from Berkshire Hathaway who I talked to in the whole process” (Fort Worth Star-Telegram, June 21, 2000).

Melton recalls an early dealing with Buffett: “The first thing he looked at in the packet I handed him was the part about the employees. He was impressed by their average tenure: 27.2 in the finance group, 21.8 in production and 14.8 in the field. He wanted people who demonstrated they could perform successfully over a long period of time” (Chief Executive, December, 2002).

Buffett’s real reasons for making the invetments he does is seldom known, but in this case it’s clear. Stockholders need the bricks if they are to follow the yellow brick road to the Wizard of Omaha.

Essentially, the corporate history unfolded like this: Acme came first; then in 1968, Acme changed its name to First Worth. John Justin exchanged his stock in Justin Boot for 20% of the stock of First Worth and Justin became president of First Worth in 1969. First Worth then changed its name to Justin Industries in 1972.

Justin Boot Company and country music star George Strait teamed up with a new collection of “Justin George Strait Lifestyle Collection” cowboy boots. The Strait collection with four lines for “ridin’, ropin’, workin’, dancin’, or just plain relaxin’” made its debut in the fall of 2004.

Early buyers were given a collector’s CD featuring such hits as “Amarillo by Morning” and “Write This Down.”

Justin Brands’s Watson said in a press release, “George is the essence of everything Western—hardworking, authentic, and straight-up true, which is why I thought this collection was such a natural fit.”

JUSTIN INDUSTRIES TIMELINE

1879: Joe Justin sets up a boot shop in a one-room frame building in Spanish Fort, Texas, a small town on the east fork of the Chisholm Trail in Montague County.

1891: With the support of family and investors, George Ellis Bennett opens Acme Pressed Brick Co. in Parker County near present-day Millsap. It later forms the foundation for the building-materials business of Justin Industries.

1908: Justin takes his sons into the business and changes the company name to H.J. Justin & Sons. By this time, the business has moved to Nocona because of the location of the railroad.

1923: The first Justin mail-order catalog—a slick, 6-by-9-inch, 50-page paper publication—debuts.

1924: With sales exceeding $200,000, H.J. Justin & Sons is restructured as a corporation. John Justin Sr., Earl Justin, and Avis Justin (Joe Justin’s sons) are elected to the firm’s first board of directors.

1925: Justin’s stockholders vote unanimously to move the boot operations to Fort Worth for better banking and freight facilities. About 600 people move to Fort Worth from Nocona.

1938: John Justin, Jr. starts Justin Belt Co. in Fort Worth.

1950: Avis Justin, the single largest stockholder in H.J. Justin & Sons with 340 shares, sells his stock to John Justin Jr., a minority shareholder in the family company. John Justin Jr. is named vice president and general manager of H.J. Justin & Sons.

1951: Because it is losing $1.25 on every pair of shoes sold, Justin stops making all shoes and concentrates entirely on cowboy boots.

1952: Boot sales, which had dipped sharply since 1948, are back on pace and expected to exceed $1 million. John Justin Sr., is elected chairman of the board; John Jr. is elected president.

1961: After several years on the City Council, John Justin Jr., is elected Fort Worth mayor. He serves one term.

1968: First Worth is formed; Justin merges into First Worth.

1972: John Justin Jr., is elected chairman and president of the company; its name is changed to Justin Industries.

1973: Justin acquires Northland Press, a western-themed publishing company based in Flagstaff, Arizona.

1976: Justin buys Featherlite Building Products.

1981: John Justin, Jr. buys Nocona Boot Co. from relative Enid Justin, who started the company after Justin moved to Fort Worth in 1925. The two companies had been tough competitors with lawsuits and a number of confrontations over the years.

1985: Justin buys Chippewa Shoe Co.

1990: Justin buys Tony Lama Co.

1994: Justin buys American Tile Supply.

1990s: Justin sales and profits stagnate for some of the ’90s because of a downturn in the boot business. The stock price had plunged more than 50% in the last six years, while the broader stock market boomed.

March 1999: At age 82, John Justin Jr., announces that he will step down as chairman and chief executive of Justin Industries within a month, concluding a 61-year career. For the first time in 120 years, no Justin is running the company.

April 1999: Justin Industries names John Roach to oversee its transition. The move returns Roach to an active corporate role four months after he retired as longtime chief executive at Tandy Corp., national electronics retailer. Roach prepares the split of the boots and building materials businesses.

October 1999: Trying to turn around its boot-making business, Justin costs of closing plants in Nocona and Fort Worth is $12.6 million.

April 2000: The company reports that first-quarter earnings rose over 64% from the same period last year. Building materials sales increased 8% to $82.9 million, and footwear sales increased 17% to $41.1 million. Total sales were up 11% from the same period the previous year. Gross margins improved in both categories.

June 20, 2000: Berkshire Hathaway announces it will buy Justin for $600

million. The company will remain intact, and the headquarters will stay in Fort Worth.

John Justin died on February 26, 2001.

_______________________________________________

ACME BRICK

Acme Brick, the largest domestically owned U.S. brickmaker, ships a billion bricks a year and has sales of more than $500 million a year. One Acme project was the renovation of the University of Oklahoma stadium. Acme’s 23 plants produce almost 12% of the nation’s bricks. The brick business is typically only regional as the cost of shipping bricks beyond about 250 miles is more expensive than actually making the bricks. Other Acme companies include Featherlite Building Products Corp., the leading Southwest producer of concrete masonry products; Texas Quarries; and American Tile Supply Co., a major Texas distributor of ceramic and marble floor and wall tile. Acme also owns Innovative Building Products, makers of the IBP system for mortarless installation of glass block.

Acme Brick provides a 100-year limited guarantee to home buyers on all residential brick it makes. The guarantee includes brick, labor, and the necessary materials.

Days after Berkshire said it would buy Justin, Justin’s Acme Brick Company subsidiary said it was buying Wheeler Brick Co. of Northeast Arkansas.

After all is said and done, it’s the brick segment that’s the real money maker for Justin, accounting for the vast majority of Justin’s operating profit.

Acme bought Denver Brick Co. in 2001. It employs about 80 people and makes about 50 to 60 million bricks a year, accounting for about 4% of Acme’s total production.

“The Acme Brick Company had its origins in the founding of Acme Pressed Brick Company by George Ellis Bennett, near Millsap, Texas, in 1891. From a single kiln built on Rock Creek, it eventually evolved into Acme Brick Company” (Dr. Edwin E. Lehr, Colossus in Clay: Acme Brick Company, p. 251).

Brickmaking predates the ancient civilization of the Tigris-Euphrates River valley, making the industry one of the oldest known to man (ibid., p. 15). George Bennett founded Acme Pressed Brick shortly after the Texas frontier closed as the state was beginning to industrialize. From a single kiln in Texas, Acme Brick Co. grew to become the largest American-owned brick company.

Bennett built its first pressed brick factory in Texas after he found rich shale deposits in Parker County. Bricks were burned with coal and delivered in mule-drawn carts in the midst of a depression that hit in the 1890s. Fort Worth, then called Cowtown because of its huge stockyards, became the “greatest packing house center of the Southwest” with the announcement of Armour’s and Swift’s huge packing plants in 1901. The new building required so many bricks that no single company could handle the huge order.

George Bennett died in 1907, the same year that brought the business its worst days with financial panic and subsequent labor strikes. Just when things were at their darkest, a timekeeper, the only remaining employee, saved the day when an unscheduled Texas and Pacific train stopped at Acme’s Bennett plant. “The conductor, friendly to Acme and knowing about Acme’s lack of business, stopped to tell J. Earnest Fender that a fire had occurred in the west Texas town of Midland, and building materials were desperately needed. Fender realized that if he got there quickly he could sell a lot of brick and possibly save the company. With ten dollars borrowed from a bank, he hopped a freight train to Midland. Fender returned with a tremendous order which enabled him to call the workers back to work and reopen the plant” (Tim Decoches, Acme Building Company Centennial Celebration, 1891–1991, pp. 5-6).

Today, former Dallas quarterback Troy Aikman is a spokesmen for Acme Brick Company which has long used two promotion pitches for its bricks: “The Best Thing to Have around Your House” and “If you don’t see the Acme name on the brick, you won’t get Acme quality.”

Acme Brick supports The Aikman Foundation’s work with children’s hospitals.

The Acme Brick folks paid for a limited circulation wrap for the November 13, 2000 issue of Sports Illustrated as part of a program Acme did for several years. The Acme Brick logo and a photo of Buffett ran with the quote, “Brick could have been my best investment.” Inside was a letter from Buffett:

Dear Acme Customers:



I know that you look to Acme Brick for both dependable products that perform and for the continuity and stability that you need to support your business. The recent purchase of Acme Building Brands by Berkshire Hathaway will enhance Acme’s ability to serve your need for quality building products. We will assist Acme by maintaining continuity of management and by providing access to needed capital. Berkshire Hathaway purchases companies for their fundamental value and retains them. We let management do their stuff and stay out of the way.



When Harrold Melton and I first met, he talked about brick as an investment. I must say, that like most people, I took the beauty and permanence of my brick home, purchased in 1958, for granted. After our discussion, I began to think about how many thousands of dollars I would have spent maintaining another type of exterior during the ensuing four decades. This was early in my business career, and that money spent on maintenance would have been unavailable to invest in sound companies. Who knows what opportunities I might have missed.



Acme’s history and reputation are exemplary. I’m proud to be a part of a team that helps deliver such value and permanence to the owners of America’s homes and buildings.



[Think Buffett misspoke here. Surely he meant to say permanent value.]

In 2007, Acme made a 6,000-pound brick to commemorate its 116th birthday. The brick was entered into the Guinness Book of Records competition.

Also in 2007, during a severe housing slump, Acme had to shut one of its plants in Wier, Kansas, which had operated there for more than 100 years. It was not known if the plant would reopen. Meantime, most of the 37 employees were without jobs. Acme Brick production has dropped more than 50% since the recession of 2008. If a recovery occurs, Acme will be among the first to know. “No one orders brick until they need it,” Buffett has said.

On a lighter note, Acme Brick was once the target believed of jokester Ted L. Nancy, author of More Letters From a Nut. Nancy—thought to be Jerry Seinfeld—wrote a string of nutty letters to folks to see if he could get a reply. For example, in one of his books, Nancy wrote to the Consulate General of India to say he understood the Taj Mahal was to be remodeled into a Staples Office Supply store. Acme Brick received the following request:

Can you make a 59 inch bra? I have large breasts and was told you can make a special bra for me. It’s a 59 A cup. Very narrow but still desirable to many. I was told you could manufacture this bra out of moccasin material. Is this true?



Also, do you manufacture the Wonder Veil as I have heard?



I know you are a shoe and moccasin company and make straw footwear and waterproof boots but I was referred to you because they said you make special order brassieres.



I also need 50 pairs of straw waterproof moccasin boots for a party I’m giving. Who can I speak to about these straw moccasin boots? I think the moccasin has always been the most desirable of shoes. This party will prove it. I would prefer to have my footwear and brassiere done by the same company.



Please write and tell me the cost and how soon my order can be ready for these straw shoes and big bra. Thank you for your time. The Acme Boot Company is the best. I will tell people that.



Acme replied: “We appreciate your interest in our company, however, we only manufacture boots. We are unable to grant your request.”

BUYING JENKINS BRICK & TILE CO.

In January 2011, Acme Brick bought Jenkins Brick & Tile Co. of Montgomery, Alabama, for $50 million. Jenkins owns three brick plants in Alabama as well as a tile distribution center and stone fabrication businesses. Jenkins sells products through more than 20 company-operated locations in Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee, South Carolina, and Florida. The company has been based in Montgomery since 1903 and employed 650 people in 2007 before the collapse of the housing industry. Jenkins will now be based in Fort Worth, Texas, but most of its operations will remain unchanged.



George W. Bush, shown here at his Crawford, Texas, ranch July 24, 2000, wears Justin boots. Justin Brands CEO Randy Watson says he’s virtually certain the boots here are Justin’s Roper style #3802. “The original Roper, known by World War II aviators as Wellington, probably worn... by former President George Bush, was converted to a true western roper in the early 1950s at the request of professional cowboys and working cowboys who needed a low top, flat heel for easy entry and exit in the stirrup and ground stability. The Justin Boot Company reached back into its archives, resurrected the Wellington and gave it a western scallop, fancy stitching and full grain work leathers. And the Roper was born.”

(Photo courtesy of

AP/Wide World Photos)

The Story of Warren Buffett



(With permission of Justin Industries)

Cover of Justin Industries

1999 Annual Report





Standard of the West: The Justin Story by Irvin Farman

(Photo by

Lisa Nichols)

Of Permanent Value Justin Brands and Boots



Original Justin Boot Shop

The first Justin boot shop in Spanish Fort, Texas, was strategically positioned right across from the Cowboy Saloon in 1879.

(Photos courtesy of Berkshire)



Barbie Doll—the Man’s Version

Justin executives Harrold Melton, former CEO of Acme Brick Co., and Randy Watson, now chairman and CEO of Justin Boots, gave Buffett a limited edition bronze statue of John Justin on his favorite horse, Baby Blue, at an appreciation dinner August 31, 2000, at the City Club in Fort Worth, Texas. Melton retired in 2005. Dennis Knautz is now the Acme CEO. Knautz and Watson have played their part for Berkshire’s synergy. At annual meetings, Knautz has bought a Campbell Hausfeld air compressor and Watson has bought a Forest River motor home (Star-Telegram, February 4, 2007).

(Photo courtesy of Acme Brick CEO Harrold Melton)



Nocona Fitting Room (1912)

Justin employees assembling boot tops in the Nocona fitting room in 1912

Justin Brands and Boots The Story of Warren Buffett



Go Long, Warren

At the 2000 Appreciation Dinner, Harrold Melton gave Buffett a signed football from Acme Brick spokesman Troy Aikman. The message read: “Warren, Welcome to the Acme Brick Team — Troy Aikman.”



Justin Brands CEO Randy Watson

(Courtesy of Justin Brands)



Randy Watson: Not Just Another Rhinestone Cowboy

Justin Brands CEO Randy Watson stands near a pair of 125th anniversary commemorative boots valued at $250,000. The hand-tooled boots, with diamonds and rubies, were on display during Berkshire’s Annual Meeting weekend in 2004. Watson once got a note from Buffett saying: “Good job doing more business with less inventory. That’s what it’s all about” (Business Week, December 10, 2004).

(Photo by Lee Armstrong)



Strait Up Cowboy

Country music star George Strait

Of Permanent Value Justin Brands and Boots



(Photo by Tommy Terrell)

The Quebe Sisters

The Quebe Sisters of Texas make music at the Justin booth at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2007.

Newest Member of

the Quebe Sisters

Buffett adds his own

harmony.



(Photo by Tommy Terrell)



(Photo by Tommy Terrell)

Justin Rodeo Roundup

Popular Texas Longhorns, symbolizing the West, turned up for the annual meeting in 2007.

Boots on Display

at the 2008 Annual Meeting

These boots were made for walking—

maybe stomping.



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



John Justin Sr.

Justin Brands and Boots The Story of Warren Buffett



Lady Gaga

Born This Way

Lady Gaga’s Justin Boots

This pair of boots made for entertainer Lady Gaga required 250 hours of craftsmanship. The hand-cut, hand-tooled and hand-painted details show Lady Gaga’s signature unicorn and wings tatoo image which is hand-cut on the outside of the boot and drapes off to the side. Gold leather chains run the length of the boot shaft. Lady Gaga is the queen of Twitter with 10 million followers. Its probably due to the boots. Factoid: Lady Gaga, who has a boyfriend in Nebraska—Luc Carl from the Omaha suberb of Springfield—spent Christmas weekend of 2010 hitting a number of watering holes in Omaha (Omaha World-Herald, December 28, 2010).

(Photo courtesy of Lisa Lankes of Justin Brands)



Of Permanent Value Justin Brands and Boots



No “Closet” Logo Here

Mr. Old Economy holds an Acme brick at Berkshire headquarters September 19, 2000. Acme is the only domestic brickmaker that stamps its residential bricks with the company logo.

(Photo courtesy of

Acme Brick former CEO

Harrold Melton)



(Photo courtesy of Acme Brick Co.)

Top 1890s Rock Band

A view from inside one of the huge updraft kilns at the Bennett plant in the 1890s. The bricks were carefully stacked in a predetermined manner for proper burning.



Acme CEO

Dennis Knautz

(Courtesy of Acme Brick)



A Gold Brick Home

Then Acme Brick CEO Harrold Melton and Buffett stand in front of Buffett’s brick home in Omaha on September 19, 2000, after Berkshire bought Justin Industries.

(Photo by Britt Stokes)



Colossus in Clay

The book, published in 1998, tells the history of Acme Brick Company.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Justin Brands and Boots The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

Free Money

An Acme brick passed out $100,000 Warren Buffett bills near the Justin Industries booth at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2001.



Gold Bricks

The Acme Brick Company paid for a circulation wrap around the November 13, 2000 issue of Sports Illustrated. The wrap carried the Acme Brick logo and a photo of Buffett with the quote: “Brick could have been my best investment ever.” Inside was a letter from Buffett.

Of Permanent Value Justin Brands and Boots



Bricks Mean Business

Transportation of bricks can be a heavy issue if long distances become involved.

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)



122





SHAW INDUSTRIES


Carpet, rugs, ceramics, laminate, flooring, hardwood—all are considered old economy. That’s right up Berkshire’s alley, and that is what is produced at Shaw Industries.

On September 6, 2000, Berkshire offered to buy 80% to 86% of Shaw Industries, the world’s largest carpet maker, and wound up buying 87% for $19 a share in cash. Shaw’s stock traded on the New York Stock Exchange at 123/16 at that time. In early 2002, Berkshire bought the remaining Shaw shares from top officers for $324 million with payment in 4,505 Class A and 7,063 Class B Berkshire shares.

With Shaw’s 126.6 million shares outstanding, the original purchase of the

family-owned company came to about $2 billion in cash as well as the assumption of $900 million in debt.

Shaw stock had hit a five-year high of $25 in early 1999.

A quarterback for the Dalton High Catamounts in the late 40s, Shaw’s Chairman Robert Shaw, and his father, Clarence, who died in 1958, had been immersed in textiles before tufting machinery appeared (Thomas M. Deaton, Bedspreads to Broadloom, p. 131).

Shaw took over his father’s small rug-dyeing operation in 1958, and turned it into the world’s largest tufted carpet maker.

With more than 100 manufacturing plants and distribution centers, Shaw employs about 30,000 workers. It is the largest manufacturing employer in Georgia, making more than 600 million square yards of carpet a year.

Based in Dalton, Georgia, Shaw sells 2,000 colors of tufted and woven carpeting and rugs for residential and commercial applications throughout the United States and exports to most markets worldwide.

It markets its residential products under such brand names and trademarks as Cabin Crafts, Couture by Sutton, Cumberland, Expressive Designs, Home Foundations, Philadelphia, Queen, ShawMark, Sutton, TrustMark, Evans & Black, Salem, Tuftex, and Shaw Rugs. Shaw markets its commercial products under the names Shaw Contract, Designweave, Patcraft, and Queen Commercial. Through the network of commercial dealers known as Shaw Contract Flooring Services, Shaw also sells commercial flooring products and provides project management services. Shaw also offers hard surface flooring through the brands Shaw Ceramics, Shaw Laminates, and Shaw Hardwoods.

Shaw had sales of about $4 billion in 2001. For the previous 20 years, the company delivered shareholders a whopping 27% in average annual return on investment. In 1980, CEO Shaw boasted that the company would more than quadruple its then-$214 million in annual sales to $1 billion—an unimaginable figure for the carpet business—by 1990. However, his prediction was lenient timewise: it took only eight years. By the decade’s end, Shaw had sales of $1.6 billion. It now has about $6 billion a year in sales.

Robert Shaw said, “We knew we wanted to build a world-class company. You have to be best in your field, looking at your horizon beyond just your field at someone else’s game. You commit to being the best and don’t let your company be driven by the slowest runner rather than the fastest” (SellingPower.com, October 2001).

Shaw claims that his company has always pursued a conservative approach to growth, never mortgaging the future on borrowed capital. “You have to grow from earnings,” he says, “and that’s the lesson the dot-coms are learning today. They’re outrunning their headlights. But I believe that after a certain number of years, you’ve got to create enough free cash flow to grow. If you use that as a philosophy—that you grow out of earnings rather than by borrowing—and you manage your balance sheet, then you never get into serious trouble” (ibid). All of this is based on the company’s tripartite values—honesty, integrity, and hard work—that any Shaw employee can recite upon request.

Dalton, Georgia, about 90 miles northwest of Atlanta, is the carpet capital of the world. It all began back in 1895 when 15-year-old Catherine Evans Whitener hand-tufted a bedspread that became popular with family and friends (Thomas M. Deaton, Bedspreads to Broadlooms, p. 2). She gave her first one to a relative as a wedding gift and soon was selling the handmade bedspreads (Randall L. Patton, Shaw Industries, p. 7).

About 80% of the carpet made in the U.S. comes from mills within a 65-mile radius of Dalton, Georgia. All the main carpet makers—Shaw, Mohawk Industries, and Beaulieu of America—are in the vicinity.

As the years went by, Dalton’s livelihood centered on the carpet industry, and Shaw became the leader of the area carpet business. However, Shaw suffered a setback in 2002, when Sears closed its carpet business. Shaw had been one of Sears’ biggest vendors.

Robert Shaw, his brother Bud, and Julian Saul have long led the company in its efforts to be a low-cost producer and in buying out competition.

Shaw was founded as Star Dye Co., a bedspread-dyeing company, a half-century ago in the small mountain community. Founders Clarence Shaw and John B. McCarty were drawn there by the proliferation of small tufting companies making bedspreads.

What is tufted carpet? It’s carpet made by the tufting process, which involves insertion of pile tufts by a row of eyed needles that penetrate a primary backing fabric, thus forming tufts from the yarn threaded through the eyes of tufting needles. More than 90% of all carpet sold in the U.S. is tufted (Thomas M. Deaton, Bedspreads to Broadlooms, p. 207).

“When the end of World War II freed the nylon that had been going into parachutes for civilian purposes, the carpet market exploded. Shaw switched into first dyeing, then manufacturing of tufted broadloom carpets” (International Fiber Journal, October 1999).

The company took its shares public in 1971, assimilated several other large carpet makers, and gradually assumed control over its processes, some of which were previously outsourced. Outside companies had been spinning its nylon yarn from staple fiber acquired from DuPont and Monsanto, sending the yarn back on cones. In the early ’80s, Shaw started integrating backwards, acquiring yarn mills.

It started a yarn division with the purchase of New Found Industries, a spinner of carpet yarns. Filament nylon had been sent out for twisting and heat-setting until Shaw bought the equipment to do it inhouse. Today, the company spins, twists, and heat-seats its own yarn before tufting, dying and finishing the carpet. It has invested 10 times the industry average in capital dollars for yarn processing, dye techniques and advanced manufacturing equipment.

“Shaw consumes well over a billion pounds of fiber a year in its carpet manufacturing operations and continues to buy most of its nylon, which accounts for 60% of carpet production from outside fiber producers. Polyester, accounting for 10% of overall fiber use, is bought as staple recycled from soft-drink bottles” (ibid.).

With more than 5,000 different styles of carpet and laminate flooring, Shaw has quickly responded to changing markets. In 1986, when DuPont revolutionized the industry with stain-resistant fibers, Shaw moved its outdated inventory and rapidly retrofitted machinery, unlike most other carpet manufacturers. Robert Shaw sees adapting to change as a reflection of good sales skills. “Selling is just meeting people, figuring out what they need and supplying their needs. But those needs are ever changing. So if you’re doing business the same way you did it five years ago—or even two years ago—you’re doing it wrong” (SellingPower.com, October 2001).

In 1987, Shaw bought the carpet operations of West Point Pepperell; and in 1989, it acquired the carpet operations of Armstrong World Industries. In 1992, Shaw bought Salem Carpet Mills; and in 1998, Queen Carpets was purchased, making Shaw the dominant carpet manufacturer.

The Wall Street Journal (November 20, 2000) reported Buffett’s fondness for boring companies was not a master plan. “The carpet business is a fundamental business. People will keep using carpet. It is a fairly easy business to learn,” Buffett said.

The story noted that in June of 2000, Robert Shaw was at Berkshire’s office in Omaha to negotiate a reinsurance policy because Shaw was considering a merger and wanted insurance against liabilities of the possible merger partner. As Shaw was leaving, he asked Buffett about a possible Berkshire investment in Shaw. At first Buffett was non-committal.

After returning to Dalton, Shaw sent Buffett a packet of information about Shaw Industries. A few days later Shaw and Saul returned to Omaha to discuss a direct investment from Berkshire. As the Shaw executives were leaving, Buffett asked if they minded Berkshire buying Shaw shares in the open market. Buffett began buying stock and a deal seemed in the making when Flooring America, Shaw’s largest customer, filed for bankruptcy protection. Buffett told the executives that any talks about a direct investment would have to be put on hold. Shaw persisted and eventually an agreement was worked out (Randall L. Patton, Shaw Industries, p. 188).

Finally, Shaw received a real signal of interest. When he showed up for a meeting with Buffett, Munger was there. An offer for Shaw was tendered at that meeting.

After the deal, Shaw said of Buffett: “My impressions couldn’t be better. I immediately felt comfortable with him. He picked us up at the airport himself. That was surprising.” Shaw further said, “The great thing about being part of Berkshire is that you get to run your company the way you think is best.”

Buffett wrote of the Shaw acquisition in Berkshire’s 2000 Annual Report: “Now, if people walk all over us, we won’t mind.”

Shaw had profits of $292 million in 2001. Although carpet prices rose only 1% in 2002, Shaw managed to make $424 million. The increase was due to Berkshire’s complete ownership of Shaw and Shaw’s greater operating efficiencies.

Shaw Timeline

1946: Clarence Shaw, father of Chairman & CEO Robert E. (Bob) Shaw and former Chairman J.C. (Bud) Shaw, buys Star Dye Company, which dyes tufted scatter rugs.

1958: Bob Shaw becomes CEO of Star Dye Company, now jointly owned by Bob and J.C. With $300,000 in sales, the company soon starts finishing carpet as Star Finishing Company.

1967: J.C. Shaw organizes a holding company to acquire Philadelphia Carpet Company, which originated in 1846. The holding company adds Star Finishing to the fold one year later.

1971: The holding company goes public as Shaw Industries Inc., with approximately $43 million in sales and 900 employees.

1985: Shaw Industries makes its first appearance on the list of America’s largest corporations—the Fortune 500—with more than $500 million in sales and close to 5,000 employees.

2001: Shaw Industries, now a subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway Inc., is a full-service flooring company with close to $4 billion in annual sales and about 30,000 employees.

2002: Shaw Industries: A History by Randall L. Patton, an associate professor of history at Kennesaw State University, is published. It follows the publication of Carpet Capital: The Rise of a New South Industry coauthored by Kennesaw State professors Randall L. Patton and David B. Parker.

2003: “Since we felt these two books were important to both our industry and our company, we felt like we should give something back to Kennesaw State for their efforts,” Julius Saul said in a statement announcing a $1 million gift from Shaw to Kennesaw State to endow a chair for the Department of History and Philosophy.

In September 2003, Shaw agreed to buy some assets of Dixie Scrap of Chattanooga, Tennessee. It bought Dixie’s yarn, tufting, dyeing, finishing, needlebond, distribution, and logistics facilities in Calhoun, Georgia. A needlebond facility in Dalton, Georgia, and a carpet recycling facility in Lafayette, Georgia, were also purchased.

About 1,100 people work at the plants, which have annual sales of $225 million and were sold for about $180 million.

A day after Berkshire’s final approval to buy the Clayton Homes mobile home business, Shaw bought the part of the Dixie Group’s business that makes carpets for mobile homes, a business formerly known as Carriage Carpets, of Calhoun, Georgia. Dixie sold half its business to pay down debt and concentrate on high-end carpets.

In 2004, Formica Corp. sold the equipment assets of its Formica Flooring

business to Shaw for $7 million. Formica did not transfer its name, products, or design to Shaw; however, Formica did withdraw from the laminated floor business.

Shaw, already the world’s largest carpet maker, became even larger.

Despite strong profits in the first quarter of 2004, Shaw was facing a rapid surge in oil prices. The price of oil, a key component in carpet making, adds to raw material and transportation costs.

In 2005, Honeywell International sold its U.S. nylon carpet fibers business to Shaw. And under a long-term contract, Honeywell agreed to supply Shaw with two chemicals used to make nylon fibers.

The sale included nylon fiber factories in Anderson, Clemson, and Columbia, South Carolina, as well as the Zeftron and Anso brand names. Shaw also received Honeywell’s 50% stake in Evergreen Nylon Recycling of Augusta, Georgia. Terms of the deal were not disclosed, but Shaw picked up about 90% of Honeywell’s nylon fiber capacity with $1.2 billion in sales in 2005.

THE ANDERSON FAMILY OF COMPANIES

In 2007, Shaw bought the Anderson Family of Companies based in Clinton, South Carolina. Anderson has been involved in the hardwood flooring business for more than 60 years. It sells under various brand names, including Anderson, Virginia Vintage, Appalachian, Biltmore Estate, and Anderson Pacific.



(Photo courtesy of The Daily Citizen-News)

Shaw Industries Headquarters in Dalton, Georgia

The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo courtesy of Shaw Industries)

A Virtual Floors-R-Us

President Julian Saul, left, and Robert Shaw, chairman of Shaw Industries, stand in front of Ken Jackson, CFO; Norris Little, vice chairman; and Vance Bell, executive vice president of operations. After Shaw merged with Queen Carpets in 1998, Saul became president of Queen and joined Robert Shaw’s management team. Bell was named CEO in 2006.

Of Permanent Value Shaw Industries



(Photo by Mary Porter)

Ray Charles’ Brother Ray

“Georgia on My Mind”

Shaw Industries The Story of Warren Buffett



Swept under Berkshire’s Carpet

In 2000, Shaw Industries became one more old economy business added

to the Berkshire fold.

(Photo courtesy of The Daily Citizen-News)



(Photo by Caroline Summers)

Randall Patton’s

Shaw Industries

Of Permanent Value Shaw Industries



Finally a “How to” on Walking All Over Charlie Munger

Shaw Industries Chairman Robert Shaw shows off the 3-by 5-foot rug of Charlie Munger rolled out for sale at the Shaw booth at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2001.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Helping Berkshire Carpet the World

The Shaw booth at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2004

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



A Shaw Truck Moving Carpet in Omaha

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

Shaw Plant

Four Shaw plants in Dalton, Georgia, were closed in 2011 as the housing market failed to recover.



(Photo by Mark Terrell)



123





HOMEMAKERS FURNITURE


Berkshire’s Nebraska Furniture Mart (NFM) said on September 14, 2000, it would buy Homemakers Furniture based in Des Moines, Iowa. The price for Iowa’s largest furniture maker wasn’t disclosed.

The purchase included Homemaker WoodMarc Manufacturing unit in Winterset, Iowa. The WoodMarc was sold to an Illinois investment group in early 2005 as Homemakers, and NFM decided to focus on the retail market.

Homemakers president David Merschman said (Omaha World-Herald, September 14, 2000) that his family and the Blumkin family of Nebraska Furniture Mart had talked about a deal in the early ’90s and that the Blumkins had raised the issue again recently. The deal gave NFM control over one of its biggest competitors.

The Furniture Mart has one other subsidiary called Floors Inc., a commercial flooring company that operates nationwide.

Buffett, who approved the Homemakers purchase, said in a press release that the deal would give Berkshire furniture retail dominance in seven states: Nebraska, Iowa, Utah, Idaho, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Texas (ibid.).

Founded in 1974, Homemakers has an 80,000-square-foot store in eastern Des Moines and a 170,000-square-foot store in Urbandale, a suburb west of Des Moines. It also has a 130,000-square-foot distribution center in Urbandale. The company controls about 40% of the Des Moines furniture market. WoodMarc’s Winterset plant covers 260,000 square feet, more than four football fields (ibid.).

NFM’s Ron Blumkin said NFM would add WoodMarc’s offering of mid-priced bedroom and home entertainment goods to its mix. The only thing that had stopped it before, he added, was WoodMarc’s connection to a key competitor (Furniture Today, September 18, 2000).

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 2002 Annual Report: “In a so-so year for home-

furnishings and jewelry retailers, our operations did well. Among our eight retailing operations, the best performer was Homemakers in Des Moines. There the talented Merschman family achieved outstanding gains in both sales and profits.”

HOMEMAKERS FURNITURE GETS A FACELIFT

On July 30, 2009, Buffett showed up for a ribbon cutting for a $30 million

renovation and expansion of Homemakers. A crowd of 2,000 politicians, dignitaries, and businessmen also showed up, forming a line the length of a city block. Buffett spent three hours there, staying for photos.

Buffett said in his remarks, “In a broader sense, what happened with this store and this family [Merschman] is a metaphor for what’s happened in America.” Buffett told the crowd that the “American system” is where people are free to unlock their capabilities.



Homemakers Store in Urbandale, Iowa

Shhh! Home is where the synergy is.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Furniture Salesman

(Photo courtesy of the Dallas County News in Iowa/Bob Eschiman)

Of Permanent Value Homemakers Furniture



124





BENJAMIN MOORE PAINTS


Berkshire agreed to buy paint producer Benjamin Moore & Co. for about $1 billion on November 5, 2000. It paid $37.82 a share, a 51% premium to the company’s then-closing price.

Again, Buffett played in the arena of old economics. It’s hard to download a gallon of paint from your computer.

Irish immigrant Benjamin Moore founded his business in 1883 in Montvale, New Jersey. Denis Abrams is president and CEO.

Benjamin Moore is a manufacturer and retailer of premium paints, stains, and industrial coatings. Its products are distributed throughout North America only through a network of authorized independent dealers.

The company has about 4,200 locations, with about 3,200 retailers in the U.S. and about 1,000 in Canada; 168 of the outlets are majority-owned by Benjamin Moore.

“We are extremely excited about the opportunity to add a company with such an outstanding reputation for quality and leadership in its industry to the Berkshire group,” Buffett said in a statement.

Benjamin Moore is among the top North American retailers of exterior and interior paints. Its high-end paint is often requested by architects and designers. The company has 2,800 employees, seven manufacturing plants, and 21 facilities.

Benjamin Moore is an industry leader in North America for architectural coatings. Estimated to have more than 700 competitors, Benjamin Moore’s biggest rivals include Sherwin-Williams, ICI, and PPG.

In 1872, at the age of 17, Benjamin Moore emigrated from Ireland to Brooklyn and found a job as a paint salesman. Moore had been a paint factory superintendent and his brother Robert had $2,000. The combination was the basis of the new company which made a powder-based house paint that just required the addition of hot water. Eleven years later, in 1883, he and Robert founded the Moore Brothers Paint Company. In 1891, the company incorporated in New Jersey as Benjamin Moore & Co.

The company’s brands include Benjamin Moore, Moorglo, Moorcraft, Moorgard, Impervo, Regal, and Aqua Glo. Each brand name represents a family of products and occupies a key price point in the overall market.

Benjamin Moore Co. has annual sales of about $900 million. Long regarded as the “Paint and Color Experts,” Benjamin Moore has been securing a strong foothold in the home furnishings industry.

In 2004, Benjamin Moore began a remodeling project for its stores which included putting up red and white “Benjamin Moore” signs and, yes, a new coat of paint.

INSL-X PRODUCTS

In late 2007, Benjamin Moore said it intended to buy select assets of Insl-x Products Corporation, a coatings-maker in Stony Point, New York.

The purchases included a breadth of coatings products such as Insl-x, Coronado, Bruning, Trinity Lacquers, and Lamar.

The company continues to operate under its president, Jim Weil, whose father founded the company in 1960.

Financial terms were not disclosed, but manufacturing and distribution were to continue at current locations.



Need Moore and Moore and Moore Paint

This is the paint Buffett uses to create his business canvas.

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)



President and CEO Denis Abrams

(Courtesy of Benjamin Moore)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Primed for Paint

Walter Scott, Buffett’s friend and a Berkshire board member, is building this 24,000-square-foot mansion in Omaha. It’ll need a lot of furniture, carpet and paint, won’t it? And, oh yes, don’t forget insulation.

(Photo courtesy of Omaha World-Herald)

Of Permanent Value Benjamin Moore Paints



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

All-You-Can-Buy Paint Sale

at Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2006

Benjamin Moore launched a line of paint called Aura, a “green” paint which is less harmful to the environment. As it dries, it releases only one-third as much organic compounds as regular paint.

Marvelous Muresco®

In 1892, Benjamin Moore introduced a new paint sensation. It was called Muresco® paint. This superior white paint became the best-selling calcimine paint in the United States in the early part of the 20th century. Muresco® paint incorporated both Irish moss and Pennsylvania clay and came as a dry powder. Prior to products like Muresco® paint, those who wanted to paint had to assemble the ingredients themselves. With Muresco®, they simply added water and were ready to paint.



(Benjamin Moore & Co. Archives)



(Benjamin Moore & Co. Archives)

Betty Moore

An imaginary character created to provide warm and friendly decorating advice over the radio, Betty Moore was given life by a succession of actresses from about 1930 to the 1960s. The actresses may have been pretending, but the advice they offered was real. A group of well-trained decorators—mainly women—who staffed Benjamin Moore’s Home Decorating Department provided the information. They also personally answered consumer decorating questions by mail and created Betty Moore paint and decorating guides that were distributed to the public by mail and through Benjamin Moore paint retailers.



(Benjamin Moore & Co. Archives)

Moore Brothers

Paint Company

In 1883, Benjamin Moore and his brother Robert started Moore Brothers Paint Company in a small loft at 55 Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn. This illustration shows the original building. Unfortunately, the following year a fire broke out and burned it to the ground. To show his determination, Moore was the last person to leave and within three days, he was back in business in a new loft at Water and Adams Street.

Benjamin Moore Paints The Story of Warren Buffett



Green Promise Products

(Courtesy of Benjamin Moore)



Benjamin Moore Paints

(Courtesy of Benjamin Moore)



Painting with Benjamin Moore Paint

(Courtesy of Benjamin Moore)

Of Permanent Value Benjamin Moore Paints



Berkshire Hathaway Color Collection

Maybe this is Buffett’s version of Michelangelo’s Sistine Chapel.

(Courtesy of Benjamin Moore)



125





JOHNS MANVILLE


In another foray into the building materials industry, Berkshire agreed to buy Johns Manville on December 20, 2000, for $13 a share in cash, or about $2.2 billion for Manville’s stock and assumed debt.

The deal came shortly after talks failed between Manville and takeover firms Hicks, Muse, Tate & Furst and Bear, Stearns & Co. who wanted to buy Manville for about $3 billion. That buyout ran into financial woes. At one point in the talks with Manville executives, Buffett said: “Don’t worry, our check will clear” (Denver Post, December 22, 2000).

Denver-based Manville, now headed by Todd Raba, had been looking for a buyer for some time. The purchase price was about seven times the previous year’s cash flow of $326 million and one times sales of $2.2 billion. Manville had operated in bankruptcy from 1982-1988 due to its asbestos liability. It emerged with a plan that endowed the Manville trust with $850 million in cash, 50% of Johns Manville’s common stock, a perpetual claim on 20% of the company’s profits, and $1.3 billion in bonds.

Founded in 1859, Johns Manville is now a leading maker and marketer of building products, including insulation, roofing, fire prevention materials, and filtration materials. The company stopped making asbestos in 1985. When employees got word of the Berkshire deal, they reacted with a round of applause. The company now employs about 8,000 people and operates 43 manufacturing plants in the U.S., Europe, and China.

Manville agreed to repurchase $135 million in stock from the Personal Injury Settlement Trust, which had a 76% stake in Manville. The trust pays out about $250 million a year in claims of potentially one million beneficiaries. It has paid out about $2.5 billion since the trust was created.

In regard to the Berkshire purchase of Johns Manville, Robert Falise, chairman of the trust, was quoted as saying: “With Berkshire there were no unnecessary complications, and they didn’t need financing from outside sources. It was remarkably swift and simple. In almost two years of looking for a buyer, nearly 50 companies took a look at Manville,” Falise said. Berkshire did the transaction in just eight days.

The trust received about $1.5 billion for its stake in the company, putting it on solid financial footing. Not only that but the completion of the transaction ended Johns Manville’s association with asbestos. Under the deal, Berkshire has no liability for asbestos claims because they are confined to the trust. Further, Berkshire gets a significant tax benefit because it can deduct from its taxes the proceeds the trust received from the sale. So about $1.5 billion of the purchase price can be carried forward to shield income for a number of years.

As for changes at Manville, Buffett said, “There will be no changes except on the stock certificate” (The Wall Street Journal, December 21, 2000).

About two weeks before the announcement, Manville had agreed to buy Skloplast A.S., a fiberglass maker in Trnava, Slovakia, that employs about 1,200 people. Skloplast’s (Sklo means glass and plast means fiber in Slovak) main products are used in fiberglass-reinforced plastics for the construction and transportation industries.

At one time, Manville was the leading maker of asbestos, an indestructible, fireproof insulator. Inhaling its fibers can cause lung cancer and other diseases. Although Manville was profitable, it filed for bankruptcy in 1982 because it faced 16,000 lawsuits alleging injuries. Manville emerged from bankruptcy in 1988, under a complex reorganization that created a trust to pay asbestos health claims. The health trust came to own most of Manville’s stock.

In 1995, the company changed its name to Schuller International Group to

create a new identity, but few people recognized the new name; so in 1997, the company reverted to Johns Manville. Sort of like Coke Classic.

A condensed version of the Johns Manville purchase was reported in Professional Roofing Magazine, July 2001:

Picture this: You’re driving Warren Buffett, chairman of Omaha, Neb.-based Berkshire Hathaway Inc. and one of the wealthiest men in the world, to the airport. Now picture Buffett turning to you and saying, “You know, in 10 years, you’ll be just like me.”



This happened to Jerry Henry, chief executive officer of Johns Manville, Denver, shortly after Berkshire Hathaway finalized a $2.2 billion deal to buy the company.



“I almost ran off the road,” Henry says of the encounter. “I said, ‘Warren, I’ll never have that kind of money.’ And he said. ‘This is not at all about money. You’ll be just like me—you’ll be tap dancing to work every day.’”



Henry had decided that if the deal with Hicks, Muse, Tate & Furst and Bear Stearns Merchant Banking was unsuccessful, he would leave Johns Manville and return to the East Coast, where he had lived for many years. In fact, he and his wife already had sold their home in Denver. …



John Cummings, Johns Manville’s director of investor relations, noticed someone was buying large amounts of Johns Manville stock. After some investigating, Cummings thought he had a pretty good idea who the buyer was and brought his suspicions to Henry.



“John tells me he thinks Warren Buffett is buying our stock,” Henry recalls. “So I decided to call Buffett though I didn’t know whether he would take my call.”



Buffett took the call and acknowledged he was buying Johns Manville stock. When Henry asked him about his intentions, Buffett laughed and, Henry says, told him, “If your deal falls through, I will make an offer to buy the company.”



“Warren basically said we can afford to lose money over the short term but not one shred of reputation,” Henry says with incredulity. “I’ve never heard anyone talk in those kinds of terms.”



Although it will take some time to see how well Johns Manville fits into the Berkshire Hathaway portfolio, Henry and his employees are relieved a burden has been lifted from the company. “Am I tap-dancing to work yet?” Henry asks. “No. But I am walking a little bit faster.”



Henry explained in an interview (DenverPost.com, October 19, 2003) what it was like to work for Buffett, “About the only real skill the trust had was that it knew how to fire a CEO. That was a core competence.”

The trust had planned to sell the company to leverage buyout artists who would have added debt to the company. As financing for that fizzled, the trust proposed a $150 million dividend that could have limited the company’s future. In the middle of Henry’s frustrations, he heard a rumor that Buffett had been buying Manville stock. “So I called him and he started laughing and said, ‘Yeah, I’d like to buy your company,’” Henry said.

He then told Buffett about the dividend proposal. “Warren said, ‘Hey, you can’t let that happen.’” Henry persuaded the board to drop the proposal and consider an offer from Buffett. As the deal progressed, Buffett asked Henry a few questions, has said he had studied the company a long time.

Henry said he talks with Buffett every couple of weeks. Buffett always wants to know what’s working and what’s not and what kind of acquisition can be explored. Henry said the only time he has to call Buffett is on initiatives costing more than $50 million.

Under Henry’s watch, Manville’s revenues have grown from $1.4 billion to more than $2 billion a year. “We’re now in the best shape we’ve ever been in,” Henry said (DenverPost.com, October 19, 2003).

Johns Manville told retired workers its health care costs had soared only later to revise the figures after a challenge (The Wall Street Journal, November 25, 2003):

The challenge was brought by John Leasher, a retired chief auditor, who felt something was wrong when his health premium rose dramatically. CEO Henry sent a letter to retirees acknowledging that the company’s numbers “could have been clearer, more complete and consistent.” A handout with the letter said the amount paid for benefits in 2001 wasn’t $42 million after all, but only $23 million.



Henry announced his retirement in 2004 and was succeeded by Steven Hochhauser. Buffett said in a press release: “Jerry has been a tremendous leader through an extremely trying time for the company. He has taken JM from a very difficult past to a bright and prosperous future. He was an instrumental part of my decision to purchase JM and I tried my hardest to convince him not to retire. However, I was no match for his wife, Kay, and their desire to start this new phase of their life after 42 years of business leadership.”



Johns Manville’s asbestos problem popped up in a unique way with the publication of Ray Bradbury’s Fahrenheit 451 (1953). The book concerns the censoring and burning of books. (Book paper catches fire at Fahrenheit 451 degrees.)

A rare, signed first edition of the novel, limited to 200 copies, was bound in Johns-Manville Quinterra, a chrysolite asbestos material. So ironically, the special edition copies were resistant to fire.

Oddly, a censored 1967 edition of Fahrenheit was released with the words damn and hell eliminated for distribution to schools.

For years, Fahrenheit 451 was the only book bound in asbestos. It’s still one of two to hold that distinction. In 1980, Stephen King ordered a limited number of copies of his novel Firestarter bound in asbestos as a tribute to this particular release of Fahrenheit 451.

GOING SOLAR

Johns Manville entered the solar market in 2004 through a deal with Energy Conversion Services. ECD now supplies JM with thin-film amorphous silicon-based photovoltaic (PV) laminates. JM created a new business called JM E3 (E3 Co.) to market building integrated solar products.

In 2009, Johns Manville bought a Montana-based insulation maker called Corbond Corp., a 20-year-old company with offices in Bozeman and Belgrade.



(Photo by Rocky Mountain News/Marc Piscotty)

Johns Manville Plaza in Downtown Denver

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Johns Manville

Johns Manville The Story of Warren Buffett



Johns Manville

The Johns Manville booth at the Berkshire annual meeting in 2010

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Johns Manville Playing Card

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Johns Manville

JOHNS MANVILLE TIMELINE

1859 Founded

1945 The U.S. government mandates that Navy vessels be insulated with asbestos-containing products.

1974 Johns Manville Corp. is a leading manufacturer of fiberglass, asbestos-cement pipe and PVC pipe.

1981 The company is renamed Manville Corp.

1982 Manville Corp. files for Chapter 11 in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court as a result of mounting asbestos litigation claims.

1983 The company’s first reorganization plan is filed, and Manville Corp. seeks to put claimants in asbestos litigation on the same level as other creditors to systematically handle claims.

1986 Manville Corp. files a second reorganization plan.

1988 Manville Corp. emerges from Chapter 11, and the Manville Personal Injury and Property Damage Settlement Trusts are established.

1991 Manville Corp. forms a holding company structure divided into Manville Sales Corp. and Manville Forest Products

1992 Manville Sales Corp. is renamed Schuller International Group Inc.

1994 A settlement is reached in a class-action lawsuit addressing asbestos claims, and the Manville Personal Injury Settlement Trust begins paying claims. Schuller completes an initial public bond offering and uses the proceeds to satisfy fixed-income obligations to the trust.

1996 The company changes its name to Schuller Corp.

1997 The company changes its name back to Johns Manville Corp.

1998 The company’s outstanding debt is refinanced, and 3.6 million shares are bought back from the Manville Personal Injury Settlement Trust.

2000 Johns Manville’s merger agreement with Hicks, Muse, Tate & Furst and Bear Stearns Merchant Banking, in New York, fails; and Berkshire Hathaway makes a purchase offer.

2001 Berkshire Hathaway buys Johns Manville for $13 per share.

2002 Johns Manville began making a formaldehyde-free line of fiberglass building insulation for residential and commercial use.

Steven Hochhauser is named president and chief operating officer.

2003 Johns Manville suffered a $21 million loss related to a fire at a pipe insulation manufacturing plant in Ohio.

2004 A new $100 million plant was planned in Defiance, Ohio, and opened in mid-2006.

2009 Johns Manville announced a multi-year agreement to provide insulation products for home and business as exclusive supplier to Lowe’s 1,700 stores.



126





MITEK ON THE ACQUISITION PATH


Berkshire agreed to buy roofing-components maker MiTek on June 12, 2001, for about $400 million in cash. Berkshire bought 90% of MiTek and existing management acquired the remaining 10%.

MiTek of Chesterfield, Missouri, makes steel connectors for joining roof trusses, designs engineering software, and provides services for the building-components market. Mainly MiTek buys hot-dipped galvanized coils to make metal connectors used to construct wood trusses for homes and buildings.

Buffett, who never went to see MiTek, later said the connector-plate business supplies a small item relative to the cost of a home and that a contractor wants reliability, not necessarily the lowest price. He added the Internet is not about to change the business.

Berkshire bought the business from Rexam PLC, a British conglomerate. Rexam, which makes aluminum cans and other consumption goods packages, sold MiTek, the world’s leading provider of engineered connector products, for cash to repay debt. The purchase added to a string of purchases in 2000 related to the building products industry.

The deal resulted from a telephone call from MiTek’s CEO, Eugene Toombs, to Buffett. “I sent him a long letter and brochure and product sample,” Toombs said. “A couple of days later [Buffett] called me himself. We talked for several hours, and I went to Omaha to meet with him” (St. Louis Business Journal, June 15, 2001).

“He’d like us to rapidly double the size of the business in a couple of years. He’ll provide the funding we need if we can make wise investment decisions.”

The company was started by John Calvin Jureit, the inventor of the Gang-Nail connector plate and numerous other construction industry advancements. The Gang-Nail connector plate, a simple-to-use connecting device for roof trusses, helped revolutionize the home-building industry in the 1950s, making houses more affordable. The Gang-Nail plate is made of galvanized steel with nail-like prongs protruding from it. The plate is machine-pressed into two adjoining pieces of wood.

MiTek was re-established in the early 1980s by former Ralston Purina executive Paul Connelsen who bought St. Louis-based Hydro-Air Engineering Inc. and merged it with a Miami firm to form MiTek. Connelsen sold out in the early 1990s.

As of 2006, MiTek had plants in five U.S. cities and on five continents as well as 30 sales and engineering offices around the world. It has 1,000 employees with 150 of them in the St. Louis area.

In early 2002, MiTek bought TEE-LOK Corp., a building-component supplies firm in Edenton, North Carolina. Bill Black, the former owner and CEO, remained as a consultant to TEE-LOK.

Aegis Metal Framing, a joint venture of Dietrich Metal Framing and MiTek’s Steel Framing Systems unit, began operations in early 2002. Dietrich is a subsidiary of Worthington Industries.

Aegis unites two well-known names in light-gauge steel framing. By combining the manufacturing and distribution skills of Dietrich with the software, engineering and marketing functions of MiTek, Aegis offers building component producers an array of products, including plates and fasteners, as well as a variety of services.

In early 2003, MiTek bought Production Conveyor Systems of Columbia, Missouri, a leading supplier of wall panel machinery and material-handling systems to the North American building components industry.

PCS became part of a new wall-panel division of MiTek. All PCS employees stayed with the company, including David Ohnesorge and Jason Gregory, the former owners of PCS.

In mid-2003, MiTek bought Canada-based Pacific Automation, a supplier of truss manufacturing machinery. Also in mid-2003, MiTek bought TBS Engineering of Cheltenham, England, a leading supplier of lead and battery machinery. The business had been part of Rexam.

In 2004, MiTek took a 50% stake in a steel processing service center in Phoenix in a joint venture with Long Beach, California-based NexCoil. Under the venture, MiTek and NexCoil each have a 50% interest in NexCoil Processing, which buys and makes steel for MiTek’s Phoenix location and for other customers in the southwestern United States. At the end of 2004, MiTek bought competitor Koshovich Co. of Rochester, Minnesota.

In all, MiTek has bought a dozen companies since Berkshire acquired it.

In addition to making connections for trusses, MiTek makes the trusses themselves as well as saws and other machines for truss manufacturing. They also make the software used to design trusses and other framers for home builders.

Buffett praised MiTek’s CEO Eugene Toombs in Berkshire’s 2004 Annual Report saying MiTek was on its way to becoming a mini-Berkshire. He said Toombs had made a number of brilliant add-on acquisitions.

Buffett added that MiTek had been hit with higher costs. He noted, “Steel costs at MiTek [their primary business is connectors for roof trusses] were running 100% over a year earlier. And MiTek uses 665 million pounds of steel every year. Nevertheless, the company continues to be an outstanding performer.”

On July 11, 2006, MiTek announced that three of its units made acquisitions. Collectively the acquisitions were meant to broaden the company’s range of products and services while extending its market presence in the building component manufacturing industry across North America, said Toombs.

MiTek bought Robbins Engineering which is located in Tampa, Florida. Robbins offers a complete line of connector products, truss manufacturing, material handling equipment and engineering services.

MiTek Canada Inc. bought the connector plate division of Jager Building Systems, a Calgary, Canada-based maker of connector plates and engineered wood products. The company will be called Jagar Metal Products and operates under MiTek Canada.

Hardy Frames Inc., a MiTek unit since 2001, bought Morgan Sheet Metal Inc. of Huntington Beach, California. The Hardy Frame panel is a prefabricated shear wall system used mainly in regions such as California, where seismic or high wind shear conditions present serious design challenges.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 2006 Annual Report:

MiTek, a manufacturer of connectors for roof trusses at the time we purchased it in 2001, is developing into a mini-conglomerate. At the rate it is growing, in fact, “mini” may soon be inappropriate. In purchasing MiTek for $420 million, we lent the company $200 million at 9% and bought $198 million of stock, priced at $10,000 per share. Additionally, 55 employees bought 2,200 shares for $22 million. Each employee paid exactly the same price that we did, in most cases borrowing money to do so.



And are they ever glad they did! Five years later, MiTek’s sales have tripled and the stock is valued at $71,699 per share. Despite its making 14 acquisitions, at a cost of $291 million, MiTek has paid off its debt to Berkshire and holds $35 million of cash.



Toombs sends brief monthly reports to Omaha and calls Buffett about four times a year about acquisitions or other matters. Under Buffett’s ownership, MiTek has become a world leader in supplying to the construction components industry. It has made 14 acquisitions in five years, which extends its reach to 90 countries (St. Louis Post-Dispatch, April 19, 2007).

VIRTEK

Yet another acquisition came in 2008 with the purchase of the Canadian firm Virtek Vision International. It was fending off a hostile takeover bid from Salem, New Hampshire-based StockerYale when Berkshire stepped in to buy Virtek’s most profitable unit, Image and Templating, for $26.5 million—$4 million more than—StockerYale’s regional offer for the entire company.

MiTek bought TMI of Flint, Michigan, which makes doors, air curtains, strip doors, and industrial screens.

In 2009, MiTek bought SidePlate Systems, a maker of steel frame connector technologies, based in Laguna Hills, California. SidePlate’s technologies were developed in direct response to the devastation caused by the 1994 Northridge earthquake. MiTek now serves customers in more than 90 countries.

BATTERY TECHNOLOGY GROUP

In March 2011, MiTek bought Battery Technology Group from Tech Metals, a unit of Tech Resources of Vancover, Canada. The Battery Technology Group makes battery grid technology for lead-acid battery production. A week later, MiTek bought USP Structural Connectors from Gibraltar Industries. USP designs, engineers, and makes framing and bracing connectors.

MITEK

MiTek acquired Sandell Industries which offers drainage products for the construction industry and is based in Schenectady, New York, and has a work force of 45 people.

[Not very interesting, but true.]



(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

The MiTek Booth at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2003

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value MiTek on the Acquisition Path



Ad for MiTek: Moving Deeper into Home Building Products

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

Building a Home?

MiTek booth at Berkshire’s 2006 Annual Meeting



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



127





XTRA


On July 31, 2001, Berkshire agreed to buy XTRA Corp., the truck- and container-leasing company, for about $1.3 billion in cash and assumed debt. The price tag was $578 million in cash, or $55 a share, and $710 million in debt; and the purchase came at a time of slowing economy and lowering freight demand.

Based in St. Louis, Missouri, XTRA leases trucks, trailers, cargo containers, and intermodel or piggyback trailers. The company is one of the two largest highway trailer leasors in North America with about 25% of the market. Clients include railroads, shipping lines, and trucking firms. The company manages a fleet of more than 200,000 units.

The stock had closed at $52.30 the day before the offer, so Buffett paid a modest premium for control of XTRA.

“What Berkshire has been successful in doing is paying fair prices for assets that are out of favor. It’s buying straw hats in winter time,” said analyst Alice Schroeder (Bloomberg, July 31, 2001).

XTRA’s biggest shareholder, Julian Robertson’s mutual funds with 27% of the shares, agreed to the sale. Robertson’s previous attempt to sell—a $1.9 billion agreement with Apollo Management—collapsed in 1998.

XTRA benefited from Berkshire’s Triple-A credit rating because of the frequent borrowing needed by a leasing company. XTRA had been rated seven notches below that at “BBB+” by Standard & Poor’s. Indeed, after Berkshire’s purchase, XTRA’s credit rating was upgraded because of Berkshire’s halo effect.

“The association with Berkshire Hathaway will allow XTRA to both grow its business and benefit from a lower cost of capital,” a prepared statement said.

Shipping-container leasing is really a finance business. Cost of capital is a big item and could give the acquisition an XTRA kick, rendering Berkshire not lost in transportation.

Buffett made his decision after seeing Julian Robertson on television (Bloomberg, August 5, 2001).

In March 2000, at the climax of the dot-com frenzy, Robertson said on television that he planned to close Tiger Management because his style of picking undervalued companies was out of favor in that dot-com era.

Robertson said he planned to sell most of the fund right away and sell off such stakes as XTRA at a later time.

Buffett called Robertson and said he’d “be interested in taking the XTRA stock off his hands.” Eventually the sale materialized.

XTRA announced on June 3, 2003, that it had bought some of the assets of Leasing USA Inc., a unit of Gainey Holdings. The purchase price was not disclosed.

Bill Franz, president of XTRA, said in a statement: “Acquiring the trailers of Leasing USA will enhance our equipment pool and bolster our ability to serve customers through our street corner strategy.”

XTRA and Milestone Equipment Corp. announced on July 25, 2003, that Milestone’s 3,600 unit intermodel fleet would be consolidated into XTRA’s operations.

Bob Thull, Milestone’s president, said in a statement: “The joining of operational and accounting resources will achieve necessary economics of scale for both companies in an extremely adverse financial operating environment for intermodel trailers.”

The addition of the 3,600 unit Milestone Fleet replaced equipment that XTRA had retired over the past 18 months and allowed XTRA to maintain its critical mass in the shrinking intermodel trailer market over the long term. XTRA has disposed of its containers and intermodel units to concentrate on trailer leasing.

In late 2003, XTRA Lease was picked to provide 1,200 trailers to Schneider Logistics to deliver GM auto parts.

In 2004, CEO was added to Bill Franz’s title; he had been president of XTRA’s more than 700 employees for 11 years. Coinciding with his promotion, XTRA offices were relocated to the St. Louis headquarters.



Going the XTRA Mile

XTRA is a leader in transportation equipment

leasing—helping the world move forward.

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

The Story of Warren Buffett



XTRA’s CEO Bill Franz

Of Permanent Value XTRA



128





FRUIT OF THE LOOM


B

erkshire’s purchase of Fruit of the Loom (FOL) in late 2001 was a headline writer’s delight.

Would it be: “Bricks, Boots, and Briefs” or “Buffett’s into Underwear” or “Buffett ‘Shorts’ the Market?” or “Who Will Sew His Name in All That Underwear?”

Or perhaps—“In the Buff-ett.”

Buffett said it best during the shareholders weekend in 2002: “We cover the asses of the masses.” But not always. FOL introduced a thong collection in 2002. A press release said: “Constructed of soft, breathable, 100% ringspun cotton, the Fruit of the Loom thong has a satin trim on the waist and legs for an updated look, and features a variety of prints ranging from retro geometrics to safari-inspired animal skins to coordinating solid colors.”

Buffett said Berkshire really bought Fruit of the Loom because “Charlie said we have to get into women’s underwear and he’s 78. It’s now or never.” Buffett added that Fruit of the Loom is a product “with broad appeal.”

In any event, Berkshire offered to buy the apparently undervalued underwear and apparel maker out of bankruptcy after bids were not accepted from a Russell Corp.-Blackstone Group partnership and a Gildan Activewear Inc.-Texas Pacific Group team.

Berkshire offered about $835 million in cash for the company. Berkshire had invested in Fruit of the Loom before.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 2001 Annual Report: “This was an unusual bankruptcy in that interest payments on senior debt were continued without interruption, which meant we earned about a 15% current return. Our holdings grew to 10% of Fruit’s senior debt, which will probably end up returning us about 70% of face value. Through this investment, we indirectly reduced our purchase price for the whole company by a small amount.” The final cost for Fruit was $730 million.

Back in 1985, Berkshire accumulated a six percent stake in Fruit of the Loom’s former owner, Northwest Industries.

Fruit of the Loom, a 130-year-old Chicago firm with locations in the Cayman Islands, filed for bankruptcy protection in 1999. It was hobbled by debt and manufacturing and inventory problems in a time when all U.S. textile makers were suffering from an influx of inexpensive imports, particularly from Asia.

Buffett’s other venture into textiles—his investment in Berkshire in the 1960s—was a partial mistake. But while the textile business closed down in 1985, Berkshire still thrived.

At the time of Berkshire’s proposed purchase, Fruit of the Loom owed about $1.2 billion to secured lenders and bondholders and about $400 million to unsecured bondholders. Fruit of the Loom had $2.35 billion in assets as of October 1999, just before its bankruptcy filing and then lost money during the reorganization period.

The company is one of the largest producers of men’s and boys’ underwear, activewear for the screenprint T-shirt and fleece market, and women’s and girls’ underwear. It employs 23,900 people in more than 50 locations, and claims about one-third of the U.S. market for men’s and boys’ underwear.

The company sells mainly under the Fruit of the Loom, BVD (BVD was founded in 1876 by Messrs. Bradley, Vorhees, and Day), Screen Stars, and Best-brand names in a fiercely competitive industry. A six-pack of easy, breezy Fruit of the Loom men’s briefs at Wal-Mart sells for about $5.44.

Buffett said, “We’ve agreed to buy Fruit of the Loom for two major reasons: the strength of the brand and the management talent of John Holland.” Holland, who spent 34 years with the company until he retired in 1996, was called back in 2000 to run the company.

Holland and Buffett had a two-minute conversation and a handshake about Holland’s pay on the morning of May 5, 2002. No lawyers. No contracts. The 38-word compensation package is based on a certain slice of the profits of Fruit of the Loom. “There is no cap on the arrangement,” Buffett said at a press conference during Berkshire’s shareholder’s weekend.

In 1985, Fruit of the Loom was taken over in a leveraged buyout by financier William Farley who later took the company public. He was known mainly for two things: doing ads in his Fruit of the Loom briefs and a failed run for president (maybe the two are related). The company moved production to offshore sites in an attempt to lower costs, but the moves led to quality-control and inventory problems. Farley stepped down in 1999 when the company sought bankruptcy protection.

The company’s stock reached $44 a share in 1977, then fell below $1 in 2000 when finally the shares were delisted.

In this, as in other cases, Berkshire is an attractive buyer because it can make a purchase with far less red tape than most companies. Often it waives a due diligence review. It doesn’t need to get shareholder votes or board approval. It doesn’t have to raise financing or usually worry about antitrust issues.

The purchase of Fruit of the Loom was the second time Buffett bought a company once owned by Ben Graham. The first, of course, was GEICO. In the 1940s, Graham-Newman bought control of Philadelphia and Reading Coal which bought a number of businesses including Union Underwear. One of Union’s brands was Fruit of the Loom.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 2001 Annual Report:

In August 1955, I was one of five employees, including two secretaries, working for the three managers of Graham-Newman Corporation, a New York investment company. Graham-Newman controlled Philadelphia and Reading Coal and Iron (“P&R”), an anthracite producer that had excess cash, a tax loss carryforward, and a declining business. At the time, I had a significant portion of my limited net worth invested in P&R shares, reflecting my faith in the business talents of my bosses, Ben Graham, Jerry Newman, and Howard (Micky) Newman.



This faith was rewarded when P&R purchased the Union Underwear Company from Jack Goldfarb for $15 million. Union (though it was then only a licensee of the name) produced Fruit of the Loom underwear. The company possessed $5 million in cash—$2.5 million of which P&R used for the purchase—and was earning about $3 million pre-tax, earnings that could be sheltered by the tax position of P&R. And, oh yes: Fully $9 million of the remaining $12.5 million due was satisfied by non-interest-bearing notes, payable from 50% of any earnings Union had in excess of $1 million. (Those were the days; I get goosebumps just thinking about such deals.)



Subsequently, Union bought the licensor of the Fruit of the Loom name and, along with P&R, was merged into Northwest Industries. Fruit went on to achieve annual pre-tax earnings exceeding $200 million.



John Holland was responsible for Fruit’s operations in its most bountiful years. In 1996, however, John retired, and management loaded the company with debt, in part to make a series of acquisitions that proved disappointing. Bankruptcy followed. John was then rehired, and he undertook a major reworking of operations. Before John’s return, deliveries were chaotic, costs soared, and relations with key customers deteriorated. While correcting these problems, John also reduced employment from a bloated 40,000 to 23,000. In short, he’s been restoring the old Fruit of the Loom, albeit in a much more competitive environment.



Stepping into Fruit’s bankruptcy proceedings, we made a proposal to creditors to which we attached no financing conditions, even though our offer had to remain outstanding for many months. We did, however, insist on a very unusual proviso. John had to be available to continue serving as CEO after we took over. To us, John and the brand are Fruit’s key assets.



I was helped in this transaction by my friend and former boss, Micky Newman, now 81. What goes around truly does come around.



Buffett has said he wouldn’t be surprised if Fruit of the Loom eventually earned $130–140 million pre-tax a year.

However, the continued rise of imported textiles from China and the Far East led to the closing of Fruit of the Loom’s plant in Harlingen, Texas, in 2003. Almost 800 employees were let go as the area’s last textile plant shut down.

In 2004, Fruit of the Loom said it planned to close both its large plants in Ireland and move production to Morocco. FOL said Ireland no longer was cost-effective for its spinning, knitting, and dyeing operations. The plants had a total of more than 600 employees who were told Irish operations would cease in five years; this gave them time to retrain and look for new jobs.

FOL made Ireland its major European manufacturing base in 1987 and employed more than 3,000 people at its peak of operations there. FOL already has 1,700 employees in Morocco working at a fraction of the cost.

In 2006, Berkshire’s Fruit of the Loom still had employees in Northern Ireland; and Berkshire and Fruit of the Loom agreed to abide by the principles of fair employment standards set out in 1984 by late Irish statesman, Nobel Peace laureate, and founder of Amnesty International, Sean MacBride.

Fruit of the Loom and Marvel Entertainment Inc. collaborated in 2007 to develop and make children’s underwear lines based on several of Marvel’s characters, including Iron Man, the Incredible Hulk, and a range of other Marvel heroes and villains.

RUSSELL CORP.

Berkshire and Russell Corp., a sportswear manufacturer long based in Alexander City, Alabama, announced on April 17, 2006, a definitive merger agreement. This insures one thing: Berkshire will stay stocked with great new T-shirts as the years go by.

Russell stockholders received $18 a share for the 33.2 million shares in cash or about $600 million for the company. Russell stock was trading at $13.30 at the time of the announcement, 35% below Berkshire’s offer.

Russell now reports to Fruit of the Loom CEO John Holland. Indeed, it was Holland who first contacted Russell about a deal in September 2005.

Jack Ward, Russell’s CEO, who originally opposed the deal, said in a statement that becoming part of Berkshire puts Russell in a stronger financial position. “Russell will be better positioned against our worldwide competition in all three segments of our business and that includes apparel, sports equipment, and athletic shoes. We also owe our gratitude to the thousands of people who have played roles in the development of this organization from a small Alabama apparel operation founded in 1902 to a major player in the global goods marketplace today.”

Ward, who became CEO in 1998, retired when Berkshire’s buyout of Russell was completed on August 2, 2006.

Immediately after the purchase of Russell, Berkshire paid off Russell’s $520 million in debt instantly transforming Russell from a debt-ladened company into a debt-free enterprise. Much of the debt that was paid off had an expensive rate of 9.25%.

Russell’s major brands include Russell Athletics, Jerzees, Brooks, Huffy Sports, Bike, Moving Comfort, Mossy Oak, Spalding, and American Athletics Inc. (AAI).

AAI of Jefferson, Iowa, makes wall pads, balance beams, volleyball poles, cheerleading equipment, and basketball hoops. The hoops are used in 16 of 30 NBA arenas.

In 2007, Spalding, the world’s largest sports equipment supplier, signed Ohio State’s Greg Oden, the NBA’s No. 1 pick, and Washington Wizards guard Gilbert Arenas to endorse its line of basketballs and backboards.

Russell, which has about 14,000 employees, (1,300 are in the process of being laid off as more production moves overseas) is a leading provider of team uniforms and is the largest provider of basketball equipment in the world. Spalding and Huffy have long-term contracts with the National Basketball Association.

Russell was founded by Ben Russell in 1902 when Russell’s assets included eight knitting machines and 12 sewing machines. The first finished product was a lady’s undershirt, or summer-weight vest. The mill’s beginning capacity was 150 garments a day. During his career, Russell launched many businesses and built an entire town around his manufacturing complex in Alexander City, Alabama. By 1974, Russell Mill Village was home to 4,000 people. Russell built a community with houses, a church, a hospital, and a school with the state’s finest gymnasium.

A Russell family trust owned 10% of the company’s shares at the time of Berkshire’s buyout. Had the deal not gone through, Russell would have had to pay Berkshire a $22 million termination fee.

Russell’s common stock began trading on the New York Stock Exchange on December 26, 1985. Sales reached $1 billion in 1995. In the 1990s, low-priced competition from foreign apparel makers challenged Russell, forcing it to move much of its production of sweatshirts and T-shirts to Mexico and Honduras.

At one time, Russell supplied uniforms for Major League Baseball teams and Southeastern Conference teams, including the University of Alabama and Auburn University. In 1967, Russell invented the tear-away football jersey. Although Russell lost those contracts, it still supplies NBA basketballs and outfits 500 Division I teams.

In 1999, offices in Atlanta, Georgia, opened dual headquarters with Alexander City.

Russell had its share of troubles including operational issues. Hurricane Katrina forced half of the ports that Russell uses to close. Russell was faced with higher energy, transportation, and raw material costs.

Russell’s economic woes continued. In 2000, the University of Michigan said it was ending its apparel license agreement, becoming the twelth university to do so in response to Russell’s decision to close a unionized factory in Honduras. Russell said in a statement the closing was caused by economic considerations and not the presence of the union.

VANITY FAIR’S INTIMATE BRANDS

VF Corp. of Greensboro, North Carolina, said in January 2007 that it was selling its Intimate brand to Berkshire’s Fruit of the Loom for $350 million.

The deal for the underwear and pajama unit—a Berkshire effort to get more intimate with the American consumer—was to buy VF’s intimate apparel line which includes Vanity Fair, Lily of France, and many others.

VF’s intimates business had sales of $800 million and about $50 million in operating income in 2006. The business operates as Vanity Fair Brands, a new, wholly owned subsidiary of Fruit of the Loom.

Berkshire’s Fruit of the Loom will keep VF’s current management team in place, as long as they continue to run the company from headquarters in Alpharetta, Georgia, and Igualala, Spain. Offshore management is based in McAllen, Texas. There are seven sewing plants and a cutting plant in Mexico; two sewing plants in Honduras; a distribution center in Mission, Texas; two distribution centers, an edge/finishing plant, cutting plant, and administrative offices in Monroeville, Alabama; a knitting plant in Jackson, Alabama; and offices in New York.

Vanity Fair intimate apparel includes sports bras, panties, and girdles, with products in all price ranges.

For some time, workers in Monroeville and Jackson, Alabama, had feared the worst—closure of all local operations. The Berkshire purchase offered new hope for greater stability with pledges by Fruit of the Loom’s John Holland to bring the name back to the forefront of lingerie markets (Mobile Press-Register, January 29, 2007).

The paper quoted Alice Lee, 95, sister of Harper Lee, author of To Kill a Mockingbird, as saying she remembers the long struggle by residents to get the small manufacturing company in 1937.

“When Vanity Fair came here,” Lee said, “the population of Monroeville was 1,700. We had to raise $30,000 to secure a building for them. We formed a group and sold bonds for $50 and $75 when money was hard to find. I borrowed the money to buy mine.”

Vanity Fair grew, adding Lee Jeans as well as other companies. Vanity Fair Mills started with 100 employees and $20 million in sales in 1937. By the 1970s, sales had risen to $200 million. In 1995, sales totaled some $500 million, with more then 10,000 employees worldwide.

Vanity Fair, long one of Alabama’s largest employers, lost hundreds of jobs over the years to cheaper foreign labor.

Fruit of the Loom’s acquisitions of Russell and VF’s intimate apparel business together added a total of $2.2 billion in sales and 23,000 employees.



Every Day Can Be Good.

Michael Jordan has promoted Hanes underwear, and Jim Palmer has represented Jockey. So will Buffett be modeling Fruit of the Loom? That remains to be seen, but what we do know is that Buffett wears Fruit of the Loom briefs (Fortune.com, November 5, 2001). Munger said he had not bought under-wear recently and therefore at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2002 was “inappropriately dressed.”

The Story of Warren Buffett

I Wear the Briefs

This Fruit of the Loom logo features Buffett wearing the company’s briefs. In 2002, Fruit of the Loom launched an ad campaign bringing back the fruit guys—originally featured in TV commercials in the 1970s. In one commercial the four characters—Leaf, Green Grape, Purple Grape, and Apple—show up at a fashion shoot for ladies’ lingerie and are ignored by the models.



(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

Of Permanent Value Fruit of the Loom



(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

Top Banana

Fruit of the Loom CEO

John Holland

Fruit of the Loom The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo courtesy of Jeff Hull)

Fruit of the Loom booth at the 2006 Berkshire Annual Meeting

Of Permanent Value Fruit of the Loom



(Photo by Jeff Hull)

Buffett sang with The Fruit of the Loom Fruits during the 2005 Berkshire Annual Meeting weekend.



Fruit Collection

Fruit of the Loom Booth at the 2008 Annual Meeting

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Buffett visits the Fruit of the Loom booth

during Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2006.

(Photo by Jeff Hull)





129





LARSON-JUHL


Berkshire bought Larson-Juhl, the world’s largest commercial frame maker, on December 17, 2001. Berkshire paid about $225 million in cash for the privately held custom framing business in Atlanta, Georgia.

Chairman Craig Ponzio was the sole shareholder in the company and sold his 100% stake for cash. He stayed on with the company as chairman and designer, and Steve McKenzie stayed on as president and CEO.

Buffett said in a press release, “Craig Ponzio has done a remarkable job of building a wonderful business and is leaving the business in good hands under the leadership of Steve McKenzie.”

Larson-Juhl said it expected no changes in the way it designs, manufactures, or distributes products from its custom framing business, which serves about 18,000 framing shops.

The company makes and distributes framing materials including wood and metal moldings, mat and foam board, glass and hardware—such as mat-board cutters and joining machines. Brand names are Larson-Juhl Classic Collection, Craig Ponzio Signature Collection, and Clark.

Ponzio joined Larson Picture Frame Inc. in 1973 and bought the company in 1981 when it had sales of about $3 million. In 1988, Larson Picture Frame bought Juhl-Pacific Corp., creating Larson-Juhl. The company later changed its name to Albecca.

It had sales of $314 million in fiscal 2001 and a profit of $31.6 million. “Picture perfect,” Berkshire says. The company, with about 2,000 employees worldwide, is the U.S. leader in custom-made picture frames; it’s also the leader in Canada and much of Europe. Larson-Juhl’s customers include custom frame shops and craft shops in the U.S. and Europe. The company has 24 facilities across the U.S. as well as in 14 countries around the world. It has six manufacturing plants, including one in Hazelbrouck, France, where the art of water gilding, an arduous process of making golden frames, has been part of the company’s legacy for more than 100 years. Begun in 1903 by George Senelar and J. Silder, the Hazelbrouck factory was bought by Larson-Juhl in 1995 (Veranda, May-June 2003).

After Berkshire’s purchase of Larson-Juhl, a shareholder remarked, “We’ve been framed!”

Buffett told CNBC (December 20, 2001): “We just announced the purchase of a custom framing company here [in Atlanta]. The first I heard about the company was a couple of weeks ago.The fellow gave me a call and I liked the way it sounded on the phone. He met with me two days later. We made a deal in 90 minutes, and we signed it 10 days later.”

Buffett saw quickly that the business had a “huge moat” around it because of its service which gets 95% of frames ordered to the customer the next day.

Buffett has since said he had never thought about the picture frame business but could tell almost instantly that he wanted it because it had 18,000 locations with a sales force that called on all clients six times a year. Also attractive to Buffett was the fact that the company had a real investment in a sales force, distribution, and low-price sensitivity that would be hard for another business to beat.

Buffett said, “It would make no sense to compete with it – the investment would never pay off. Even if you did have hundreds of millions of dollars, it would be impossible to get the framing outlets to switch distributors. The business has an enormous moat.”

After the purchase, Albecca raised the number of its board seats from three to five. The two new members were Buffett and Berkshire CFO Marc Hamburg.

In 2003, Berkshire paid off $135 million of Albecca’s pre-acquisition debt.

Larson-Juhl has partnered with Global ReLeaf to set up the Larson-Juhl Global ReLeaf Forest Foundation which has planted more than 100,000 trees worldwide.

In 2008, Larson-Juhl’s newly launched online art division, Artaissance, was tapped to provide most of the custom art framing on Donald Trump’s reality show Celebrity Apprentice.



Craig Ponzio

(Larson-Juhl website)



Steve McKenzie

(Courtesy of Larson-Juhl)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Larson-Juhl Custom Frame

(Larson-Juhl customer card)



(Photo courtesy of Larson-Juhl)

Framing Nature



(Photo courtesy of Larson-Juhl)

Framing for Home Decor



Of Permanent Value Larson_Juhl



(Photo courtesy of Larson-Juhl)

In Profile



(Photo courtesy of Larson-Juhl)

Frame Selections





(Photo courtesy of Larson-Juhl)

Bird’s Nest



(Photo courtesy of Larson-Juhl)

Still Life



(Photo by

Andrew Kilpatrick)

You Ought to Be in Pictures.

The Larson-Juhl booth at Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2004 displays picture frames.





(Photo courtesy of Larson-Juhl)

Pastoral Scene



130





GARAN


Berkshire and clothing maker Garan Inc. announced on July 2, 2002 that they would merge with Berkshire, paying $60 a share for Garan for a total of about $270 million. Garan traded at $56.20 the day of the announcement.

Best known for its Garanimals brand, Garan makes it easy for children to pick clothes that match by placing safari animal-themed tags on separates. A child knows that pants and shirts go together if they have matching animal tags.

More than 80% of Garan’s business is children’s wear, but the company also makes women’s and men’s apparel.

Garan sells 90% of its Garanimals and Bobbie Brooks children’s wear mainly to a single customer, retailing giant Wal-Mart. About half of Garan’s production comes from its plants in the Caribbean.

The company, with 5,000 employees, grew earnings per share at 27% over the five-year period before the merger with an annual sales increase of 12%. In fiscal 2001, Garan had net earnings of $22.6 million, up from $17 million in 2000.

Garan had sales of $257 million in 2001 and practically no long-term debt.

Executives of Garan, who owned more than 20% of the stock, said they would vote for the merger and stay on after the merger. Seymour Lichtenstein is the CEO.

According to the merger papers, Buffett’s decision to buy, setting up the meat of the deal, occurred in one day: “On June 12, 2002, representatives of Goldman Sachs contacted Mr. Buffett regarding a potential strategic acquisition of Garan and the proposed price at which Garan would be interested in pursuing a transaction. The following day [author’s italics], Mr. Buffett advised Goldman Sachs that Berkshire Hathaway would be interested in pursuing an acquisition of Garan at $60 per share in cash.”

In 2009, Wal-Mart added a line of Garanimals play and learning toys to its stores. The items featured brightly packaged apparel for youngsters.



The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Rick Casterline)

Garan’s booth at Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2005



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Something for the Under ‘10’ Shareholders

The Garan display booth at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2004 had a state-fair theme.

Of Permanent Value Garan



131





BERKSHIRE’S FINANCIAL BUSINESSES


Berkshire has a business segment called “Finance and Financial Products Businesses.” Very little is said or known about this segment, but it is increasingly showing up on Berkshire’s balance sheet as a money maker. This hodgepodge of businesses, special situations, loans, and Buffett’s own trading strategies earned $1 billion in 2002, achieving financial nirvana. Some years back the unit was described as consisting of Scott Fetzer Financial Group, Berkshire Hathaway Credit Corporation, and Berkshire Hathaway Life Insurance Company of Nebraska.

Berkshire’s 1998 Annual Report described it this way: “Berkshire’s finance and financial products businesses consists primarily of the financial products businesses of General Re, the finance businesses of Scott Fetzer Financial Group and a life insurance subsidiary in the business of selling annuities. General Re’s financial products businesses consist of General Re Financial Products (GRFP) group and a collection of other businesses that provide investment, insurance, reinsurance, and real estate management and brokerage services.”

The unit includes a small commercial real estate operation as well as a fledgling annuity business.

The 2002 Annual Report described the unit as consisting of “proprietary trading, real estate financing, transportation equipment leasing, commercial, and consumer lending and risk management products.”

In this collection is General Re’s Financial Products, a derivatives dealer now in runoff, acquired with the buyout of General Re at the end of 1998. The Scott Fetzer Financial Group finances sales of Scott Fetzer, Kirby, and World Book products. Berkshire Life Insurance, established in 1993, sells structured settlement annuity products which make periodic payments to personal-injury claimants.

Berkshire’s Mike Goldberg, who heads “special projects,” has a hand in these increasingly important operations.

Occasionally, rumors crop up about buying Florida land loans or financing real estate projects, but the segment seems a “mystery wrapped in an enigma” because so little is known about it.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 2001 Annual Report: “Our finance and financial products line of business now includes XTRA, General Re Securities (which is in a run-off mode that will continue for an extended period), and a few other relatively small operations. The bulk of the assets and liabilities in this segment, however, arise from a few fixed-income strategies, involving highly liquid AAA securities, that I manage. [Just call this business Pure Buffett.] This activity, which only makes sense when certain market relationships exist, has produced good returns in the past and has reasonable prospects for continuing to do so over the next year or two.”

Berkshire’s stake in Value Capital L.P. falls under Berkshire’s financial business section. Berkshire’s 2002 Annual Report said: “On July 1, 1998, Value Capital L.P., a limited partnership, commenced operations. A wholly owned subsidiary of Berkshire is a limited partner in Value Capital. The partnership’s investment objective is to achieve income and capital growth from investments and arbitrage in fixed income investments. Berkshire currently accounts for this investment pursuant to the equity method. Since inception Berkshire has contributed $430 million to the partnership; and other partners, including the general partners, have contributed $20 million. Profits and losses of the partnership are allocated to the partners based on each partner’s investment. At December 31, 2002, the carrying value of $603 million (including Berkshire’s share of accumulated earnings of $173 million) is included as a component of other assets of finance and financial products businesses. Berkshire possesses no management authority over the activities conducted by Value Capital, and it does not provide any financial support of the obligations of this partnership or of the other partners. As a limited partner, Berkshire’s exposure to loss is limited to the carrying value of its investment. Berkshire’s Value Capital investment at the end of the second quarter of 2004 amounted to $638 million.”

Berkshire’s second quarter report in 2004 said: “Assets of the finance and financial products businesses totaled $49.0 billion at June 30, 2004 and $28.3 billion at December 31, 2003. Liabilities totaled $42.2 billion at June 30, 2004 and $22.0 billion at December 31, 2003. Finance assets and liabilities reflect the consolidation of Value Capital beginning on January 1, 2004. As of June 30, 2004, Value Capital’s assets and liabilities totaled $24.1 billion and $23.4 billion, respectively. Assets owned by Value Capital as of June 30, 2004 primarily included investments in fixed maturity securities-trading ($6.9 billion) and securities purchased under agreements to resell ($15.9 billion), while liabilities primarily included securities sold but not yet purchased ($13.9 billion) and securities sold under agreements to repurchase ($8.7 billion). As of December 31, 2003, the net investment in Value Capital ($634 million) was included in other assets of the finance and financial products businesses.”

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 2003 Annual Report: “Because of accounting abuses at Enron and elsewhere, rules will soon be instituted that are likely to require that Value’s assets and liabilities be consolidated on Berkshire’s balance sheet. We regard this requirement as inappropriate, given that Value’s liabilities—which usually are above $20 billion—are in no way ours. Over time, other investors will join us as partners in Value. When enough do, the need for us to consolidate Value will disappear.”

In 2004, Value Capital accepted investments from new limited partners and redeemed $125 million of Berkshire’s investment. As a result, Berkshire’s economic interest in Value Capital declined from about 90% to about 62%. Berkshire’s investment in Value Capital at the end of 2004 was $503 million. Berkshire wound up its investment in Value Capital in 2006. Buffett made a big bet buying bonds in 2001. He began to make profits when he began to sell in 2002 (Bloomberg, November 27, 2002).

“The finance unit of Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway more than doubled its assets last year to $42 billion by buying U.S. Treasury and agency bonds, according to SEC filings,” Bloomberg reported.

“BH Finance, a division of Berkshire’s finance group, loaded up last year on Treasuries and bonds sold by government-chartered companies such as Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae,” according Bloomberg. The story went on to say that leveraged investments financed at low interest rates of the time made these trading strategies successful.

“The leveraged purchases allowed Buffett, who runs BH Finance’s trading, to take advantage of the gap between his funding costs—through repurchase agreements—and yields on Treasury bonds. A so-called repo is an agreement in which the seller of a security agrees to buy it back at a specified price and date. Some repo rates have fallen below 1%, less than one-fourth the 4.07% yield on benchmark Treasury 10-year notes, after the Federal Reserve cut benchmark interest rates to a 41-year-low,” the story said.

Berkshire’s 2002 Annual Report said: “Pre-tax earnings of the finance and

financial products group in 2002 increased $497 million (95.8%) to $1,016

million. Pre-tax earnings of BH Finance in 2002 increased $425 million from 2001, due primarily to lower interest expense as a result of declining short-term rates as well as an increase of $152 million in realized investment gains.”

To Repeat: The finance segment made $1 billion pre-tax in 2002.

During a talk to Harvard Business School students in October 2003, Buffett replied to a question about derivatives by saying, “I have in fact made five hundred million off of derivatives in two recent transactions.” One problem, he added, was because of their inherent risk, he “simply can’t build a business around them” (Harbus, October 27, 2003).

The Financial Products segment is showing rapidly increasing annual value with the difference between assets and liabilities as follows:

Year End 1995: $ 72M Year End 2000: $2,099M

Year End 1996: $ 118M Year End 2001: $3,800M

Year End 1997: $ 182M Year End 2002: $4,852M

Year End 1998: $1,464M Year End 2003: $6,375M

Year End 1999: $2,006M Year End 2004: $9,674M

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Financial Businesses



(Ad in The Wall Street Journal,

February 2, 2000)



This notice from The Wall Street Journal appears to be about a financing by Berkshire’s financial business.



132





BERKADIA’S ROLE


The Finova (stands for “financial innovators”) Group announced a $6 billion loan on February 27, 2001, from Berkshire and Leucadia National to restructure its struggling financial services business.

The $6 billion ($5.6 billion in the end) loan was made by Berkadia, a special purpose commercial lender entity formed for the purpose and owned jointly by Berkshire and Leucadia.

Leucadia—founded in 1978 by Ian Cumming and Joseph Steinberg with $53,000 they borrowed on their credit cards—has a reputation for running struggling financial services companies. It has been written up in the press as a sort of “Baby Berkshire.”

The three companies said in a joint press release: “Berkadia expects to finance its funding commitment and Berkshire Hathaway will provide Berkadia with a 90% primary guarantee of such financing, with Leucadia lenders providing a 10% primary guarantee and Berkshire also providing a secondary promise for Leucadia. Upon completion of the reorganization as currently contemplated, Berkshire Hathaway and Leucadia together will receive common stock representing 51% [in the end, 50%] of Finova’s outstanding shares and the public will retain its existing shares. Berkadia will be entitled to designate a majority of Finova’s board of directors.”

Finova’s primary line of business is commercial lending, financing the purchase of used aircraft for charter companies, as well as backing holiday resorts.

Lawrence S. Hershfield, a Leucadia executive, was appointed the chief restructuring officer of Finova. In 2002, Thomas Mara, Leucadia’s treasurer, took Hershfield’s job as Finova’s CEO. Leucadia’s 2002 Annual Report explained Hershfield’s departure this way: “Larry has gone to seek his fortune doing transactions for his own account.”

The Wall Street Journal (February 28, 2001) reported that sources said Berkshire already owned $1.4 billion of Finova’s debt, including $300 million in bank debt and $1.1 billion in public bonds.

Finova’s bankruptcy filing was the seventh largest in U.S. history. Had it been allowed to default on its debt, it would, at the time, have been the largest failure since the Depression.

When it emerged from bankruptcy, the top officers of Finova were Leucadia’s Cumming and Steinberg.

In January 2001, Finova, which spun off from Dial Corp. in the early ’90s, announced the end of an agreement for Leucadia to directly invest $350 million in Finova.

One reason Finova filed bankruptcy was the difficulty of winning unanimous creditor approval of the bailout plan. Under a bankruptcy filing, such a move requires only two-thirds creditor approval in order to commit the entire group.

“It’s a way to legally bind dissident creditors to the restructuring,” said Phoenix bankruptcy attorney Tom Salerno, adding that in such a proceeding most of the parties are in agreement prior to entering Chapter 11 (Arizona Republic, March 4, 2001).

Under the bankruptcy plan, proceeds from the $6 billion loan were distributed on a pro-rata basis to holders of about $11 billion in debt. The remaining $5 billion were covered by new 10-year notes issued by Finova and subordinated to Berkadia. After the term loan was paid off, 95% of the company’s cash was used to make principal payments to senior note holders, and 5% was distributed to common shareholders. Essentially, creditors got 55 cents on the dollar in cash and some notes.

Among Finova’s 20 largest creditors was Berkshire itself. Finova owed Berkshire’s BH Finance unit $127,500,000.

On June 3, 2001, a judge approved Finova’s third plan, one that allowed Berkshire to loan $6 billion (financed by a third-party lending facility) to Finova which planned to use that money plus its cash reserves to pay creditors $7.35 billion. Creditors got senior notes, bringing the transaction’s possible value to more than $8 billion. Berkshire offered to pay 70 cents on the dollar upfront, which would be made up of a Berkadia loan to Finova and cash on hand. Finova issued new senior notes with an interest rate of 7.5%.

The loan was arranged through FleetBoston. Buffett said: “Fleet’s capital market capabilities were essential to completing the transaction. They’ve been a great resource in my 30-year association with them, and they delivered outstanding results in this very important deal.”

Fleet acted as sole arranger of the transaction. Seventeen other institutions participated in the deal. A total of $6 billion was raised, but by the time of the closing, Berkshire only needed $5.6 billion. In this event, Berkshire was borrowing cheap and lending at a high rate. And lending a very large sum.

Finova said its plan was to maximize the value of its loan portfolio through an “orderly liquidation.” The company, which listed assets of $12.4 billion in its bankruptcy filing, said it expected to have just over $4 billion in assets in 2005.

Berkshire, already owning $1.43 billion of Finova bank and bond debt, agreed to buy as much as $500 million of those senior notes at 70% of face value.

Buffett, who didn’t use an investment bank once in the whole process, personally spoke with Finova’s largest creditors (The Wall Street Journal, June 11, 2001).

The plan, which was approved in August 2001, cleared the way for Finova to emerge from bankruptcy.

Since the Chapter 11 filing March 7, 2001, the company ceased writing new business and continued to shrink. By August 2001, Finova employed 662 people, down from 900; and its loan portfolio slipped from about $9 billion to about $8 billion (Arizona Republic, August 11, 2001).

At the company’s annual meeting in 2001, Leucadia Chairman Ian Cumming gave a glimpse of what it’s like to do a deal with Buffett. “It’s exactly like he writes in the annual reports. You call him up, say ‘This is the deal,’ and he gives you an answer like that,” said Cumming, snapping his fingers.

In early 2002, Finova stock was delisted by the New York Stock Exchange because it had traded below the $1 minimum share price for more than 30 consecutive days. The stock, nearly worthless, then began trading in the over-the-counter market.

In Finova’s 2001 Annual Report, Cumming, Steinberg, and Hershfield described Finova’s problems: “No sector of the economy has been harder hit by the impact of September 11th than has aviation, and within that sector, the most seriously affected assets have been older vintage aircraft owned and financed by Finova.… Finova reduced the carrying value of its aircraft portfolio (primarily through increases to reserves and write-downs) by approximately $1.2 billion during the third and fourth quarter of 2001.”

In 2002, Finova sold most of its performing assets to GE Capital for $485 million.

Despite the horrific financial landscape that played out subsequent to the deal, Berkshire made out well. The economics of the deal itself won Berkshire hundreds of millions of dollars in fees and interest from the bailout loan, in essence, improving and enhancing its original debt position.

CAPMARK’S ASSETS

Back in 2006, a KKR-led group bought 78% of Capmark from GMAC for about $1.5 billion and the repayment of $7.6 billion in debt.

Berkadia surfaced again in 2009 when the Berkshire-Leucadia partnership agreed to pay as much as $490 million for Capmark Financial Group’s loan servicing and mortgage business. In a complex deal, Berkadia was paid $40 million to enter into an agreement to buy Capmark were Capmark to decide to sell within 60 days. This made room for a better offer if Capmark were to file for bankruptcy which it did on October 25, 2009. The deal gave money-losing Capmark the right to sell the assets to the joint venture. In the end, Berkadia bought the Horsham, Pennsylvania, company for $468 million, up from the “stalking horse” bid of $400 million. Capmark is one of the largest U.S. real estate finance companies (the former General Motors loan unit hurt by the credit crisis and owned by KKR, Goldman Sachs and others).

It’s not known how much debt Berkadia would be assuming.

The purchase was completed on December 15, 2009. With it, Berkadia hired more than 1,022 of Capmark’s 1,500 employees.

Berkadia originates loans for Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae, the FHA, and some life insurance companies. As of December 31, 2009, Berkadia was servicing about 33,000 loans with an unpaid balance of more than $236 billion.

In 2011, Berkadia seemed to be trying to grow with the announcement of nine new hires and it financed student housing in Laramie, Wyoming and a

co-op in Santa Monica, California.

BIGGER CREDIT LINE

In late 2010, Berkadia Commercial Mortgage, the lending venture backed by Berkshire, was granted a 50% increase to its secured credit line as it sought to make more loans.

The credit line, originally provided by Berkshire, was raised to $1.5 billion from $1 billion.

Berkadia Commercial Mortgage, backed by Berkshire, said it planned to use its own capital to fund at least $200 million in loans to be packaged into commercial mortgage backed securities. (CNBS). Berkadia earns income by servicing $215 billion in mortgages. Its team of about 100 mortgage bankers.

Berkadia makes loans on offices, retail buildings and apartments.

LOAN FOR APARTMENTS

Berkadia Commercial Mortgage made $23.7 million in loans in 2011 to fund the purchase of a 266-unit apartment community in Washington State.

The borrower was a joint venture between Pacific Property Co. and Trecap Partners. The Sammamish, Washington-based complex was developed in 1988.

TAVERNIER ASSETS

In September 2011, Berkadia agreed to buy the banking assets of Tavernia Capital Partners to expand into Florida.

The deal added 20 employees and $2 billion in servicing rights, mostly for commercial and industrial properties. Tavernia has offices in Jacksonville, Orlando, Tampa, Miami, and Boca Raton, Florida. “It’s an area of the country where we don’t have any coverage,” a Berkadia spokesman said in a statement. “We’re seeing a bottoming out of commercial property values” in Florida.

The Story of Warren Buffett



The Land of Commerical Lending

(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)





PART 2 OF 3



THE BOOK ON CLAYTON


A University of Tennessee finance professor gave Buffett a copy of Jim Clayton’s book First a Dream. It may have played a role in Berkshire’s buyout of Clayton Homes.

“It appears this entire transaction was started when a friend of mine gave Mr. Buffett my book a month ago,” Clayton has been quoted as saying.

A story first reported by Amy Nolan of the Knoxville News-Sentinel (April 2, 2003) told how Tennessee finance professor Al Auxier had traveled five times with his students to meet with Buffett in Omaha. The trips began after Auxier and Buffett started corresponding in 1994 after Auxier wrote an article for Barron’s about Ben Graham.

“If Warren Buffett tells them something, it may stick. If I tell them something, it may not,” Auxier says (Knoxville News-Sentinel, April 22, 2003).

Auxier thought Buffett would enjoy Clayton’s self-published memoir about how a West Tennessee sharecropper’s son rose to be an entrepreneur who created a mobile home company with $1.2 billion in annual sales.

“I knew Buffett had been interested in Conseco and in Oakwood Homes and that he likes to read good business biographies,” Auxier said, adding that Buffett had suggested the students read a biography of Sam Walton. So, in February 2003, Auxier and his students gave Buffett the Clayton autobiography during their Omaha visit.

Buffett recognized the Clayton Homes name and first asked if Clayton had been generous to the University of Tennessee. Clayton had.

Jim Clayton recalls that Buffett asked Auxier to check with the Claytons to see if they would mind a call from him about the mobile home industry. “We thought he wanted information about the industry relative to his interest in Conseco and Oakwood,” Clayton said.

As Jim Clayton recounts in his revised edition of First a Dream, Buffett’s original call was a voicemail to him saying, “Jim, this is Warren Buffett. I read your book over the weekend and enjoyed it very much—you did a good job on it. I’ve followed your company for several years and congratulate you on taking it to the top of the industry. Give me a call. I’d like to get your views on the industry” (p. 355).

Two weeks later, Buffett left a message for Kevin Clayton, Clayton’s CEO and a University of Tennessee MBA graduate. The two talked later in the day, and two weeks later the buyout was announced.

Auxier, said Buffett through Debbie Bosanek, e-mailed him the following message: “I’m glad you gave me the book instead of a basketball or football. Tell your students they have finally established themselves as deal makers.” Wonderful message, but it was of course not accompanied by a finder’s fee—at that time.

Before a talk at Tennessee’s Fall 2003 MBA Symposium on October 14, 2003, Buffett did give the 40 students a finder’s fee of sorts—one share of Berkshire Class B stock to each student. He also gave Auxier a Class A share (KnoxNews.com, October 15, 2003).

In addition, Buffett awarded them “honorary Ph.D.s in dealmaking from the University of Berkshire Hathaway,” but dubbed the Ph.D. as a “phenomenally hardworking dealmaking” diploma (The Wall Street Journal, November 14, 2003).

In 2004, the University of Tennessee’s College of Business Administration released a video about the Buffett and Clayton story called: Vintage Buffett: Warren Buffett Shares His Wealth.

Buffett said of the effort to buy Clayton: “I knew it would get done. We were just on the one-yard line for a long time.” He said he and Kevin Clayton frequently talk about acquisition opportunities within the manufactured housing industry. “We’re ready,” Buffett said. “We haven’t had an overdraft yet.”

Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee gave an account to Congress of the whole episode of Berkshire’s buyout of Clayton, saying there were two lessons to be learned: “The first is to be interested in other people. Mr. Buffett read the autobiography of a fellow businessman and was so impressed he ended up buying a company. The second lesson to be learned: make sure you always give a thoughtful thank-you present [Clayton’s book]. It’s the right thing to do—and you never know where it may lead.”

In 2010, Clayton Homes unit Trendsetter constructed a project at Fort Sam Houston in Texas. The Army base found it could create housing for 1200 military medical trainees faster by turning to modular construction. The project created 250,000 square feet of barracks that were transported in and assembled, keeping construction time and expense to a minimum.



“It’s Lighter Now”

When Buffett came to Knoxville on April 8, 2003, for a talk, his photo was taken handing his wallet to Jim Clayton. Buffett quipped: “It’s lighter now.”



The Book on Clayton

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Book on Clayton



Go Vols.

Buffett posed with University of Tennessee MBA students near Berkshire

headquarters in Kiewit Plaza in February 2002.

(Photo courtesy of Al Auxier)



Hey, Al, this is Bill.

Now let go!

Left to right: Buffett, Al Auxier, and Bill Gates early in February 2002 at Kiewit Plaza. Gates was passing through on his way to a business meeting in New York. Auxier said Buffett told his students that people would short Berkshire if they knew how he spent his time, mainly reading in peace and quiet.

(Photo courtesy of Al Auxier)



137





MCLANE BUYS LIQUOR DISTRIBUTORS


Berkshire agreed to buy wholesale grocery distributor McLane Co., from Wal-Mart for about $1.5 billion on May 2, 2003. McLane distributes groceries and nonfood items such as tobacco products to convenience and drug stores, wholesale clubs, quick service restaurants, and theaters. It was bought by Wal-Mart in 1990.

McLane, based in Temple, Texas, is one of the largest distributors in the U.S. It has annual sales of $30 billion with about two-thirds of that coming from outside of Wal-Mart. The company serves 54,000 of the nation’s convenience stores with average annual sales to them of $300,000. McLane also serves fast-food restaurants, notably those of Yum Brands which include KFC, Pizza Hut, and Taco Bell. It also supplies to 7-Eleven and other convenience stores. McLane delivers more than 10 billion pounds of goods a year.

In 2005, McLane inked a deal with New West Petroleum, a wholesale petroleum distributor and operator of 38 convenience stores in the San Diego and Central California market. In 2010, McLane was picked to supply Jack in the Box restaurants.

Its grocery and foodservice distribution centers deliver both food and non-food items to mass merchandisers, quick-serve restaurants, chain stores, and movie theaters.

McLane CEO Grady Rosier, formerly of Goldman Sachs, and CFO Tom Shoewe visited Omaha to discuss the sale with Buffett for an hour or two.

Buffett said, “In early spring [2003], Byron Trott, a managing director of Goldman Sachs, told me that Wal-Mart wished to sell its McLane subsidiary. … I should add that Byron has now been instrumental in three Berkshire acquisitions. He understands Berkshire far better than any investment banker with whom we have talked and—it hurts me to say this—earns his fee. I’m looking forward to deal number four (as, I am sure, is he).” It’s pretty rare for Buffett to single out an investment banker for praise. In Berkshire’s 2003 Annual Report, Buffett told how the deal was initiated: Trott, of course, was representing the seller. The other acquisitions handled through Goldman were The Pampered Chef and Garan. Trott also helped Buffett arrange for Berkshire to borrow money at a negative rate in the SQUARZ deals.

Trott, a graduate of the University of Chicago business school, started his career as a broker for Goldman in St. Louis then returned to Chicago as an investment adviser. He has headed Goldman’s 13-state Midwestern business since 1996.

The sale to Berkshire allowed McLane to seek new business from grocers and drug stores that compete with Wal-Mart. Buffett said McLane would immediately begin to call on potential new customers including Wal-Mart competitors such as Costco and Target. Indeed, in 2003, McLane acquired the Kmart and Target accounts. McLane also serves Wawa stores exclusively and has an agreement through 2011 with ExxonMobil to distribute food and non-food goods to Exxon and Mobil retail locations throughout the U.S.

Buffett complimented McLane’s performance by saying, “Grady Rosier has developed a service-oriented organization that supplies tens of thousands of locations in an extraordinarily efficient manner. We believe there is an excellent possibility for expansion of the customer base in the future.”

At Berkshire’s 2003 Annual Meeting he added: “If any of you get a chance to see Grady—or, better yet, if any of you own a convenience store—step forward and we’ll be glad to give you our card.

“McLane is a narrow margin business,” Buffett continued. “When you get up to $22 billion of sales and you’ve got Hershey and Mars and people like that on one side; and you’ve got buyers like 7-Eleven and Wal-Mart on the other side, they’re not going to leave a lot in between.”

Wal-Mart and Sam’s Clubs accounted for more than $7 billion, or 33%, of McLane’s annual sales in 2004. Wal-Mart sold Merit Distribution Services, a wholly owned unit of McLane, to Swift Transportation Co., a Phoenix-based national truckload carrier, for about $50 million. Proceeds of both the McLane and Merit sales came to $1.5 billion.

In addition to its grocery and food-service distribution businesses, McLane

operates a software company and employs about 15,000 people in the United States. In the international market, McLane operates several distribution centers and provides third-party logistics services to multinational companies.

HISTORY OF MCLANE COMPANY

A pioneer in the retail grocery business, Robert McLane opened a small retail grocery store in 1894. Encouraged by his success, he moved into the wholesale trade by 1903. His son, Robert McLane, Jr., joined the family business in 1959. He later sold the business to his tennis partner Sam Walton for cash and Wal-Mart stock in 1990, and now owns the Houston Astros baseball team.

The McLane Company consists of loyal customers and visionary leaders who have transformed the small wholesale grocery distribution company in Cameron, Texas, into an international distribution and logistics leader.

As a result of their efforts, McLane ranks as one of the nation’s leading distribution and logistics companies, serving customer locations around the world.

How did a small business in the heart of Texas become a leader in the industry? Sound management, leadership, innovation, team loyalty, attention to changing trends, and courage to pioneer new markets all contributed to its success.

In 2004, McLane joined forces with Chevron and Oracle to create a new Internet company, Retailers-MarketXchange.com. This enterprise plans to offer the first Internet trade exchange designed as a full-service marketplace for all convenience-store and small retail business retailers and suppliers. The company also hopes to revolutionize the supply chain to the highly fragmented convenience store and small business sector.

Along the way, McLane expanded its fast-food distribution network by buying the U.S. operations of AmeriServe Food Distributors, now called McLane Foodservice. In 2004, McLane bought wholesale distributor C.D. Hardnett, which has annual sales of $230 million.

In 2006, McLane bought another wholesale distributor, McCarty-Hull Inc., based in Amarillo, Texas, which has annual sales of about $100 million.

In 2007, McLane picked Jessup, Pennsylvania, near Scranton/Wilkes-Barre, as the site for its newest regional distribution center, It opened in 2008. The facility gave McLane a total of 20 grocery divisional distribution centers in 18 cities.

In the 2009 Annual Report, Buffett gave a real shout-out to the company; “Grady Rosier led McLane to record pre-tax earnings of $344 million, which even so amounted to only slightly more than one cent per dollar on its huge sales of $31.2 billion. McLane employs a vast array of physical assets—practically all of which it runs—including 3,242 trailers, 2,309 tractors, and 55 distribution centers with 15.2 million square feet of space. McLane’s prime asset, however, is Grady.”

A LIQUOR LICENSE

In March 2010, McLane bought privately held Kahn Ventures, the parent company of Empire Distributors, a wine distributor in North Carolina. The company, with 650 employees, has operations accounting for 25% of the market share of North Carolina and Georgia with ability to expand to other states. The purchase of the distilled spirits, wine, and beer company, will boost the products that McLane can sell to Wal-Mart and thousands of convenience stores. The sale price was not disclosed.

In a statement, Buffett said, “We expect that the Empire acquisition will provide us with a solid platform for potentially acquiring other similar high quality wholesale distributors.” The deal was completed on April 23, 2010.

SONIC DRIVE-IN

McLane announced on August 17, 2010, that Sonic Drive-In picked it to provide food distribution service for the popular chain. McLane will supply chainwide services that not only include food but also procurement and inventory management services.

Founded in 1953, Sonic is the largest chain of drive-in restaurants in America with more than 3,500 locations in 44 states.

HORIZON WINE AND SPIRITS

In late 2010, McLane’s Empire Distributor bought Horizon Wine and Spirits, a beverage distributor based in Nashville and Chattanooga, Tennessee.

McLane has applied for licenses to distribute alcohol in Virginia, Washington, and Florida, according to reporter Bill Freehling (Fredericksburg.com, October 28, 2010).

He writes: “McLane has the infrastructure in place (trucks, warehouses, distribution contacts) to quickly expand into the liquor business if it can find wholesalers willing to sell, and Buffett has tens of billions of Berkshire’s dollars to invest. It’s the type of business he loves—an industry whose product is consumed by tens of millions and that has no chance of being displaced by technology. No matter how advanced Facebook or Google gets, it’s hard to envision their being able to pour you a glass of wine anytime soon. Further, U.S. alcohol distribution laws give wholesalers a near monopoly of a popular product in the territories they serve, which is music to the Oracle of Omaha’s ears.”



McLane’s CEO Grady Rosier



The Story of Warren Buffett



Humble Beginnings

Robert McLane entered the wholesale trade in 1903.

(www.mclaneco.com)



Move ’Em Out.

McLane trucks in Arlington, Texas

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

Of Permanent Value McLane Buys a Liquor Distributor

McLane Buys a Liquor Distributor The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value McLane Buys a Liquor Distributor



138





FOREST RIVER BUYS PRIORITY ONE


One day in the summer of 2005, Buffett received a fax from an advisor for Forest River, proposing he buy the large recreational vehicle maker for $800 million. Buffett liked what he saw in the way of big market share and little debt, and the next day he made an offer. The deal was sealed a week later on July 21, 2005, in a 20-minute meeting between Buffett and Forest River founder Peter Liegl. “It was easier to sell my business than to renew my driver’s license,” Liegl said (The Wall Street Journal, November 12, 2005).

Financial terms were not disclosed (one report said $800 million was the final figure). Founder Peter J. Liegl remained the CEO. He says he still works about half a day—from 7 to 7 (RVBusiness, December 2005).

The RV and boat maker company makes a line of recreation vehicles that range from pop-up campers to luxury motor homes. Forest River, based in Elkhart, Indiana, has a line of transit and bus shuttles and makes a variety of accessories such as clothing and maintenance for the RV experience. In addition, the company produces cargo trailers, marine products such as pontoon boats, as well as delivery vans, body trucks, mobile offices, and even temporary schools in 75 manufacturing sites nationwide.

The company’s Forest River Housing unit bought Hart Housing, a producer of HUD code homes and modular homes. Forest River has more than 5,000 employees, and in 2004, had about $1.3 billion in sales. The Dallas plant employs 350 workers who make travel trailers and fifth wheel trailers which are sold under the names of Salem, Sierra, Sandpiper, Wildwood, and Wildcat brands. The plant also crafts cargo trailers for hauling motorcycles, snowmobiles, and cars.

One Forest River division, Starcraft Bus, makes shuttles and school buses.

In a statement, Buffett said: “We are very excited about the growth prospects of Forest River. Pete Liegl and his strong management team have built a remarkably successful company that is well positioned for further growth. Forest River’s focus on building leisure vehicles at fair prices represents a strong opportunity for the company’s dealers and customers throughout the U.S. and Canada.”

RVBusiness called Liegl “the chief administrator, general strategist, head bean counter, part-time engineer, manufacturing specialist, designer, and cheerleader” for Forest River. He bought the company out of the debris of his former employer, Cobra Industries, which went bankrupt in 1996. He acquired assets mainly in the way of buildings, machinery, and raw goods. Forest River opened for business on January 29, 1996, with Liegl as the only employee. He named the new company Forest River. “It represents the outdoors to me. It has a nice ring,” he explained in Indiana Business (August 2004).

The magazine related that in 2003, Forest River sold 34,743 towables, more than 15% of the nation’s total. That’s behind industry leader Thoor and ahead of Fleetwood, Jayco, and Coachmen. Forest River made 2,016 motorized recreational vehicles in 2004, or 3.6% of the total RV market. Forest River now has about 5% of that market.

Buffett fleshed out the Forest River story in a talk to business students in 2008:

I got a fax from Pete at Forest River saying this is the type of business you would like to own. He didn’t want to worry about if he died tomorrow, and left his wife and daughter behind. After we made the deal, we had dinner and I brought up the topic of salary. I told him to name whatever number he wanted, and I would sign the check. He asked me what I made. I told him $100,000 and he said he didn’t want to make more than me, so we settled on $100,000. Pete called yesterday and said he wanted to make an offer for another business. We talked for five minutes. I gave him some advice, but I really give them a lot of freedom. I’ve spent $1.7 billion and I’ve never even been to the company, at least I hope it’s there.



PRIORITY ONE FINANCIAL SERVICES

Forest River bought Priority One Financial Services from its founder and president, Lisa Gladstone, on April 24, 2007. Financial terms were not disclosed.

Started in 1987, Priority One of St. Petersburg, Florida, is a finance and insurance outsourcing firm which serves more than 60 marine and recreational vehicle dealers throughout the U.S. Its size allows it to secure financing for more deals and negotiate better terms with lenders and insurance providers on behalf of dealer partners as compared to in-house managers.

“Our acquisition of Priority is another important step Forest River is taking to partner with our dealers to make them the most profitable, best managed, and financially strongest dealers in our markets,” Peter Liegl said. “I believe strongly that each of our dealers should consider developing a partnership with Priority One to help them close more sales, increase profits, and limit liability.”

COACHMEN INDUSTRIES

In late 2008, Forest River bought the recreational-vehicle business unit of Coachmen Industries of Middlebury, Indiana, for a reported $40 million.

In 2010, Forest River had record earnings on almost $2 billion in sales.



Forest River’s Pete Liegl

Photo of cover page of RV Business December 2005 issue, which Buffett included with the 2005 Berkshire Annual Report

(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Forest River Buys Priority One

Forest River Booth at Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2006



(Photo by Tommy Terrell)



139





BERKSHIRE BUYS BUSINESS WIRE


On January 17, 2006, Berkshire announced that it was buying Business Wire, a privately held press release company.

Terms of the agreement were not disclosed, but press reports said the figure was more than $400 million. Business Wire sends out corporate news, as well as multimedia and regulatory filings, with access to about 60 international and national news agencies. The company, with about 500 employees, had sales near $145 million in 2007.

The company sends out an electronic tidal wave of information, releasing about 1,000 full-text news bulletins daily to the media, Internet, online services, databases, and a huge investment community in 150 countries in 45 languages. Business Wire helps companies satisfy their disclosure and regulatory requirements worldwide.

Buffett said: “In making this acquisition of Business Wire, we have followed our blueprint of buying profitable companies that are industry leaders, yet have significant growth potential. A major criteria in all our investment decisions is evaluating corporate management. Business Wire’s experienced management team was key to our decision.

“We quickly realized that Business Wire was a gem of a company. I expect Business Wire to continue to do what it has always done, and I’ll be there if I can help in any way,” Buffett said.

Cathy Baron Tamraz, Business Wire’s president and CEO, replied: “We are confident that the acquisition will provide a myriad of positive benefits for our employees, our clients, and our affiliates and business partners worldwide. This is a win-win for all involved.” It was Tamraz who originally wrote Buffett about the business after her husband read a story about Buffett in The Wall Street Journal (November 12, 2005). Tamraz immediately thought that Berkshire and Business Wire would be a fit, and she dashed off a letter and faxed it to Buffett.

Tamraz joined Business Wire’s San Francisco office in 1979 as a news clerk and climbed her way up through the company ranks. She currently works out of the company’s New York office.

Recalling the moment when the deal became final, Tamraz said, “Berkshire wired the money to Business Wire right after we signed the deal. It was practically instant.”

Business Wire has expanded in Europe and Asia in recent years and is trying to push even further with its global expansion. One of Business Wire’s competitors is PR Newswire, a unit of United Business Media of London. Business Wire has set up many regulatory disclosure networks in Europe in preparation for the European Union’s Transparency Obligations Directive, which took effect in 2007, amid a growing trend toward fuller corporate disclosure.

Business Wire provides direct news feeds and photos to Yahoo! Finance, Google, AOL, and other information sites. It files to Associated Press, Bloomberg, Dow Jones, Reuters, Agence France-Presse, and the British Press Association. There are 31 offices—24 in the U.S., four in Europe, one in Tokyo, one in Sydney, and one in Toronto. It has reciprocal partners such as China and India throughout the world.

After being told of Berkshire’s access to Business Wire for distribution of its press releases and earnings announcements, Berkshire’s CFO Marc Hamburg was quoted as saying, “I certainly intend to use it.”

Business Wire released the following on March 20, 2006:

NEW YORK—(Business Wire)—Berkshire Hathaway CEO Warren Buffett and Cathy Baron Tamraz, president and CEO of Business Wire, jointly rang The New York Stock Exchange’s ceremonial “Opening Bell” Monday to signal the start of trading on the world’s largest equities exchange.



Some of Business Wire’s releases covered Berkshire’s growing international presence. For example: “OMAHA, Neb. & TEFEN, Israel – (Business Wire) – July 5, 2006 – Berkshire Hathaway Inc. (NYSE:BRK.A) (NYSE:BRK.B) and Iscar, Ltd. today announced that Berkshire Hathaway has successfully completed its acquisition of 80% of the Iscar Metalworking Companies (IMC) in a transaction that valued IMC at US $5 billion.”

Tamraz has said, “Business Wire found the perfect home with Berkshire Hathaway. We share the same values as Warren Buffett and Berkshire, so the transition was a natural and seamless one. Even better, we’ve been able to continue doing what we do best—take care of our valued clients—while enjoying the support and wisdom of a terrific parent company. It continues to be a win-win for all.”

Using its own press release distribution system, Business Wire announced an expansion into Canada in early 2008. Tamraz said with the international influence of Canadian businesses growing, it made sense to open an office there.

Buffett showed up February 6, 2008, for the opening of the office in Toronto. Previously, Business Wire had announced a distribution agreement with CanWest MediaWorks Inc. as part of Canada’s largest media company.

In 2010, Business Wire opened an office in Austin, its fourth in Texas and among 31 nationwide.

Lorry I. Lokey, a former journalist and public relations executive, founded Business Wire in 1961. He now plans to devote more time to his philanthropic pursuits. Lokey has made charitable contributions of more than $300 million in the past decade to educational and medical research-related endeavors. Much of the money has gone to his alma mater Stanford University. Lokey ranks 26th on Business Week’s list for charitable giving. In 2007, Lokey, who grew up in Portland, made a $74.5 million gift to the University of Oregon—the largest single academic gift in the school’s history.

“The most recent contribution from Lorry is what we call a catalytic gift,” UO President Dave Frohnmeyer said. “Catalytic gifts create a rising tide of expectation and achievement. They form a basis for securing additional gifts and competitive grants. They create an esprit de corps. They make the difference between good programs and great ones. But most of all, catalytic gifts have the potential to change the world as we know it.” The gift brought Lokey’s total giving to the university to $132 million in the past four years.

In 2008, Lokey donated $30 million to the Weizman Institute of Science in Israel.

In 2010, a small Australian company, Media3Corp., agreed to provide a media distribution platform in Australia and New Zealand.

Buffett and Tamraz were on hand again September 30, 2011 to ring the opening bell of the New York Stock Exchange which honored the 50th year anniversary of Business Wire.



Cathy Baron Tamraz

Tamraz was named President in 2005 and CEO on December 6, 2005.

The Story of Warren Buffett



The Opening Bell Ceremony

Business Wire President and CEO Cathy Baron Tamraz, left, and Buffett, center, listen to specialist James MaGuire (far right), of LaBranche & Co., LLC, at the trading post for Berkshire Hathaway on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange on Monday, March 20, 2006. Cathy Baron Tamraz rang the opening bell to celebrate Berkshire’s acquisition of Business Wire in February 2006. New York Stock Exchange’s John Thain is in the background. Thain headed Merrill Lynch which was later bought by Bank of America.

(AP Photo)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire Buys Business Wire



Business Wire’s New York Newsroom

(Photo by Business Wire/Jeffrey Abelson)



This Just In.…

Business Wire Booth at Berkshire’s 2008 Annual Meeting

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Lorry I. Lokey

Founder



140





ISCAR


On May 5, 2006, the evening before its annual meeting, Berkshire agreed to buy Iscar Metalworking Companies of Israel, its first major overseas purchase. The acquisition of Iscar, the largest corporate sale in Israel’s history, was completed on July 5, 2006. With that purchase, Berkshire truly became an international company.

For $4 billion in cash, Berkshire bought 80% of Iscar, a maker of precision metal-cutting tools for the aerospace and auto industries among others. Iscar is a major supplier of tungsten carbide inserts used to cut steel.

The company’s name derives from ISraeli CARbide.

Buffett said that the deal got rolling in the fall of 2005 when he received a one-and-a-half-page letter from Iscar’s chairman of the board, Eitan Wertheimer. He added that “character and talent jumped off the page.” Later he said, “I could tell about the person at the other end [of the letter].”

Buffett has written that Wertheimer’s letter began, “I am writing to introduce you to Iscar.” It closed with hope that Iscar might find a new home in Berkshire: “We have for some time considered the issues of generational transfer and ownership that are typical for a large family enterprise, and have given much thought to Iscar’s future. Our conclusion is that Berkshire Hathaway would be the ideal home for Iscar. We believe Iscar would continue to thrive as a part of your portfolio of businesses.”

Wertheimer later was quoted as saying, “I did send him a letter of a page and a half that had some writing, some numbers, and some graphs. After a couple of hours, I got an e-mail. A week later we were all of us in Omaha having coffee in his office.”

The story goes that Buffett asked if Wertheimer would be in Omaha anytime soon. “I said, jokingly, that as it happened we would be passing through next Monday morning,” Wertheimer said (Omaha World-Herald, February 20, 2011).

At the 2006 Annual Meeting, Buffett said, “I think you’ll look back at this in 5 to 10 years as a very significant event in Berkshire’s history. I’m going to Israel in September to see if there are any more girls like Iscar there.” Buffett wanted to make Iscar the centerpiece of future acquisitions in Israel and beyond. The Berkshire-Iscar marriage took off on a fast honeymoon with a call from the Israeli prime minister, Ehud Olmert, to Iscar’s chairman Eitan Wertheimer saying, “It’s terrific tidings and a great gift to the State of Israel. We tip our hat to you, personally and in the name of the whole country.” Later, Buffett shared a phone conversation with the prime minister. The news was greeted in Israel with national euphoria.

With the deal, the Wertheimer family became the richest in Israel, and the Israeli government was due to get $1 billion in capital gains taxes from the Wertheimer family. Plus, Buffett was given strategic investor status, meaning he will pay no taxes on Iscar’s earnings for 10 years, which amounts to a savings of more than $1 billion. That’s a trifecta.

Israeli newspaper stories explained that instead of getting Iscar for $4 billion, Buffett may be getting it for as little as $2.5 billion because of tax and other breaks. Stories reported that Buffett seemed to be buying the “activity” of the company rather than the stock, which creates a significant tax break. For acquisitions of current activity, Israeli tax regulations allow the recognition of amortization of goodwill at the rate of $100 million a year. The annual tax-deductible expense of $400 million will bring a tax savings of about $100 million a year. With Buffett’s strategic investor status, profits are tax free.

Wertheimer said that selling the company was like “lighting an economic torch.” Wertheimer spoke at the Berkshire annual meeting in 2006 and showed a movie about the company.

Iscar operates around the world, mainly outside the U.S. Generating most of its profits in foreign currencies, Iscar provides another way for Buffett to bet against the dollar, which he has been doing by buying more foreign companies and stocks, as he reduces his outright bet in the currency markets. Buffett said, “We will have at Berkshire a fair amount of our earnings power coming from other currencies and countries.”

Founded in 1952 by Wertheimer’s father, Stef, the once small tool company now makes precision tools for such industries as computer, electronic, and fiber optics. Its customers include IBM and Motorola. Iscar has three core businesses in more than 60 countries around the globe. Its endeavors include an Italian firm that makes diamond-cutting tools as well as units in Germany and France. The second arm, TaeguTec Co., has large operations in South Korea. Both Buffett and Munger said one reason they bought Iscar was because they recognized the importance of doing business in rapidly growing South Korea. The third arm, Ingersoll Cutting Tools, has a factory in Germany for the European markets and another in Frankfort, Illinois, for the U.S. market.

Iscar has about 6,500 employees (who were given five months’ bonus pay in celebration of the deal) in more than 60 countries. Press reports said Iscar’s profits were $500 million in 2007 on $1.7 billion in sales, and sales were expected to grow 20% in 2008. Its biggest competitor is Sweden-based Sandvik, the world’s largest maker of metal-cutting tools which earns about $265 million on $2.87 billion in sales.

As a privately held company, Iscar kept its trade secrets and finances close to its vest. Being a part of Berkshire, it can continue to keep its secrets buried deep in the Berkshire Annual Report.

In a talk shortly after the deal was announced, Wertheimer said that Iscar’s profitability was like that of Microsoft’s. He didn’t comment as to whether the analogy meant that Iscar’s profit level was 35% of turnover. However, he added, “I would say that Buffett commented he’d never seen a company like it. There are no executive contracts at Iscar. A handshake is worth more commitment than any document.”

Wertheimer has explained that the business runs on a bare-bones basis. “We have no management. We have kitchens. We haven’t had a formal board of directors meeting for 15 years. We are constantly holding meetings and making decisions, all informally.” He added that by selling 80% of Iscar, he was buying a fascinating partner and a gigantic window of opportunity to get more things done.

TEFEN INDUSTRIAL PARK

Iscar, conceived on the Wertheimer family’s kitchen porch in 1952, has grown into a huge business based in Israel’s Tefen Industrial Park, one of the Wertheimer’s chain of parks. “I made my money in Iscar. I spend my money on the industrial parks,” Stef Wertheimer said (International Herald Tribune, May 17, 2006). Stef and Eitan believe these parks to be a path to peace and prosperity in the Middle East. The Tefen Industrial Park was established in the mid-1980s; Iscar is one of 20 companies operating there.

Such industrial parks have been a long-held dream of the Wertheimers, who see them as a way to economic progress. The parks are large philanthropic ventures based on the idea that economic prosperity will lead to Arab-Jewish coexistence. They are places of culture and education and include schools, universities, gardens, galleries, and museums. The Wertheimers’ network of industrial parks accounts for one-tenth of Israel’s industrial output.

Located in the hills of Galilee, Tefen Industrial Park is only a few miles from Israel’s northern border with Lebanon, often a flash point for violence in the region. Indeed, during the conflict between Israel and Lebanon in 2006, Iscar shut the doors of its headquarters after rockets hit nearby.

Despite press reports that 50% of factories in northern Israel closed in the first week of the war, Iscar had plans to keep their operations going. Employees worked around the clock, running to shelters when sirens sounded. Rockets came close enough to damage employees’ cars, but the company filled every order on time.

With the Middle East violence, Berkshire’s second quarter report noted its international investments have real risks, saying, “Berkshire is subject to increased risks from unstable political conditions and civil unrest in international markets.” In response, Iscar’s president Jacob Harpaz said, “Buffett isn’t worried because he knows Israel’s history. Buffett’s report was routine. These problems could occur in any country in the world, such as the September 11 attacks in the U.S.” Harpaz said Iscar’s factory in Israel was closed for the first three days of the war but has since operated normally despite air alarms. Harpaz noted the three day outage was made up for at the expense of regular vacation days. Iscar’s growth continues, he said.

Referring to the Israeli-Lebanon conflict of the summer of 2006, Buffett said, “I would say over very short periods you’ll have events like that. But over the long-term, the U.S. and Israel have exactly the same risk factor.”

The late Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has been quoted as saying, “Another 20 Tefens would multiply the volume of industrial exports from the state of Israel. This would change the economic and security positions of the country.”

Wertheimer said the deal is a boon to Israel. “I want to see that this area will slowly be a part of Europe by having its own qualified industry.” He added, “I’m so happy about the Buffett story, which helps me to sell this idea that peace can be made by educating people in the right direction and helping them to have independent private industries—just normal businesses like everywhere else in the world.”

Buffett and Munger made a pilgrimage to Israel in September 2006. Press accounts reported Buffett as saying, “We were very happy when we bought Iscar and now that we’ve been here, we are deliriously happy.”

Buffett’s entourage landed in Tel Aviv, toured the Iscar facilities in northern Israel, visited Haifa’s Rambam Hospital, where the Wertheimers are setting up a global biotechnology center, and met with Prime Minister Ehud Olmert in Jerusalem. Buffett also met with the father of Gilad Shalit, one of the Israeli soldiers kidnapped by Hezbollah, the issue that triggered the Israeli-Lebanon conflict. Shalit’s father, Noam, is a manager at Iscar.

While in Israel, Buffett and a few of his friends lodged at Jerusalem’s King David Hotel. Buffett stayed in a suite recently used by British Prime Minister Tony Blair. At the hotel, Buffett gave a talk to about 300 business and political leaders. He was given a lavish reception, to which he replied with a quip: “We’ve been here 31 hours, and I don’t think I’ve ever received such a welcome like this one. Maybe they don’t know us.”

Buffett said he would give Iscar a free hand to buy companies to compete with rivals. “If they think it’s a good acquisition, they don’t even have to ask me” (Bloomberg, September 18, 2006).

Iscar announced on September 22, 2008, it would buy Japanese tool maker Tungaloy Corp. for about $1 billion. Japan’s Nomura firm said it would sell its 71.2% stake in Tungaloy. Nomura had taken control of Tungaloy in a management buyout in 2004 when Tungaloy was split off from electronics giant Toshiba Corp.

Tungaloy, headed by Yoshito Uehara, makes metal-cutting tools, wear-resistant tools, civil engineering tools, and advanced material tools. Tungaloy sold 19.2% of its shares to Iscar.

In mid-2009, Iscar bought a 9.1% stake in Kromi Logistik AG, a German tool supply company.

ISCAR’S EFFICIENCY AND PROFITS

Iscar is an efficient and clean operation from the floors up. Long ago, Iscar chairman Eitan Wertheimer decided to paint the floors of all the factories yellow because dust is so easily spotted against that color. The floors are kept surprisingly clean and anything spilled is immediately cleaned up. The floors also provide a cheerful appearance in the factories which are spacious and air-conditioned year round.

Press reports indicated Iscar’s secretive numbers are roughly $1.5 billion a year, with profits ranging from $400 million to $500 million a year. “Iscar is a dream deal, and my expectations had been very high,” Buffett said. “The company could become a lot bigger than people imagine.”

ISCAR’S SUPPORT FOR FAMILY OF GILAD SHALIT

Iscar supported the family of Gilad Shalit for five and a half years after he was kidnapped in June 2006. The Israeli soldier was held by Hamas in Gaza. His father, Noam Shalit, holds a senior position in Iscar’s marketing department in the Tefen Industrial Park. Eitan Wertheimer continued to pay the father’s salary even when he took leave to devote time to campaign for his son’s release. The family was provided an apartment in Jerusalem and personal needs, including food. When Buffett visited Iscar in 2006, he asked to meet with Noam Shalit and express his support.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Israel Meets Omaha

Buffett, right, and Eitan Wertheimer, chairman of Israeli metalworking company Iscar, trade laughs at the Berkshire Hathaway annual meeting in Omaha, Nebraska, in 2006.

(AP Photo)

Of Permanent Value Iscar



TaeguTec Display

Iscar in Israel

Iscar headquarters in the Tefen Industrial Park in Upper Galilee in Israel.





Heavy-Metal Works

The hard-metal production works of Iscar Industries is in Tefen Industrial Park.

Iscar The Story of Warren Buffett



Two Flags over Buffett

Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert and Buffett meet in Jerusalem during Buffett’s trip to Israel to tour Iscar facilities. Buffett is wearing the flag of the U.S. on one lapel and a flag of Israel on the other.

(AP Photo)



Iscar’s Backfield

Buffett, second from right, clasps hands with Israeli industrialist Stef Wertheimer, right, the founder of Iscar Metalworking Co.; Eitan Wertheimer, second from left, Iscar’s chairman; and Charlie Munger left, vice chairman of Berkshire, in Tefen in northern Israel.

(AP Photo)



Warren Buffett

International Bon Vivant

Of Permanent Value Iscar



Traveling to the Middle East

Aquamarine Capital’s Guy Spier, left, and T2 Partners’ Whitney Tilson, both Berkshire shareholders, journeyed to Iscar’s headquarters in November 2010.

(Photos courtesy of Whitney Tilson)



Berkshire Shareholder Whitney Tilson and Iscar Chairman Eitan Wertheimer



Wertheimer’s Vintage Car Collection



One of the Buildings at Iscar’s Headquarters



141





TTI, INC.


On December 22, 2006, Berkshire agreed to buy TTI Inc., a privately held electronic parts distributor based in Fort Worth, Texas. Press reports quoted industry experts as saying that TTI, the world’s fifth largest electronic parts maker, is worth $2 billion.

TTI, which bills itself as the “best little warehouse in Texas,” sells tiny electronic parts that go into everything from cell phones to iPods, televisions, cars, and airplanes. The purchase of TTI closed at the end of the first quarter of 2007.

The company’s name originally was Tex-Tronics, before becoming TTI in 1973. It has never had an annual loss nor has it laid off any worker.

Buffett said that TTI’s Chairman and CEO, Paul Andrews, who continues to run the firm, “is a remarkable man who has built an outstanding business.” Andrews, a former oil rig roughneck, founded the company 35 years ago after being laid off as a parts buyer for General Dynamics. He started TTI in 1971 in a spare bedroom of his small apartment.

Andrews said, “It is a real honor for TTI and Mouser Electronics, a unit of TTI, to become part of Berkshire Hathaway.”

During the two years prior to the sale, Andrews considered a number of options for the best way to sell the company, according to Craig Conrad, senior vice president of marketing for TTI. Andrews started exploring options with a neighbor, and eventually investment bankers were brought in who suggested two choices.

“We could have sold to a private-equity firm that would have involved an LBO and debt, or we could have done a ‘strategic’ deal selling to a competitor,” Conrad said. He added that Andrews chose the latter because he is not only debt-adverse but he also did not like the possibility of employees losing their jobs.

Andrews then thought of Buffett. When first approached, Buffett expressed some hesitation because he saw TTI as a wholesaler rather than an industrial distributor. It didn’t take long for Buffett to become convinced about the business.

“What we’re finding is that there are many entrepreneurs like Paul who would like to sell their business but don’t like their options,” Conrad said. “Warren would like TTI to grow aggressively and like to use Berkshire’s resources to make acquisitions.”

He added, “[Berkshire is] a cash buyer, the management stays on, and the business operates as it has in the past.”

TTI and Mouser, the only firm TTI has bought, have had consistent growth and are embarking on a growth strategy that includes international expansion and new product expansion, along with the addition of several key franchise additions.

With 2,000 employees, TTI operates in 19 countries in more than 50 locations. It had sales of about $1 billion in 2005, and about $1.3 billion in 2006. Buffett said in Berkshire’s 2006 Annual Report that Andrews, who owned 80% of the company, built TTI from sales of only $112,000.

In 1971, Andrews, along with 20,000 others, was laid off from his job at General Dynamics when the F-111 swing-wing jet fighter/bomber project was grounded. As a buyer for GD, Andrews saw the difficulty of buying certain electronic parts and was determined to fill a need in the business.

Originally, TTI sold to firms that made military and aerospace electronic parts and grew steadily to serve commercial and auto businesses.

TTI is the largest specialist distributor of passive, interconnect, and electromechanical components. Its products include resistors, capacitors, connectors, potentiometers, trimmers, magnetic and circuit protection components, wire and cable, identification products, application tools and electromechanical devices. The resistors, capacitors, and other parts TTI sells represent about 85% of the parts on any circuit board inside a computer. TTI is far from glamorous, but then water—about 65% of the human body—isn’t too glitzy either.

Mouser is a catalog retailer of parts for electronic design engineers. Mouser.com features more than 730,000 products online from more than 300 manufacturers. Its 1,800-plus-page catalog is published every 90 days. Mouser ships to more than 200,000 customers in 170 countries from its 432,000-square-foot facility in Mansfield, Texas.

Andrews, 65, began thinking of selling the company in the summer of 2006. He wanted to ensure it would be around after he was gone. He thought Berkshire would be a long shot as a buyer but gave it a try anyway.

With the help of Fort Worth attorney Dee Kelly, Andrews connected with John Roach, who, five years earlier, sold Buffett another Fort Worth company, Justin Industries, where Roach was chairman (Star-Telegram, December 23, 2006). Andrews and Buffett had a five-hour meeting in Omaha on November 15, 2006, after which the men stood up, shook hands, and headed off for a lunch of burgers and fries.

Buffett said in an interview (Star-Telegram, December 23, 2006): “Here’s a guy who’s built a business from nothing to a very, very large business. When I get a chance to join up with somebody like that, I’m always happy to get into a business where somebody else does the work.”

Founded in 1964 in southern California by Jerry Mouser, a physics professor who needed components for an electronics program at his school. His company sells to engineers working on designs. In 1983, the company moved to Mansfield, Texas, and now ships to more than 200,000 customers globally. In 2000, Mouser became a unit of TTI.

The average electronic part that TTI sells is priced at under four cents. Many companies have overlooked the market, preferring to sell the more costly microprocessors and semiconductors.

TTI sells about 80% of the circuitry needed in a cell phone, for only about 20% of the phone’s cost (Star-Telegram, December 23, 2006). Of the 500 components of the Apple iPod, TTI stocks 450 of them.

Andrews—who likes golf, collecting cars, and boating—has said that he has no long-term plans for his windfall, other than to buy shares of Berkshire. He and his wife Judy have contributed significantly to a women’s hospital at Baylor All Saints Medical Center in Fort Worth.



Tiny Parts

This photo shows the small size of some of the electronic parts made by TTI. Buffett has said selling the tiny parts is like selling jellybeans, but that TTI sells billions of them.

(Photos courtesy of TTI)



Paul Andrews

Andrews, a Fort Worth native, attended the University of Texas in Austin.

The Story of Warren Buffett



TTI’s global headquarters in Fort Worth, Texas, features 270,000 square feet of office and warehouse space.

Of Permanent Value TTI, Inc.



TTI’s new 200,000-square-foot Connector Assembly and Warehouse Facility in Fort Worth, Texas, opened for business in July 2005.

(Photos courtesy of TTI)



TTI’s new 165,000-square-foot European Distribution Center in Munich, Germany, opened for business in June 2005.



Mouser Electronics headquarters in Fort Worth, Texas

(Photos courtesy of TTI)



“Best Little Warehouse” in Texass

Inside TTI’s Fort Worth warehouse

(Photo courtesy of TTI)



142





RICHLINE


“I will find out where she has gone,





And kiss her lips, and take her hands,





And walk along long dappled grass,





And pluck till time and times are done,





The silver apples of the moon,





The golden apples of the sun.”





—“The Song of Wandering Aengus” by W.B. Yeats

On May 18, 2007, Berkshire announced plans to buy gold jewelry suppliers Bel-Oro International of New York City, and Aurafin LLC of Tamarac, Florida. Terms of the deals were not disclosed. The two firms combined into a newly formed company called Richline Group and continued to market under many name brands.

Dave Meleski, Aurafin’s CEO, said that the combined firm will be the largest jewelry supply group in the U.S. Aurafin carries 5,000 styles of gold necklaces, bracelets, earrings, charms, pendants, and rings.

Dennis Ulrich, CEO of Bel-Oro, became the CEO of the combined Richline Group and Meleski the president. The deals closed in the second or third quarter of 2007. Aurafin had been a portfolio company of private equity firm Norwest Equity Partners since 1999.

Berkshire rarely buys a business from a private-equity firm, an industry that Buffett and Munger have criticized. Also, the industry has raised a record amount of money for buyouts, making it harder for Berkshire to compete for the businesses. Buffett said when he gets an offer to buy a business from a private-equity firm, he “puts the phone down faster than Charlie.” He added, “They invariably auction the business and are looking for a strategic buyer. A strategic buyer is just someone who pays too much.”

Combined, the two firms sell to thousands of retailers and have more than $500 million in annual sales. Eighteen hundred people are employed.

The deal had been in the works six months after Ulrich suggested it to Buffett. Although small by Berkshire’s standards, the deal is big in the jewelry industry as the new entity will account for about 6% of the sales of the gold jewelry business.

Berkshire already owns several jewelry retailers including Borsheims (bought in 1989), Helzberg (1995), and Ben Bridge (2000), which, in total, had about $800 million in sales in 2006, a bit less than 1% of Berkshire’s revenues.

With Bel-Oro and Aurafin, sales from the jewelry segment are about $1.2 billion a year, a bit more than 1% of Berkshire’s total sales.

ALARAMA

Jewelry maker Alarama was bought by Richline in November 2007, for an undisclosed price. Jeff Adwar will continue to head the Long Island City, New York firm.

“Alarama is our first diversification into the gemstone and wedding band category,” Richline’s CEO Ulrich said, adding that Richline is looking at other acquisitions, mostly in the finished jewelry and designer areas. “The jewelry industry is still very fragmented. There is an opportunity to consolidate further,” he said.

CUTTING A RIBBON

Buffett paid a visit to Richline Group of Mount Vernon, New York, just north of New York City, on June 27, 2008, after they had completed a $1 million renovation. Buffett did a ceremonial ribbon cutting and joked that that is about all he’s good for. He arrived entirely on his own—“no entourage, no assistants, or handlers.” Buffett posed for photos and gave a short talk saying, “We trust our managers,” he said. “They’ve earned that trust. They’ve delivered over the years, and we let them run their businesses. I take no credit for any of their successes, and I take no blame for any of their fortunes.”

LOVE, EARTH JEWELRY

In 2008, Richline’s Aurafin branch introduced a line that lets customers trace their gold and silver back to its origins to ensure “responsibly produced” rings, pendants, bracelets, earrings, and necklaces. Aurafin plans to sell Love, Earth jewelry at Wal-Mart and Wal-Mart Sam’s Club warehouse stores. Customers can go online, enter batch numbers from their jewelry, and see maps of mines and manufacturing locations.

BIDZ.COM

In 2009, Bidz.com sold its intellectual property, trademark, and many lines of online jewelry. Bidz.com, founded in 1998, is a leading online retailer of jewelry. Among the brands purchased were Krementz, Van Dell, Shiman, Dolon & Bullock, Taylor Avedon, Argelite, Skai, Skalet, Magual Yeare, Little Miss Pride, Sideways, Darling Diamonds, and Fingerprint Locker.

EXPANDING ABROAD

In early 2011, Richline bought privately owned Italian jeweler Rosato for an undisclosed sum, but in the end bought only one branch of Rosato, the 7AR brand.

In May 2011, Richline bought three other Italian jewelry brands; children’s jewelry maker Erz, earrings and bracelets maker Farinex, and 7AR, which is part of the Rosato jewelry group. “This is another important and strategic addition to our expansion into the international arena,” Richline CEO Dennis Ulrich said in a statement.

Later in the year, Richline bought Carniani, another Italian jeweler which had sales of $5.63 million in 2010.

Richline had sales of $500 million in 2010. In 2012, Richline bought debt-laden UnoARrre, continuing its expansion in Italy.



Aurafin Logo



Bel-Oro jewelry

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Richline



143





MARMON HOLDINGS


On Christmas Day 2007, Berkshire said it would buy 60% of Marmon Holdings Inc., a “nuts-and-bolts” industrial conglomerate, from Chicago’s Pritzker family, one of the wealthiest families in the U.S. The stake was raised to 63.6% by mid-2008 and to 80% in 2011 with a $1.5 billion investment for that slice of the business.

Products include railroad cars, wire and cable, water treatment kits, as well as a container leasing company in China. With Berkshire also being a “conglomerate,” Buffett joked that the deal amounts to “conglomerate-squared.” Under a variety of names such as Webb, Fontaine, Leland, and Fleetline, Marmon makes everything from fifth wheels to brake systems to clutches and transport trailers.

Marmon, with about $7 billion in annual sales, has more than 130 businesses throughout the world. Berkshire plans to buy the rest of the company in stages by 2014, with a final price to be determined by Marmon’s future earnings (The Wall Street Journal, December 26, 2007).

The sale involved the biggest piece of the Pritzker fortune, and the deal’s structure was shaped to meet the needs of the Pritzker family. After the settlement of a lawsuit with two family heirs in 2005, the family planned to restructure its empire by 2015. Marmon is owned by family trusts for the benefit of the Pritzkers.

Tom Pritzker, chairman of Marmon and head of the family’s business interests, said in an interview (The Wall Street Journal, December 26, 2007) that Buffett was the ideal partner because of his reputation as a hands-off owner who allows good managers to run their businesses without interference. “His philosophy is very consistent with our goals. This is a marriage, not a sale.”

Agreement to the transaction occurred over a two-week period in late December 2007. It started when the Pritzkers arranged to have a Goldman Sachs banker meet Buffett (the deal had been moved along by Byron Trott, former head of the Goldman Sachs office in Chicago who now runs his own investment firm) at the San Francisco airport after Buffett had attended a fundraiser for Senator Hillary Clinton. Buffett read a huge compilation of information on his flight back to Omaha and immediately asked to meet with Marmon’s top managers.

Tom Pritzker, worth $3 billion according to Forbes, said, “We delivered a phone-book-size document describing Marmon, literally, at his plane. He read it on a plane going back to Omaha. He landed and called the Goldman [banker] and said, ‘Tell Tom we have a deal’” (The New York Times, December 26, 2007).

Buffett also was quoted as saying: “I liked what I read. We set a goal of getting it done by Christmas.”

The Pritzkers, whose other largest holding is the Hyatt Hotel chain, is a business empire that dates back a century. It started with a family of Chicago lawyers including Jay and Robert Pritzker, who bought Marmon in 1953 when it was a struggling manufacturer in Ohio. In recent times, family members have sued one another and have agreed to split up the fortune by 2011.

Buffett said, “Our transaction was done just the way Jay [Tom Pritzker’s father] would have liked it to be done—no consultants or studies.”

Tom Pritzker added that the deal represented “an elegant solution to seemingly conflicting goals.” Pritzker family members get money now, but the Pritzkers also get the benefit should the company continue to grow. “We’re able to use Warren’s capital to give more freedom to those family members who want more freedom,” Pritzker said (Chicago Tribune, December 26, 2007).

Buffett had met Jay Pritzker in the 1950s and had served on the board of Grinnell College with Cindy Pritzker, Tom Pritzker’s mother. Buffett said that he looked forward to working with Tom Pritzker; Marmon CEO Frank Ptak; and John Nichols, the former CEO who is now a consultant to Marmon.

Marmon has more than tripled its operating income and increased margin from 4.9% to 12.4% in the past five years. It had operating profits of $794 million in 2006. The transaction closed in the first quarter of 2008.

Similar to Berkshire, Marmon operates from a small central office in Chicago with about 70 employees who manage and invest the resources of the many businesses. Marmon has often bought troubled “smokestack” companies. It has about 300 facilities in 20 countries, earning about half its revenues from service firms and the other half from its manufacturing units.

The sectors are Wire & Cable; Transportation Services & Engineering Products, including railroad tank cars and internodal tank containers; Highway Technologies; Distribution Service for specialty pipe and tubing; Flow Products for plumbing; HVAC/R and other markets; Industrial Products, including metal fasteners, safety products, and metalmaking; Construction Service; Water Treatment Equipment; and Retail Services which provides store fixtures and food preparation equipment.

The businesses also include a 61,000-car railroad leasing unit as well as Union Tank Car Co. and Canadian affiliate Procor, Ltd., which make up North America’s largest builder and lessor of railroad tank cars used by chemical and food companies. Union Tank Company, Marmon’s biggest unit, makes liquid-carrying rail cars. The Union Tank Car Co. closed its plant in east Chicago in 2008, after a decline in the market for railroad tank cars.

Many of Marmon’s products contain metals as the primary raw material, and the company was hit hard with the surge in metals prices. For example, prices for scrap metal rose 88% in the first quarter of 2008.

Fontaine International of Birmingham, Alabama, one of Marmon’s companies, makes truck trailers and a variety of other products; and Webb Wheel Products, Inc., of Cullman, Alabama, makes brake drums, rotors, and hubs.

Wells Lamont Industry Group of Niles, Illinois, another Marmon company, is known for its cut- and heat-resistant gloves. Other units lease cranes for Canadian tar sands exploration. Some units make wires for the appliance and telecommunication industry.

Buffett told CNBC (December 26, 2007), “The test is not whether the stock market likes it today or tomorrow. The test is where it will be in 10 years. … This is a large bet on America over a long period of time. I finally earned my salary,” Buffett also said. “We’ve gone all year without any sizeable deals so this was the bottom of the ninth for me.”

Some of the businesses could wind up doing business with existing Berkshire units or they could make “bolt-on” acquisitions of their own in time. Alphabetically, the Marmon Group includes the following businesses:



Tom Pritzker

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Mormon Holdings



Fontaine Customized Trailer

Aetna Insulated Wire

Amarillo Gear Company

Amarillo Wind Machine

Anderson Copper and Brass Company

Atlas Bolt & Screw Company

Cable USA, Inc.

Catequip S.A. and Cat’Serv S.a.r.l.

Cerro E.M.S. Limited

Cerro Fabricated Products, Inc.

Cerro Flow Products, Inc.

Cerro Wire & Cable Co., Inc.

Comtran Corporation

Dekoron Unitherm, Inc.

Dekoron Wire and Cable

Ecodyne Limited

Ecodyne Water Treatment LLC

Graver Water Systems LLC

Ecodyne MRM

EcoWater Systems LLC

EcoWater Canada Ltd.

EcoWater Systems Europe, N.V.

Eden Industries (UK) Limited

Enersul Inc.

Enersul Operations

Enersul Technologies

EXSIF Worldwide, Inc.

Fontaine International Inc.

Fontaine Modification Company

Marmon-Herrington Company

Fontaine Spray Suppression Company

Fleetline Products

Hogebuilt

NU-LINE Products Inc.

Fontaine Trailer Company

General Cable Industries Ltd.

Graver Technologies LLC

Adsorbents Division

Industrial Filter Division

Ion Exchange Division

Liquid Filter Division

Harbour Industries, Inc.

Hendrix Wire & Cable, Inc.

IMPulse NC, Inc.

EMC Traction, S.r.l.

Koehler-Bright Star, Inc.

KX Technologies LLC (KXT)

L.A. Darling Company

Leader Metal Industry Co., Ltd.

MarCap Corporation

Marmon/Keystone Corporation

Bushwick Metals, Inc.

Future Metals, Inc.

M/K Express Company

Marmon/Keystone Canada Inc.

McKenzie Valve & Machining Company

NHD Group Limited

NYLOK Corporation

Nylok Canada Inc.

Owl Wire and Cable, Inc.

Raven Wire & Cable, Inc.

Pan American Screw, Inc.

Deerwood Fasteners International, Inc.

Penn Aluminum International, Inc.

Penn Machine Company

Perfection Clutch

Prince Castle, Inc.

Q-Matic

Procor Limited

Railserve, Inc.

Internodal Transfer LLC

WCTU Railway Company

Robertson Inc.

Specialty Bolt & Stud Inc.

Rockbestos-Surprenant Cable Corp.

PMC, a Division of R-SCC

Silver King Refrigeration, Inc.

Sloane Group Limited

Sterling Crane

Store Opening Solutions, Inc.

Streater, Inc.

TE Wire & Cable, LLC

The Kerite Company

Thorco Industries, Inc.

Trackmobile, Inc.

Triangle Suspension Systems Inc.

Unarco Industries, Inc.

Uni-Form Components Co.

Union Tank Car Company

Webb Wheel Products, Inc.

Wells Lamont Industry Group

Wells Lamont Europe Industry

Wells Lamont Retail Group

Austins Marmon, Ltd.



The Marmon Booth displays wares at the

Berkshire annual meeting in 2008.

(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)



144





ON TRACK


This is all happening because my father didn’t buy me a train set,” Buffett joked to The New York Times (November 4, 2009) regarding his purchase of the entire Burlington Northern Santa Fe Corp. (BNSF) railroad.

“I love railroads,” he later told Burlington employees. “I mean, you go back 70 years when I used to be going down to Union Station every Sunday, and so I watched it for years. And, we couldn’t have done this 20 years ago in terms of the size of Berkshire. But Berkshire piles up. We don’t pay out any dividends, so we pile up 8 or 9 or 10 billion dollars a year, and, you know, this is a dream for me, you know, getting a chance to buy a wonderful railroad like this. I couldn’t be happier about it” (Burlington CEO Matt Rose interview with Buffett, December 3, 2009).

Perhaps Buffett was thinking the railroad could deliver toy trains for decades to come. The “elephant” investment Buffett was always hoping to make was finally tracked down. In this case, it was the mother of all elephants.

Demonstrating characteristic thought and acting with extraordinary speed, Buffett announced on November 3, 2009, that Berkshire would buy all of BNSF for $44 billion—by far Berkshire’s biggest deal ever. The total price included not only cash and Berkshire stock for the shares Buffett didn’t own, but also the cost of the shares he already owned and a further $10 billion of Burlington debt, which Berkshire assumed.

Since 2006, Buffett has patiently accumulated 23% of the railroad’s stock, building the wherewithal to fork over Berkshire stock and cash to pay for the other 77% in a sluggish economy. As compared with other Wall Street deals, he negotiated the BNSF deal in a nanosecond.

Commenting on the purchase in a half-hour interview, Buffett told CNBC (November 3, 2009) that his “bet on the country” came together quickly after he had suggested it 10 days before to Burlington’s CEO, Matthew Rose, an engineer who doubled the railroad’s revenues from 2001 through 2008. That same day, Buffett told Fox Business Network that the deal began when he told Rose, “Matt, if you’re ever looking for a home for the railroad, Berkshire would be a good one.” Buffett later said he felt emboldened when Rose didn’t throw him out of their meeting.

Buffett told CNBC that Burlington moves goods in a “cost-effective and extraordinarily environmentally friendly way.” He explained, “BNSF last year moved, on average, a ton of goods 470 miles on one gallon of diesel. It releases far fewer pollutants into the atmosphere. It saves enormously on energy consumption and, you know, it diminishes highway congestion. Rails last year moved 40%—more than 40%—of the ton-miles in the country. They moved more than all those trucks, just the four big railroads. So it’s a very effective way of moving goods. And I just basically believe this country, you know, will prosper and you’ll have more people moving more goods 10 and 20 and 30 years from now, and the rails should benefit. It’s a bet on the country, basically.”

Buffett said in a statement, “Our country’s future prosperity depends on its having an efficient and well-maintained rail system.”

Berkshire may very well be creating some synergy with the purchase of BNSF. Such goods as MidAmerican’s coal, Acme’s bricks, Shaw’s carpets, along with the products of a number of furniture and manufacturing firms in the Berkshire operating sphere must be shipped.

As if the news flash of the buy was not enough, Buffett did the unthinkable. He announced a 50-to-1 stock split for the B shares, bringing the price down from more than $3,000 to roughly $65 each. The split was enacted to help Burlington shareholders move into Berkshire stock tax-free should they choose stock over cash. Berkshire later said its board thought the split was advisable whether or not the Burlington deal went through.

With the split and the increased liquidity, Berkshire was picked, after waiting many years in the wings, to join the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index, replacing Burlington Northern. (See the S&P chapter near the end of this tome.)

Berkshire paid $100 a share for the 77.4% of Burlington’s stock it didn’t already own. The mix of stock and cash played out this way: Berkshire made the purchase using 60% cash and 40% stock. In the end, Berkshire paid $15.87 billion in cash and issued 80,932 Class A shares and about 21 million Class B shares to close the deal. Berkshire came up with $8 billion from its own coffers and borrowed $8 billion from JP Morgan Chase and Wells Fargo to be paid back in three annual installments. Buffett arranged the loans at remarkably cheap rates, at only one or two percent over the London interbank rate. At the time, the three-month LIBOR rate was .27%, far better than the rate of 2.22% a year earlier.

Financial advisors for BNSF included Goldman Sachs—a Berkshire investee, and Evercore Partner, headed by Roger Altman, deputy treasury secretary in the Clinton administration. The Munger, Tolles & Olson law firm counseled Berkshire.

Buffett told the Times that he wanted the deal wrapped up by noon Sunday (November 1, 2009) because he had a root canal scheduled at that time. “I wanted to go into that with my mind at ease.”

Fees for the investment banks on the Burlington side reportedly ran about $50 million.

One of the advantages Burlington got from the deal was lower borrowing costs; as a result, it now enjoys Berkshire’s triple A credit as opposed to their previous triple B credit which meant higher borrowing costs. Also, Berkshire dropped the Burlington board as there is no longer a need for it or its annual report. So those expenses are gone as well as postage costs for dividend checks. Further, for Rose, it meant no more time spent on analysts and hedge-fund managers.

Buffett told employees of Burlington that location was one reason he was buying the railroad. “I think the West is going to do well. I’d rather be in the West than the East,” Buffett said (Bloomberg, December 22, 2009). “I think I know how the country’s going to develop.”

Buffett said he would not sell any of the railroad’s assets and would continue investing in Burlington’s infrastructure. “It’d be crazy if we didn’t. We’re not going to starve it” (Bloomberg, December 22, 2009).

BACKGROUND

Berkshire disclosed on April 7, 2007, a $3.2-billion stake—amounting to more than 10% of the shares—in Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway (BNSF), a mix of almost 400 railroad lines that were merged or bought over 150 years.

Purchases of the stock on April 4 and 5, 2007, ranged from $81.18 to $81.81 a share. In August 2007, Berkshire added substantially to its Burlington position, bringing its total to almost 53 million shares.

In a filing on August 31, 2007, Berkshire said it might raise its stake. Berkshire informed BNSF and regulatory authorities of its “good faith intention” to buy another $597.9-million worth of stock, although future purchases would be based on market conditions. A Burlington Northern official was quoted as saying the action would give Berkshire clearance to buy up to 50%. Berkshire would have to seek a new clearance if it wanted more than that.

Buffett might have been bumping up against the 15% he could buy prior to receiving Hart-Scott-Rodino antitrust law approval to go higher. Berkshire was given approval by federal authorities on September 19, 2007, to buy up to 50% of Burlington Northern’s shares.

When Buffett bought the options exercised on October 3, 2007, he raised Berkshire’s economic interest from 15% to 17% of the company, more than 60 million shares. Apparently, Buffett bought the options in a private transaction.

Berkshire said in filings that it bought options entitling it to buy 7.85 million more shares. Berkshire bought the options at about $39 for each option exercisable at $40, meaning Berkshire wound up paying about $79 a share.

In 2008, Berkshire picked up more shares, raising its stake to about 70 million shares, or 20%. By early 2009, it had raised its stake to 76 million shares.

BNSF of Fort Worth, Texas, is the second-largest U.S. railroad (after Union Pacific), with a network that runs from the Pacific through the heartland and on to the Gulf of Mexico. It owns and operates tracks in 28 states and two Canadian provinces, competing with Union Pacific of Omaha to deliver goods to western states.

It also has rail lines through the Dakotas, with connections to the Canadian National Railway, and through Montana, with connections to the Canadian Pacific Railway. These are important connections because Canada is expanding its oil production, and much of it will be refined and consumed outside Canada. Shipments of oil, grain, minerals, coal, and cars throughout Canada and the United States are expected to rise over the years.

With 220,000 freight cars and 6,300 locomotives, Burlington Northern moves more boxcars and containers than any other rail line in the United States. It carries enough coal to power more than 10% of the nation’s homes, as well as enough lumber each year to build a half-million new houses.

Operating in the western half of the United States, Burlington is the largest rail transporter of aircraft parts in the country, as well as the largest rail transporter of beer and wine. It is one of the largest grain-hauling railroads in the U.S. in addition to shipping millions of packages for UPS each year (more than 50 million between Thanksgiving and Christmas alone).

BNSF is different from its competitors in several ways. Its transcontinental route (now double-tracked) runs from Chicago to Los Angeles and is shorter than its rivals. Also, Burlington has a big agriculture business and limited exposure to the struggling auto sector.

The company was formed on December 31, 1996, when the Atchison, Topeka, and Santa Fe Railway was merged into the Burlington Northern Railroad. In 1999, Burlington and the Canadian National Railway (of which Bill Gates’s Cascade Investments owned about $1.6 billion in mid-2008) announced intentions to merge into a company to be called North American Railways and be based in Montreal. However, the U.S. Surface Transportation Board imposed a 15-month moratorium on all rail mergers, ending the intended combination. On January 24, 2005, the Burlington Northern Santa Fe railroad’s name was changed to BNSF Railway.

Omaha and BNSF have several old ties. Omaha has been the site for corporate meetings of Burlington Northern. Also, the railroad hired an Omaha executive to be one of its directors; Mike Yanney, a friend of Buffett’s, has served on the board since 1989 (Omaha World-Herald, April 10, 2007).

Coal is one of the many products that must be transported by rail. Canadian Pacific Railway, in a bid to expand into the booming Midwest coal markets, bought American railroad Dakota, Minnesota & Eastern Railroad in 2007. CP was striving to break into the Powder River Basin (PRB) coal market, a sector dominated by Burlington Northern. The PRB is the region in Wyoming that has abundant supplies of low-sulfur coal.

However, it has not been an easy ride. Barriers for entering into new markets are high in the railroad industry and acquiring the rights to build railroads are virtually unobtainable. The costs of buying the land and then building tracks for a new railway are prohibitive. For example, China is currently building a new 16,000-mile railway system at a cost of $300 billion, many times the worth of the major rail firms in the U.S.

Considering rising fuel prices, railroads are beginning to trump trucking. Higher fuel costs have forced trucking and shipping companies as well as parcel carriers to move long-haul freight by rail.

During Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2007, Buffett talked a bit about the railroad business, looking at the effect of climbing oil prices on truckers compared with that on railroads: “It’s not the most exciting business, but railroads’ competitive position has improved versus truckers’ over the past 20 years, especially as oil prices have risen. Rising oil prices raise truckers’ costs four times more than they raise railroads’ costs.”

Buffett’s interest in railroads may show more foresight than just the identification of the best way to move goods cross-country in the current economy. With Burlington Northern serving U.S. ports that are a gateway to Asia, Buffett’s investment in railroads seems to be a play on steady growth in an era of globalization. “It’s clearly going to be a royalty-income stream on globalization,” said Tom Russo, a partner with Gardner Russo & Gardner (The Wall Street Journal, April 10, 2007).

Buffett made his move on Burlington Northern at a time when that railroad was facing $80 million in environmental costs and a write-off for scrapped equipment. Even so, Burlington, a buyer of its own stock, had profits of $1.8 billion in 2007.

When Berkshire announced in April 2001 that it had more than 10% stake in BNSF, it had already become the largest shareholder, moving ahead of Marsico Capital Management, which owned 32 million shares, 8.9% of the company, as of December 2006.

In April 2008, Buffett flew to Kansas City to join Burlington Northern CEO, Matthew K. Rose, for a ride in a vintage 1930s railcar. As they traveled the 430 miles of rail to Chicago, the two talked about the turnarounds in the railroad industry (BusinessWeek, November 3, 2008).

Apparently, the Burlington Northern stake was Berkshire’s first railroad company purchase, but Buffett had his eyes on others as well. The same month Berkshire’s stake in Burlington Northern was announced, Buffett disclosed to Liz Claman (formerly with CNBC and now anchor of News Corporation’s Fox Business Network) that in addition to the large Burlington Northern stake, Berkshire had bought stakes in two other rail companies, with an investment of about $700 million in one and slightly less in another (“slightly” being about $500 million less). They turned out to be investments in Union Pacific and Norfolk Southern.

In World War II, American soldiers rolled through North Platt, Nebraska, on troop trains. The tiny town, wanting to offer support to servicemen, kept its railroad depot open from 5 a.m. until the last train left after midnight. Volunteers greeted six million troops with encouragement, magazines, coffee, and food during the quick stops. The train later became the subject of Bob Greene’s Once Upon a Town.

May 2007 filings showed that Berkshire owned more than 10 million shares of Union Pacific (UP) and about 6 million shares of Norfolk Southern. Those stakes were lowered later in the year to 4.5 million shares of Union Pacific and to 1.9 million shares of Norfolk Southern. The UP stake was raised to 8.9 million shares in the second quarter of 2008.

Union Pacific is headquartered in Omaha, where the movie Union Pacific (1939) premiered. A UP museum is in nearby Council Bluffs, Iowa. Union Pacific operates in 23 states, covering two-thirds of the United States; links every major West Coast and Gulf Coast port; and provides service to the eastern states through its major gateways from Chicago, St. Louis, Memphis, and New Orleans. It is the nation’s largest hauler of chemicals and one of the largest intermodal carriers, which means it transports truck trailers and containers.

CEO Matthew Rose said Buffett would sell the shares of Union Pacific and Norfolk Southern before completion of Berkshire’s buying Burlington.

It turned out that Buffett had already sold the stakes. “I’ve done that just to facilitate the transaction,” Buffett said on the Charlie Rose Show (November 13, 2009). “I think they are good investments. I would have held them had this not happened.”

Buffett also told Rose that he did not get a bargain, but that Burlington is “a good asset for Berkshire to own over the next century.” He went on to explain: “It was an opportunity to buy a business that’s going to be around for 100 or 200 years that’s interwoven with the American economy in a way that, if the American economy prospers, the business will prosper.”

While Buffett has become one king of the railways, Bill Gates is another. Cascade Investment, the investment arm of Gates, owns a stake in the Canadian National Railway, the largest freight railroad in North America.

Who knows where all these full-steam-ahead events are going. Buffett has

said the Canadian National Railway has “the best record of any railroad that I know of.”

Rumors persist that Buffett and Gates have an interest in energy holdings on Alaska’s North Slope. Perhaps that could initiate a joint venture between BNSF and Canadian National Railways that will fit into Burlington Northern’s “Fuel by Rail” theme. After all, rail delivery of petroleum products grew about 20% in 2006. Or maybe Berkshire will invest in coal next. Burlington Northern carries tons of coal.

WHAT IS DIFFERENT TODAY ABOUT RAILROADS?

Thought of as passé in the 1960s and 1970s, railroads today, often with double-decker carriages, are not what they used to be, according to longtime railroad lawyer Charles Sharp of Birmingham, Alabama. “Under stringent ICC rate regulations and ‘feather bedding’ by railroad unions, the railroad future for the past 100 years has never been too bright,” he said of what has historically been a low-return, capital-intensive business.

The Staggers Act in 1980 deregulated railroads and allowed them to set rates to compete with trucking. Sharp said railroad managements negotiated with the unions, resulting in standard trains having two rather than five people on board. Railroad maintenance costs have also been lowered by mechanization.

“Railroads make money from long hauls,” Sharp said. “They have sold or leased short runs to independent short-line railroads, which pay a percentage of the haul to the major railroads; hence, the major railroads have eliminated the unprofitable short-line business. The increase in fuel costs have benefited the railroads, and railroads are three times as efficient in conserving fuel than are trucks.”

Sharp continued: “In 2006, BNSF’s coal volume increased 10%. Low-sulfur coal is mined in Powder River, Wyoming, and shipped to coal-burning electric plants around the country. Wyoming coal is shipped to Birmingham, Alabama, for example, in an average of three trains a week, consisting of 132 coal gondola cars, three big engines on the front and two pushing in the back. When they unload at West Jefferson in Birmingham, the 132 cars are emptied, and without turning the unit around, the two rear engines lead the train back to Powder River.

“BNSF has the best route from Long Beach, California, to Chicago,” Sharp reported. “It has three transcontinental routes. The heavy increase in the corn crops this year [2006] will benefit BNSF by its hauling the grain and hauling the ethanol produced from corn.”

Sharp’s comments run along the same track as Munger’s at the Wesco annual meeting in 2007: “Warren and I have hated railroads our entire life. They’ve been capital-intensive, heavily unionized, with some make-work rules, [and] heavily regulated. [And they have] long competed with a comparative disadvantage versus the trucking industry, which has a very efficient method of propulsion and uses free public roads. Railroads have long been a terrible business and have been lousy for investors.”

But times as well as minds have changed. Munger admitted: “We did finally change our minds and invested. We should have done it two years ago, but we were too stupid to do it at the most ideal time. There is a German saying, ‘Man is too soon old and too late smart.’ We were too late smart. We finally realized that railroads now have a huge competitive advantage, with double-stacked railcars, guided by computers, moving more and more production from China, etc. They have a big advantage over truckers in huge classes of business.

“Bill Gates figured this out years before us. He invested in a Canadian railroad and made 800%. Maybe Gates should manage Berkshire’s money.”

AN X FACTOR

An X factor in the Burlington purchase is the land. The land to either side of the thousands of miles of tracks might one day become property for wind and solar energy development. Maybe Burlington Northern one day will turn out to be an energy play in disguise. BNSF tracks pass through the “wind corridor” from Texas to the Dakotas. Perhaps the land holdings will provide green energy for Burlington or even Berkshire’s MidAmerican Energy. In future years, maybe the property could contain wind and solar farms and electrical transmission lines. Perhaps even communications lines some day.

Munger has said, “As I move closer to the edge of death, I find myself getting more cheerful about the economic future.” He explained: “I see a final breakthrough that solves the main technical problem of man. By harnassing the power of the sun, electrical power will become more available around the world. That will help humans turn sea water into fresh water and eliminate environmental problems. If you have enough energy, you can solve a lot of other problems.”

THE NEXT CENTURY

After Berkshire’s deal for Burlington was closed on February 12, 2010, Buffett called Rose and said, “I look forward to our first century together.” Somewhat surprised, Rose said he was accustomed to people talking in terms of quarterly performance (USA Today, March 25, 2010).

In the second quarter of 2010, Burlington’s first quarter under Berkshire’s wing, the railroad had earnings of $603 million.

Also in 2010, the railroad raised $250 million by selling 100-year bonds.

Rose called the merger with Berkshire “seamless,” saying only two from the leadership team left, the head of investor relations and the corporate secretary (The Wall Street Transcript, February 22, 2011).

Some writers saw the Burlington Northern purchase as a bit of Buffett’s succession plan in that it tied up so much capital that future managers could not make some lesser investment with that big of a sum. A Seeking Alpha story (September 29, 2011) found a different wrinkle, but agreed that the purchase had succession in mind. “A quirk in the rules for railroads allows them to avoid liquidation in the event of bankruptcy. After Buffett is gone, whoever is in charge could bumble with some derivative instruments that, for unforeseen reasons, blow up. If the blow-up were large enough, it could trigger the need to file bankruptcy to get Berkshire Hathaway’s house in order. The clause in the Interstate Commission and Bankruptcy Act would protect Berkshire Hathaway from having to sell off valuable assets while the company emerges from bankruptcy.

“The second significant succession strategy of a railroad has to do with what is called “compulsory mergers.” This requirement allows the ICC and a railroad that has gone bankrupt to merge with another company on terms drawn up by the ICC, the bankrupt company, and the acquiring company.”

“Since the railroad industry, like the airline industry, is infamous for bankruptcy, Berkshire would get to take advantage of the “compulsory” mergers rule.”...

“Knowing that bankruptcy is only just around the corner in the next economic purge, Berkshire Hathaway could absorb other rails with absolute impunity.”...



Buffett and Matt Rose

(Courtesy BNSF Railway and Wyatt McSpadden)

The Story of Warren Buffett



BSNF Train Making Its Way

(Courtesy BNSF Railway)

Of Permanent Value On Track



Train Collector

(Illustration by

Tom Kerr/Courtesy of the

Omaha World-Herald)



Riding the Rails with Burlington Northern

Every six seconds, a truck trailer-sized container is loaded onto a Burlington Northern Santa Fe freight car (Forbes, December 20, 2007). About 10% of the country’s freight ton-miles are handled by Burlington Northern.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

On Track The Story of Warren Buffett

IMAGINARY SUMMARY OF HOW THE DEAL WENT DOWN

Buffett is on the phone with Munger, Tolles lawyers, Charles Munger, and Ron Olson:

Buffett: [grunt] Charlie, talked with Matt for about 10 minutes. Think we can buy all of Burlington.

Munger: Keep it to $100 a share, Warren. [grunt]

Buffett: Ron, we OK on antitrust?

Olson: You’re fine, Warren.

Buffett: Have someone call in the morning to borrow $8 billion, will ya?

Munger: Not a problem, Warren.

Buffett: Great. Let’s move fast on this. Want it done before I have that damn root canal on Sunday.

Munger: Go back to your bridge game, Warren.

Investment banking fee: A long-distance phone call.

Of Permanent Value On Track



Ports Served by BNSF

About 40% of all goods received into the U.S. in containers from overseas—many of them from China in an increasingly globalized world—enters through the ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach.



Union Pacific Logo



Norfolk Southern Logo



Liz Claman

On Track The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Union Pacific Headquarters

The new Union Pacific headquarters in Omaha is shown behind its previous building which was built back in the 1960s. In this photo, the old building is being demolished in 2008.



Centennial No. 6900

Centennial, part of the UP train display in Omaha, is the largest and most powerful diesel-electric locomotive ever built.

(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Big Boy No. 4023

Built by UP in 1944, Big Boy, the world’s largest steam locomotive, is now on display at Kenefick Park at Lauritzen Gardens, Omaha’s Botanical Center. It greets travelers as they cross the bridge from Iowa into Nebraska.

Of Permanent Value On Track



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Harriman Dispatching Center

The Harriman family began a century of leadership at Union Pacific when E. H. Harriman bought the railroad on the steps of Union Pacific’s Omaha freight house. Today, many dispatchers control train movements across 23 states from this Harriman Dispatching Center in the same converted freight house.

On Track The Story of Warren Buffett



Train Sets at Last

After Buffett’s joke about not getting a toy train as a child, two people sent him models. This train, now in Buffett’s office, came from Lionel Electric Trains CEO, Gerald Calabrese. The bottom photo is an HO set sent in from J. Philip Walthers, president of Wm. K. Walthers, Inc., which has made model train equipment since 1932. The Walthers train now sits atop Buffett’s bookcase along with visible copies of World Book and Moody’s.



(Photos by Debbie Bosanek)

Of Permanent Value On Track



145





LUBRIZOL


Berkshire said on March 14, 2011 that it planned to buy Lubrizol, the world’s largest specialty chemical maker, particularly engine oil additives that make engines particularly for trucks, buses, and boats, run faster and smoother. The price tag was $9 billion in cash, actually $9.7 billion with the assumption of $700 million of Lubrizol’s debt.

The price was at a 28% premium to the closing price on Friday before the Monday announcement. Berkshire paid $135 a share for the entire company, which had sales of $5.4 billion and profits of $732 million in 2010.

Reports said that David Sokol, head of Berkshire’s NetJets unit, initiated talks with Lubrizol in January 2011. Sokol resigned from Berkshire on March 28, 2011 after revelations that he had bought Lubrizol stock for his personal account during a time Berkshire was contemplating buying the whole company. Sokol said the trading was not illegal and that his resignation was unrelated to his stock trading, a statement at odds with Buffett’s remarks. Buffett offered $135 a share on February 8. On March 2, Buffett rejected a Lubrizol counter to increase the price to $140 a share.

Berkshire bought Lubrizol at 13 times earnings, cheap by market standards.

Lubrizol makes goods for the global transportation, industrial, and consumer markets including additives for gasoline and diesel that improve fuel-economy. It makes aftermarket chemicals, coatings, plastic additives and personal care products. Although it focuses on making lubricants, it also offers other products such as an adhesive for automatic labeling machines and a product called Estane, a leading brand of polyurethane used to form tubing, medical garments, shoes, and auto parts. Lubrizol makes components that are mixed with base oils to create finished lubricants.

In 2001, Lubrizol bought Noveon, an advanced material business, polymers, films, and other products that had been part of BF Goodrich Co. Noveon accounts for a quarter of Lubrizol’s sales. About 40% of Lubrizol’s sales come from vehicle maintenance, particularly from additives for gasoline and diesel fuel.

One of the largest acquisitions in Berkshire’s history, the company also makes ingredients for soap, hairstyling products, skin cream, paint and pharmaceutical drugs as well as coatings and resins for plastics technologies and hydraulic fluids. In early 2011, Lubrizol bought the Nalco personal care and household care business for $164 million.

Three quarters of Lubrizol’s sales come from additives for engine oil and fluids for passenger cars, big diesel engines, power tools, hydraulics and machine parts.

Lubrizol’s CEO James Hambrick, a chemical engineer out of Texas A&M, joined the company in 1973, while still in school and was named to the top post in 2004.

In a statement, Buffett said, “Our only instruction to James—just keep doing for us what you have done so successfully for the shareholder.”

One of the largest acquisitions in Berkshire’s history, Lubrizol employs 7,000 workers, has plants in 27 countries, and rang up sales of $5.4 billion in 2010. It sells more than 12,000 products in more than 100 countries.

Lubrizol began life in 1928, but actually dates back to the 1870’s, as BF Goodrich Performance Materials.

The company will keep its current headquarters in Wickliffe, Ohio and continue to be led by current management.

Lubrizol, whose future is tied to the world’s industrial and population growth, may be a synergy play in that it could do business with the Berkshire units. In a regulatory filing, Lubrizol was quoted as saying, “We anticipate that we may be able to develop collaborative opportunities with other Berkshire Hathaway companies.”

It’s possible that transportation parts of BNSF, McLane Company, MidAmerican Energy, and NetJets, could use Lubrizol products on a stand-alone or integrated basis with other products bought from outside vendors, e.g., engine oil. Also, it may be possible to use Lubrizol technology in the products of Benjamin Moore, CTB, Johns Manville, and Shaw Industries. It’s likely BNSF would be a big user of Lubrizol products.

Lubrizol is building a $300-million plant in China where factories need large quantities of engine lubes to keep plants, trucks, ships, and cars running smoothly.

In Berkshire’s 2010 Annual Report, Buffett said he had his “elephant gun” out for acquisitions and that his trigger finger was “itchy.” A bit later he said he had missed on bagging a “zebra,” but shortly after that, the purchase of Lubrizol was announced. Buffett told CNBC (March 20, 2011), referring to the Lubrizol deal: “You pick the animal, but it’s somewhere between an elephant and a zebra.”

So maybe Lubrizol is a giraffe.

Berkshire’s acquisition of Lubrizol closed on September 16, 2011.

After the close, Buffett and Berkshire’s CFO Marc Hamburg and Hambrick were named to the Lubrizol board.

Lubrizol’s headcount of 6,900 workers brought the number of people working for Berkshire to: 270,100.

MERQUINSA

On November 3, 2011, Berkshire agreed to buy Merquinsa to expand its polymers business at Lubrizol. Berkshire was to get about 100 employees of the Barcelona-based company.

Reportedly, the company was purchased for $103 million, or about 1.4 times sales and 11.5 times earnings.

Merquinsa, which mainly makes plastics, has offices in Seabrook, New Hampshire and Guangzhou, China and works with distributors like Germany, India, Australia and South Africa. The family business was founded in 1964 and is chaired by José Luis Ayuso Piqueras.

CHEMTOOL INC.

Lubrizol agreed to buy Chemtool Inc., of Rockton, Illinois, on November 9, 2011 to expand offerings of custom-made greases. “The combination of Lubrizol’s expertise in additive technology along with Chemtool’s knowledge in manufacturing grease is a natural fit,” Lubrizol’s CEO James Hambrick said in a statement.

Chemtool is one of the largest makers of lubricants and specialty products in the world. Terms of the deal were not disclosed.

ACTIVE ORGANICS

In late 2011, Lubrizol bought Active Organics to boost sales of specialty ingredients, including botanical extracts used by cosmetics makers. Terms for purchase of the Lewisville, Texas company were not disclosed.



The Story of Warren Buffett



Lubrizol CEO

James Hambrick

Of Permanent Value Lubrizol



146





BUFFETT BUYS HOMETOWN NEWSPAPER


News flash: Berkshire announced on November 30, 2011, it would buy the Omaha World-Herald Company which is the owner of the Omaha World-Herald newspaper and six other dailies and several weeklies across Nebraska and Southwest Iowa.

“The World-Herald delivers solid profits and is one of the best-run newspapers in America, and we are pleased to have Terry Kroeger and his team join Berkshire Hathaway,” Buffett said in a statement. “We are also delighted to report that the editorial independence that Nebraskans and Iowans have come to expect from the World-Herald will continue.

In addition to Buffett’s hometown newspaper, the Omaha World-Herald purchase also included daily newspapers in Council Bluffs, Iowa, and Grand Island, York, Kearney, North Platte, and Scottsbluff in Nebraska, as well as many weeklies and shoppers in the two states. The Omaha World-Herald also runs World Marketing, Inc., a direct marketing firm with operations in Omaha, Chicago, Atlanta, Dallas, and Los Angeles.

Buffett, who worked as a paperboy in his youth and who reads five newspapers a day, also said in his statement that the purchase is consistent with Peter Kiewit’s vision for local ownership of the World-Herald, which led construction-magnate Kiewit to buy the newspaper in 1962 from the Hitchcock family.

Peter Kiewit Sons’ Inc. bought the paper when Kiewit learned the Hitchcock family was thinking of selling it to the Samuel Newhouse chain in New York. Kiewit wanted the paper to remain locally owned.

When Kiewit died in 1979, he left a plan for the paper’s employees of his foundation to share ownership until 80% of the ownership was in the hands of employees and 20% with the Peter Kiewit Foundation.

It turned out that former Kiewit Foundation CEO Walter Scott, who is Buffett’s longtime friend and a Berkshire board member, was a key figure in triggering the transaction. The Omaha World-Herald reported (December 1, 2011) that Scott and Valmont Industries CEO Mogens Bay, a Kiewit trustee, were fishing on Scott’s boat in Alaska when Scott brought up the subject of the future of the paper. Things moved quickly from there to Kroeger and Buffett and the deal was struck.

The World-Herald was the last employee-owned major newspaper in the country (Omaha World-Herald, November 30, 2011).

Kroeger said in a statement that the company’s employee-ownership structure was restrictive and limited the ability to raise money from nonemployees, in addition to an ongoing need to repurchase stock from exiting employees. “We have repurchased the company about seven times since the employee ownership was put in place,” Kroeger said.

The paper was founded in 1885 by Gilbert M. Hitchcock as the Omaha Evening World. William Jennings Bryan was its editor in 1894–1896.

Hitchcock’s son-in-law, Henry Doorly, took over control after Hitchcock’s death in 1934. Doorly served 58 years at the paper.

In 1953, the World Publishing Company, owned by heirs of the Hitchcock/Doorly families, sold the paper to local businessman Peter Kiewit, as mentioned previously.

Three publishers have run the paper in modern times: Harold Andersen (1975–1989), John Gottschalk (1989–2007), and Terry Kroeger (2008 to present).

A few informative tidbits applicable at the time of Berkshire’s purchase of Omaha World-Herald Company are as follows: The World-Herald was the 49th largest newspaper in the United States. It was in the top 10 in the country in terms of the percentage of households in its market that subscribed. It was the only remaining newspaper with morning and afternoon editions and was put out by a news staff of 200 people. Its Web site, Omaha.com, had 300,000 users. The paper had a Sunday circulation of 170,381 and weekday circulation of 135,282.

Terms of the deal were not disclosed but a report in Barron’s said it was for $200 million. Other reports said it was for $150 million in cash and the assumption of $50 million in debt. Buffett described the price this way: “It’s not a crazy price. It certainly is not a bargain price” (Bloomberg, November 30, 2011).

Buffett has always had an interest in media companies—even as their fortunes have declined in recent years as advertising and circulation have declined as subscribers have turned to the Internet.

Berkshire bought a large stock stake in The Washington Post in the early 1970s, bought all of the Buffalo News in 1977, and purchased press release dissemination Business Wire in 2006.

Back in the 1970s, Berkshire held stakes in Scripps Howard, Booth Newspapers, Harte-Hanks Communications, and Affiliated Publications, which then owned the Boston Globe. In 1985, Buffett invested $517 million for a 15% stake in Capital Cities to help it buy ABC, a stake that Berkshire held until Cap Cities sold itself to The Walt Disney Company in 1996. Berkshire has long held a small stake in the stock of the Gannett newspaper chain.

Buffett made his first newspaper purchase in 1969 when Berkshire bought the Sun Newspapers, a group of weeklies, from Stan Lipsey. The paper, with Buffett himself doing some of the investigative work, won the Pulitzer Prize in 1973 by revealing a funding scandal at Boys Town. Buffett sold the Sun papers in 1981, and they ceased publication in 1983.

The Omaha World-Herald, over the years, has won three Pulitzer Prizes.

Berkshire already owns other Omaha businesses: Borsheims fine jewelry store and Nebraska Furniture Mart.

“It is a reasonable investment,” Buffett said of his Omaha World-Herald purchase. “There is no question it is affected by the fact that I am extremely bullish on Omaha, Nebraska” (Barron’s, November 30, 2011).

The Story of Warren Buffett



Buffett Buys His Hometown Newspaper

Buffett told Omaha World-Herald employees and shareholders on November 30, 2011 that becoming part of Berkshire meant the newspaper’s local ownership was being made as permanent as possible.

(Reprinted with permission from

The Omaha World-Herald/Jeff Bundy)



Omaha World-Herald Headquarters

A reader of the paper for decades, Buffett also once sat on the paper’s board.

(Photo by Nancy Line jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Buffett Buys Hometown Newspaper



Omaha World-Herald Main Tower

In the foreground, one can see the old facade.

(Photo by Nancy Line jacobs)

Buffett Buys Hometown Newspaper The Story of Warren Buffett

THIS JUST IN...

The paper’s executive editor, Mike Reilly, penned a story about Berkshire’s purchase of the paper which ran December 4, 2011. Here is what it said in part:

At 3:48 p.m. Tuesday [November 29, 2011], all productive work activity ceased for a time at the offices of The Omaha World-Herald Co.

That’s when Publisher Terry Kroeger sent an email inviting stockholders to a meeting at 9 a.m. Wednesday.

“I have news to share,” Kroeger wrote, regarding “a very important, encouraging development about the future of our Company.”



Imagine your boss sending that out.



Speculation ran the gamut.



Some serious: We had purchased another newspaper.



Some humorous: Maybe we bought naming rights. How does Omaha World-Herald Rose Bowl sound?



Best I can tell, no one guessed what most of us found out the next morning: Kroeger had struck a deal to sell our company to investor Warren Buffett and his Omaha-based Berkshire Hathaway.



Buffett received a standing ovation from more than 200 employee shareholders after Kroeger detailed how and why the deal came about...



At age 81, Buffett said he’s buying The World-Herald through Berkshire, rather than personally, to make the deal as permanent as possible....



I am...confident Buffett won’t try to influence our news coverage or editorial page positions—including our extensive coverage of Buffett and Berkshire.



Kroeger got Buffett’s assurance of that before agreeing to the deal. And Buffett has a hands-off track record as owner of the Buffalo News and the biggest shareholder of the Washington Post...



No changes are planned in the tone of our coverage concerning the Lubrizol scandal and Buffett’s tax policy fights. Our Sunday “Warren Watch” column will continue.



Our coverage of Buffett and Berkshire will continue to be honest, in depth, and fair-minded. Expect nothing less.



Of Permanent Value Buffett Buys Hometown Newspaper



147





BUSINESSES GALORE


The following are Berkshire’s manufacturing, retail, and services businesses as listed in Berkshire’s 2000 Annual Report:

OPERATOR PRODUCT/SERVICE/ACTIVITY

ACME BUILDING BRANDS Face brick and other building

materials

ADALET Electrical enclosure systems and cable accessories

BEN BRIDGE JEWELER Retailer of fine jewelry

BENJAMIN MOORE Architectural and industrial coatings

BLUE CHIP STAMPS Marketing motivational services

BORSHEIMS Retailer of fine jewelry

BUFFALO NEWS Daily and Sunday newspaper

CAMPBELL HAUSFELD Air compressors, air tools,

painting systems, pressure washers, welders, and generators

CAREFREE Comfort and convenience products for the recreational vehicle industry

CLEVELAND Vacuum cleaner brushes and bags

WOOD PRODUCTS

CORT BUSINESS SERVICES Provider of rental furniture,

accessories, and related services

DEXTER SHOE COMPANIES Dress, casual, and athletic shoes

DOUGLAS PRODUCTS Specialty cordless vacuum cleaners

NETJETS Fractional ownership programs for general aviation aircraft

FECHHEIMER BROS. CO. Uniforms and accessories

FLIGHTSAFETY High technology training for operators of aircrafts and ships

FRANCE Ignition and sign transformers and components

H.H. BROWN SHOE Work shoes, boots, and casual footwear

HALEX Zinc die cast conduit fittings

and other electrical construction

materials

HELZBERG’S Retailer of fine jewelry

DIAMOND SHOPS

INTERNATIONAL Licensing and servicing Dairy

DAIRY QUEEN Queen Stores

JORDAN’S FURNITURE Retailer of home furnishings

JUSTIN BRANDS Western footwear

KINGSTON Appliance controls and actuators

KIRBY Home cleaning systems

LOWELL SHOE, INC. Women’s and nurses’ shoes

MERIAM Pressure and flow measurement

devices

MIDAMERICAN ENERGY Production, supply, and

distribution of energy

NEBRASKA FURNITURE MART Retailer of home furnishings

NORTHLAND Fractional horsepower electric motors

POWERWINCH Marine and general purpose winches, windlasses, and hoists

PRECISION STEEL Steel service center

PRODUCTS

QUIKUT Cutlery for home and sporting goods markets

SCOTTCARE Cardiopulmonary rehabilitation and monitoring equipment

[This is just in case shareholders

get heart attacks from future

synergies they never expected.]

SCOT LABS Cleaning compounds and solutions

SEE’S CANDIES Boxed chocolates and other

confectionery products

STAHL Truck equipment including service, flatbed and dump bodies, cranes, toolboxes, and hoists

STAR FURNITURE COMPANY Retailer of home furnishings

WAYNE COMBUSTION Oil and gas burners for residential SYSTEMS and commercial appliances and equipment

WAYNE WATER SYSTEMS Sump, utility, and sewage pumps

WESTERN ENTERPRISES Medical and industrial compressed gas fittings and regulators

WESTERN PLASTICS Molded plastic components

R.C. WILLEY HOME Retailer of home furnishings

FURNISHINGS

WORLD BOOK Printed and multimedia encyclopedia and other reference materials

K&W Products, an automotive compounds business acquired in the mid-1970s, was sold in February 1996 to a group of investors, which included the former president of K&W Products.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Businesses Galore



(Collage of Berkshire’s products created by Wall Street’s Whitney Tilson)



148





MORE THAN 70 OPERATING COMPANIES


INSURANCE BUSINESSES

NON-INSURANCE BUSINESSES

Company Employees

Berkshire Hathaway Homestate Companies 569

Berkshire Hathaway Reinsurance Group 573

Boat America 371

Central States Indemnity Co. 302

GEICO 24,805

General Re Corporation 2,342

Kansas Bankers Surety Company 14

Medical Protective Corporation 400

National Indemnity Primary Group 410

United States Liability Insurance Group 558

_____

Insurance total 30,344

Company Employees

Acme 1,845

Adalet(1) 211

Altaquip(1) 326

Applied Underwriters 472

Ben Bridge Jeweler 750

Benjamin Moore 2,283

Borsheims Jewelry 165

Burlington Northern Santa Fe (5) 38,000

The Buffalo News 755

Business Wire 501

CalEnergy(2) 353

Campbell Hausfeld (1) 438

Carefree of Colorado (1) 180

Clayton Homes 10,439

Cleveland Wood Products (1) 70

CORT Business Services 2,074

CTB International 1,505

Dairy Queen 2,002

Douglas/Quikut (1) 57

Fechheimer Brothers 595

FlightSafety 4,198

Forest River 6,033

France (1) 86

Fruit of the Loom (3) 30,065

Garan 4,330

H.H. Brown Shoe Group 1,250

Halex (1) 87

Helzberg’s Diamond Shops 2,191

HomeServices of America (2) 2,270

Iscar 10,393

Johns Manville 6,410

Jordan’s Furniture 787

Justin Brands 872

Kern River Gas (1) 157

Kingston (1) 67

Kirby (1) 507

Larson-Juhl 1,644

The Marmon Group (4) 15,987

McLane Company 14,699

MidAmerican Energy (2) 3,491

MidAmerican Energy Holdings (2) 27

MiTek Inc. 1,796

Nebraska Furniture Mart 2,562

NetJets 6,238

Northern Natural Gas (2) 854

Northern and Yorkshire Electric (2) 2,289

Northland (1) 53

PacifiCorp (2) 3,111

Pacific Power (2) 1,153

The Pampered Chef 760

Precision Steel Warehouse 172

Richline Group 1,749

Rocky Mountain Power (2) 2,078

Russell Corporation (3) 1,321

Other Scott Fetzer Companies (1) 155

See’s Candies 3,000

Shaw Industries 24,552

Stahl (1) 73

Star Furniture 698

TTI 2,952

United Consumer Financial Services (1) 199

Vanity Fair Brands (3) 2,435

Wayne Water Systems (1) 171

Wesco Financial Corp. 13

Western Enterprises (1) 271

R.C. Willey Home Furnishings 2,270

World Book (1) 177

XTRA 480

_______ __

Non-insurance total 230,154

Corporate Office 21

_______ __

_______ __

260,519

_______ __

_______ __

The Story of Warren Buffett

____________________

(1) A Scott Fetzer Company

(2) A MidAmerican Energy Holdings Company

(3) A Fruit of the Loom Inc. Company

(4) Approximately 130 manufacturing and service businesses that operate within 11 business sectors

(Source: Berkshire Hathaway’s

2010 Annual Report)

Of Permanent Value Major Operating Companies



149





BERKSHIRE’S WAL-MART CONNECTION


Berkshire agreed to loan Wal-Mart $125 million in the summer of 2002. Buffett followed the agreement with a visit to Bentonville, Arkansas, and met with Wal-Mart managers in a show of goodwill (Bloomberg, August 6, 2002).

Wal-Mart, the world’s largest company, was already a customer of Berkshire as it buys reinsurance from Berkshire’s General Re and National Indemnity.

Berkshire’s agreement to lend the money was part of a $2.85 billion one-year loan with 42 other lenders. The money—a line of credit known as a “back up” line—would only have been loaned if Wal-Mart couldn’t sell commercial paper. This backup line of credit is the cheapest form of debt.

By agreeing to lend the money, Berkshire was to earn only $37,500, a paltry sum but free money nonetheless. “He’s not tying up capital. It’s another sort of insurance play. It’s insurance that Wal-Mart can’t access capital, which is highly unlikely,” said Donald Yachtman of Yachtman Asset Management in Chicago (Bloomberg, August 6, 2002).

In his talk in Bentonville, Buffett praised Wal-Mart as a model for accounting and management. “If you look at some enormously successful companies, Wal-Mart and Microsoft, I don’t think those words (Ebitda) have ever appeared,” Buffett said (Bloomberg, August 6, 2002).

In a Fortune story (March 3, 2003) which named Wal-Mart the most admired company (and Berkshire No. 3 after Southwest Airlines), Buffett was quoted as saying he voted for Wal-Mart as No. 1. He has said Wal-Mart is “the retailing machine of all-time.”

He said he decided in April 1999 to buy 100 million shares of Wal-Mart; but after accumulating five million shares, he stopped buying because the price rose. “That one cost me about $8 billion,” said Buffett. “Talk about your least-admired decisions.” Buffett later said he made the mistake of getting “anchored to a price.”

Berkshire began correcting that call in 2005 when it revealed on November 21 that it owned 19.4 million shares of Wal-Mart which had advanced to 39 million shares by the end of 2009.

Berkshire’s Wal-Mart connections extend to its ownership of Garan, which does most of its business with Wal-Mart, and McLane’s (see McLane chapter), a food distributor that Berkshire bought from Wal-Mart that still serves Wal-Mart. Berkshire’s Fruit of the Loom supplies women’s apparel to Wal-Mart.

Berkshire investee Procter & Gamble, the consumer products giant that bought Gillette in 2005, does 17% of its business with Wal-Mart. About 300 employees work in P&G’s offices in Bentonville, Arkansas (home of Wal-Mart), overseeing sales of P&G brands to Wal-Mart (The Wall Street Journal, January 31, 2005).

At the time of the announcement of P&G’s bid to buy Gillette, about 13% of Gillette’s sales were through Wal-Mart. Wal-Mart is Berkshire-investee P&G’s number one customer.



Wal-Mart’s 2007 Annual Report

(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Story of Warren Buffett



One of Many Wal-Mart Supercenters

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Wal-Mart Connection



150





BUFFETT WRITES FROM BOND LAND


Buffett wrote the following letter about bonds to the Buffett Partnership on February 25, 1970:



To My Partners:



This letter will attempt to provide a very elementary education regarding tax-exempt bonds with emphasis on the types and maturities of bonds which we expect to help partners in purchasing next month. I have tried to boil this letter down as much as possible. Some of it will be a little weighty—some a little oversimplified. I apologize for the shortcomings in advance. I have a feeling I am trying to put all the meat of a 100-page book in 10 pages—and have it read like the funny papers.





Mechanics of Tax-Free Bonds



For those who wish our help, we will arrange the purchase of bonds directly from municipal bond dealers throughout the country and have them confirm sale of the bonds directly to you. The confirmation should be saved as a basic document for tax purposes. You should not send a check to the bond dealer since he will deliver the bonds to your bank, along with a draft which the bank will pay by charging your account with them. In the case of bonds purchased in the secondary market (issues already outstanding), this settlement date will usually be about a week after confirmation date whereas, on new issues, the settlement date may be as much as a month later. The settlement date is shown plainly on the confirmation ticket (in the case of new issues this will be the second and final ticket rather than the preliminary “when issued” ticket), and you should have the funds at your bank ready to pay for the bonds on the settlement date. If you presently own Treasury Bills, they can be sold on a couple of days’ notice by your bank upon your instructions, so you should experience no problems in having the money available on time. Interest begins to accrue to you on the settlement date, even if the bond dealer is late in getting them delivered to your bank. Bonds will be delivered in negotiable form (so-called “bearer” form which makes them like currency) with coupons attached. Usually the bonds are

in $5,000 denominations and frequently they can be exchanged for registered bonds (sometimes at considerable expense and sometimes free—it depends upon the terms). Bonds in registered form are nonnegotiable without assignment by you, since you are the registered owner on the Transfer Agent’s books. Bonds trade almost exclusively on a bearer basis, and it is virtually impossible to sell registered bonds without converting them back into bearer form. Thus, unless you are going to own great physical quantities of bonds, I recommend keeping bonds in bearer form. This means keeping them in a very safe place and clipping the coupons every six months. Such coupons, when clipped, can be deposited in your bank account just like checks. If you have $250,000 in bonds, this probably means about fifty separate pieces of paper ($5,000 denominations) and perhaps six or eight trips a year to the safe deposit section to cut and deposit coupons.



It is also possible to open a custody account with a bank where, for a fairly nominal cost, they will keep the bonds, collect the interest, and preserve your records for you. For example, a bank will probably perform the custodial service for you for about $200 a year on a $250,000 portfolio. If you are interested in a custodial account, you should talk to a trust officer at your commercial bank as to the nature of their services and cost. Otherwise, you should have a safe-deposit box.





Taxation



The interest received upon the deposit of coupons from tax-free bonds is, of course, free from federal income taxes. This means if you are at a 30% top federal income tax bracket, a 6% return from tax-free bonds is equivalent to about 81/2% from taxable bonds. Thus, for most of our partners, excluding minors and some retired people, tax-free bonds will be more attractive than taxable bonds. For people with little or no income from wages or dividends, but with substantial capital, it is possible that a combination of taxable bonds (to bring taxable income up to about the 25% or 30% bracket) plus tax-free bonds will bring the highest total after-tax income. Where appropriate, we will work with you to achieve such a balance.



The situation in respect to state income taxes is more complicated. In Nebraska, where the state income tax is computed as a percentage of the federal income tax, the effect is that there is no state tax on interest from tax-free bonds. My understanding of both the New York and California law is that tax-free bonds of entities within the home state are not subject to state income tax, but tax-free bonds from other states are subject to the local state income tax. I also believe that the New York City income tax exempts tax-free bonds of entities based within the state of New York, but taxes those from other states. I am no expert on state income taxes and make no attempt to post myself on changes taking place within the various states or cities. Therefore, I defer to your local tax advisor, but simply mention these few general impressions so that you will be alert to the existence of a potential problem. In Nebraska there is no need to have any local considerations enter into the after-tax calculation. Where out-of-state issues are subject to local taxation, the effective cost of your state or municipal income tax is reduced by the benefit received from deducting it on your federal income tax return. This, of course, varies with the individual. Additionally, in some states there are various taxes on intangible property which may apply to all tax-free bonds or just those of out-of-state entities. There are none of these in Nebraska, but I cannot advise on the other states.



When bonds are bought at a discount from par and later are sold or mature (come due and get paid), the difference between the proceeds and cost is subject to capital gain or loss treatment. (There are minor exceptions to this statement as, unfortunately, there are to most general statements on investments and taxes but they will be pointed out to you should they affect any securities we recommend.) This reduces the net after-tax yield by a factor involving the general rate of future capital gains taxes and the specific future tax position of the individual. Later on, we will discuss the impact of such capital gains taxes in calculating the relative attractiveness of discount bonds versus “full coupon” bonds.



Finally, one most important point. Although the law is not completely clear, you should probably not contemplate owning tax-free bonds if you have, or expect to have, general purpose bank or other indebtedness. The law excludes the deductibility of interest on loans incurred or continued to purchase or carry tax-free bonds, and the interpretation of this statute will probably tend to be broadened as the years pass. For example, my impression is that you have no problem if you have a mortgage against real property (unless the debt was incurred in order to acquire municipal bonds) in deducting the mortgage interest on your federal tax return, even though you own tax-free bonds at the same time. However, I believe that if you have a general bank loan, even though the proceeds were directly used to purchase stocks, a handball court, etc. and the tax-free bonds are not used for security for the loan, you are asking for trouble if you deduct the interest and, at the same time, are the owner of tax-free bonds. Therefore, I would pay off bank loans before owning tax-free bonds, but I leave detailed examination of this question to you and your tax advisor. I merely mention it to make you aware of the potential problem.





Marketability



Tax-free bonds are materially different from common stocks or corporate bonds in that there are literally hundreds of thousands of issues with the great majority having very few holders. This substantially inhibits the development of close, active markets. Whenever the city of New York or Philadelphia wants to raise money it sells perhaps twenty, thirty, or forty nonidentical securities, since it will offer an issue with that many different maturities. A 6% of New York coming due in 1980 is a different animal from a 6% bond of New York coming due in 1981. One cannot be exchanged for the other, and a seller has to find a buyer for the specific item he holds. When you consider that New York may offer bonds several times a year, it is easy to see why just this one city may have somewhere in the neighborhood of 1,000 issues outstanding. Grand Island, Nebraska, may have 75 issues outstanding. The average amount of each issue might be $100,000, and the average number of holders may be six or eight per issue. Thus, it is absolutely impossible to have quoted markets at all times for all issues, and spreads between bids and offers may be very wide. You can’t set forth in the morning to buy a specific Grand Island issue of your choosing. It may not be offered at any price, anywhere, and if you do find one seller, there is no reason why he has to be realistic compared to other offerings of similar quality. On the other hand, there are single issues such as those of the Ohio Turnpike, Illinois Turnpike, etc. that amount to $200 million or more and have thousands of bondholders owning a single entirely homogeneous and interchangeable issue. Obviously, here you get a high degree of marketability.



Marketability is generally a function of the following three items, in descending order of importance: (1) the size of the particular issue; (2) the size of the issuer (a $100,000 issue of the state of Ohio will be more marketable than a $100,000 issue of Podunk, Ohio); and (3) the quality of the issuer. By far the most sales effort goes into the selling of new issues of bonds. An average of over $200 million per week of new issues comes up for sale, and the machinery of bond distribution is geared to get them sold, large or small. In my opinion, there is frequently insufficient differential in yield at time of issue for the marketability differences that will exist once the initial sales push is terminated. We have frequently run into markets in bonds where the spread between bid and asked prices may get to 15%. There is no need to buy bonds with the potential for such grotesque markets (although the profit spread to the dealer who originally offers them is frequently wider than on more marketable bonds) and we will not be buying them for you. The bonds we expect to buy will usually tend to have spreads (reflecting the difference between what you would pay net for such bonds on purchase and receive net on sale at the same point in time) of from 2% to 5%. Such a spread would be devastating if you attempted to trade in such bonds, but I don’t believe it should be a deterrent for a long-term investor. The real necessity is to stay away from bonds of very limited marketability—which frequently are the type local bond dealers have the greatest monetary incentive to push.





Specific Areas of Purchase



We will probably concentrate our purchases in the following general areas:



1. Large revenue-producing public entities such as toll roads, electric power districts, water districts, etc. Many of these issues possess high marketability, are subject to quantitative analysis, and sometimes have favorable sinking funds or other factors which tend not to receive full valuation in the marketplace.



2. Industrial Development Authority bonds which arise when a public entity holds title to property leased to a private corporation. For example, Lorain, Ohio, holds title to an $80 million project for U.S. Steel Corp. The development authority board issued bonds to pay for the project and has executed a net and absolute lease with U.S. Steel to cover the bond payments. The credit of the city or state is not behind the bonds and they are only as good as the company that is on the lease. Many top-grade corporations stand behind an aggregate of several billion dollars of these obligations, although new ones are being issued only in small amounts ($5 million per project or less) because of changes in the tax laws. For a period of time there was a very substantial prejudice against such issues, causing them to sell at yields considerably higher than those commensurate with their inherent credit standing. This prejudice has tended to diminish, reducing the premium yields available, but I still consider it a most attractive field. Our insurance company owns a majority of its bonds in this category.



3. Public Housing Authority issues for those of you who wish the very highest grade of tax-free bonds. In effect, these bonds bear the guarantee of the U.S. Government, so they are all rated AAA. In states where local taxes put a premium on buying in-state issues, and I can’t fill your needs from (1) and (2), my tendency would be to put you into Housing Authority issues rather than try to select from among credits that I don’t understand. If you direct me to buy obligations of your home state, you should expect substantial quantities of Housing Authority issues. There is no need to diversify among such issues, as they all represent the top credit available.



4. State obligations of a direct or indirect nature. You will notice I am not buying issues of large cities. I don’t have the faintest idea how to analyze a New York City, Chicago, Philadelphia, etc. (a friend mentioned the other day when Newark was trying to sell bonds at a very fancy rate that the mafia was getting very upset because Newark was giving them a bad name). Your analysis of a New York City—and I admit it is hard to imagine them not paying their bills for any extended period of time—would be as good as mine. My approach to bonds is pretty much like my approach to stocks. If I can’t understand something, I tend to forget it. Passing an opportunity which I don’t understand—even if someone else is perceptive enough to analyze it and get paid well for doing it—doesn’t bother me. We will probably tend to purchase somewhere between five and ten issues for most of you. We will try not to buy in smaller than $25,000 pieces and will prefer larger amounts where appropriate. Smaller lots of bonds are usually penalized upon resale, sometimes substantially. The bond salesman doesn’t usually explain this to you when you buy the $10,000 of bonds from him, but it gets explained when you later try to sell the $10,000 to him. We may make exceptions where we are buying secondary market issues in smaller pieces—but only if we are getting an especially good price on the buy side because of the small size of the offering.





Callable Bonds



We will not buy bonds where the issuer of the bonds has a right to call (retire) the bonds on a basis which substantially loads the contract in his favor. It is amazing to me to see people buy bonds which are due in forty years, but where the issuer has the right to call the bonds at a tiny premium in five or ten years. Such a contract essentially means that you have made a forty-year deal if it is advantageous to the issuer (and disadvantageous to you) and a five-year deal if the initial contract turns out to be advantageous to you (and disadvantageous to the issuer). Such contracts are really outrageous and exist because bond investors can’t think through the implications of such a contract form and bond dealers don’t insist on better terms for their customers. One extremely interesting fact is that bonds with very unattractive call features sell at virtually the same yield as otherwise identical bonds which are noncallable.



It should be pointed out that most Nebraska bonds carry highly unfair call provisions. Despite this severe contractual disadvantage, they do not offer higher yields than bonds with more equitable terms. One way to avoid this problem is to buy bonds which are totally noncallable. Another way is to buy discount bonds where the right of the issuer to call the bond is at a price so far above your cost as to render the possible call inconsequential. If you buy a bond at 60 which is callable at 103, the effective cost to you of granting the issuer the right to prematurely terminate the contract (which is a right you never have) is insignificant. But to buy a bond of the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power at 100 to come due at 100 in 1999 or to come due at 104 in 1974, depending on which is to the advantage of the issuer and to your disadvantage, is the height of foolishness when comparable yields are available on similar credits without such an unfair contract. Nevertheless, just such a bond was issued in October 1969, and similar bonds continue to be issued every day. I only write at such length about an obvious point since it is apparent from the continual sale of such bonds that many investors haven’t the faintest notion how this loads the dice against them and many bonds salesmen aren’t about to tell them.





Maturity and the Mathematics of Bonds



Many people, in buying bonds, select maturities based on how long they think they are going to want to hold bonds, how long they are going to live, etc. While this is not a silly approach, it is not necessarily the most logical. The primary determinants in selection of maturity should probably be (1) the shape of the yield curve; (2) your expectations regarding future levels of interest rates; and (3) the degree of quotational fluctuation you are willing to endure or hope to possibly profit from. Of course, (2) is the most important but by far the most difficult upon which to comment intelligently.



Let’s tackle the yield curve first. When other aspects of quality are identical, there will be a difference in interest rates paid based upon the length of the bond being offered. For example, a top-grade bond being offered now might have a yield of 4.75% if it came due in six or nine months, 5.00% in two years, 5.25% in five years, 5.50% in ten years, and 6.25% in twenty years. When long rates are substantially higher than short rates, the curve is said to be strongly positive. In the U.S. Government bond market, rates recently have tended to produce a negative yield curve; that is, a long-term Government bond over the last year or so has consistently yielded less than a short-term one. Sometimes the yield curve has been very flat, and sometimes it is positive out to a given point, such as ten years, and then flattens out. What you should understand is that it varies, often very substantially, and that on an historical basis the present slope tends to be in the high positive range. This doesn’t mean that long bonds are going to be worth more but it does mean that you are being paid more to extend maturity than in many periods. If yields remained constant for several years, you would do better with longer bonds than shorter bonds, regardless of how long you intended to hold them. The second factor in determining maturity selection is expectations regarding future rate levels. Anyone who has done much predicting in this field has tended to look very foolish very fast. I did not regard rates as unattractive one year ago, and I was proved very wrong almost immediately. I believe present rates are not unattractive, and I may look foolish again. Nevertheless, a decision has to be made, and you can make just as great a mistake if you buy short-term securities now and rates available on reinvestment in a few years are much lower.



The final factor involves your tolerance for quotational fluctuation. This involves the mathematics of bond investment and may be a little difficult for you to understand. Nevertheless, it is important that you get a general grasp of the principles. Let’s assume for the moment a perfectly flat yield curve and a noncallable bond. Further assume present rates are 5% and that you buy two bonds, one due in two years and one due in twenty years. Now assume one year later that yields on new issues have gone to 3% and that you wish to sell your bonds. Forgetting about market spreads, commissions, etc. you will receive $1,019.60 for the original two-year $1,000 bond (now with one year to run) and $1,288.10 for the nineteen-year bond (originally twenty years). At these prices, a purchaser will get exactly 3% on his money after amortizing the premium he has paid and cashing the stream of 5% coupons attached to each bond. It is a matter of indifference to him whether to buy your nineteen-year 5% bond at $1,288.10 or a new 3% bond (which we have assumed is the rate current—one year later) at $1,000.00. On the other hand, let’s assume rates went to 7%. Again we will ignore commissions, capital gains taxes on the discount, etc. Now the buyer will only pay $981 for the bond with one year remaining until maturity and $791.00 for the bond with nineteen years left. Since he can get 7% on new issues, he is only willing to buy your bond at a discount sufficient so that accrual of this discount will give him the same economic benefits from your 5% coupon that a 7% coupon at $1,000 would give him.



The principle is simple. The wider the swings in interest rates and the longer the bond, the more the value of a bond can go up or down on an interim basis before maturity. It should be pointed out in the first example where rates went to 3%, our long-term bond would only have appreciated to about $1,070 if it had been callable in five years at par, although it would have gone down just as much if 7% rates had occurred. This just illustrates the inherent unfairness of call provisions.



For over two decades, interest rates on tax-free bonds have continuously gone higher, and buyers of long-term bonds have continuously suffered. This does not mean it is bad now to buy long-term bonds—it simply means that the illustration in the above paragraph has worked in only one direction for a long period of time, and people are much more conscious of the downside risks from higher rates than the upside potential from lower ones. If it is a fifty-fifty chance as to the future general level of interest rates and the yield curve is substantially positive, then the odds are better in buying long-term noncallable bonds than shorter-term ones. This reflects my current conclusion and, therefore, I intend to buy bonds within the ten-to-twenty-five-year range. If you decide to buy a twenty-year bond and hold the bond straight through, you are going to get the concentrated rate of interest, but if you sell earlier, you are going to be subject to the mathematical forces I have described, for better or for worse.



Bond prices also change because of changes in quality over the years but, in the tax-free area, this has tended to be—and probably will continue to be—a relatively minor factor compared to the impact of changes in the general structure of interest rates.





Discount Versus Full Coupon Bonds



You will have noticed in the above discussion that if you now wanted to buy a 7% return on a nineteen-year bond, you’d have a choice between buying a new nineteen-year bond with a 7% coupon rate or buying a bond with a 5% coupon at $791.60, which would pay you $1,000 in nineteen years. Either purchase would have yielded exactly 7% compounded semiannually to you. Mathematically, they are the same. In the case of tax-free bonds the equation is complicated; however, by the fact that the $70 coupon is entirely tax-free to you, whereas the bond purchased at a discount gives you tax-free income of $50 per year but a capital gain at the end of the nineteenth year of $208.40. Under the present tax law, you would owe anything from a nominal tax, if the gain, from realization of the discount was your only taxable income in the nineteenth year, up to a tax of over $70 if it came on top of very large amounts of capital gain at that time (the new tax law provides for capital gain rates of 35%, and even slightly higher on an indirect basis in 1972 and thereafter for those realizing very large gains). In addition to this, you might have some state taxes to pay on the capital gain.



Obviously, under these circumstances you are not going to pay the $791.60 for the 5% coupon and feel you are equally as well off as with the 7% coupon at $1,000. Neither is anyone else. Therefore, identical quality securities with identical maturities sell at considerably higher gross yields when they have low coupons and are priced at discounts than if they bear current high coupons.



Interestingly enough, for most taxpayers, such higher gross yields over-compensate for the probable tax to be paid. This is due to several factors. First, no one knows what the tax law will be when the bonds mature, and it is both natural and probably correct to assume the tax rate will be stiffer at that time than now. Second, even though a 5% coupon on a $1,000 bond purchased at $791.60 due in nineteen years is the equivalent of a 7% coupon on a $1,000 bond purchased at par with the same maturity, people prefer to get the higher current return in their pocket. The owner of the 5% coupon bond is only getting around 6.3% current yield on his $791.60 with the balance necessary to get him up to 7% coming from the extra $208.40 he picks up at the end. Finally, the most important factor affecting prices currently on discount bonds (and which will keep affecting them) is that banks have been taken out of the market as buyers of discount tax-free bonds by changes brought about in bank tax treatment through the 1969 Tax Reform Act. Banks have historically been the largest purchasers and owners of tax-free bonds and anything that precludes them from one segment of the market has dramatic effects on the supply-demand situation in that segment. This may tend to give some edge to individuals in the discount tax-free market, particularly those who are not likely to be in a high tax bracket when the bonds mature or are sold.



If I can get a significantly higher effective after-tax yield (allowing for sensible estimates of your particular future tax-rate possibilities), I intend to purchase discount bonds for you.



You should realize that because of the enormous diversity of issues mentioned earlier, it is impossible to say just what will be bought. Sometimes the tax-free bond market has more similarities to real estate than to stocks. There are hundreds of thousands of items of varying comparability, some with no sellers, and some with reluctant sellers and some with eager sellers. Which may be the best buy depends on the quality of what is being offered, how well it fits your needs, and the eagerness of the seller. The standard of comparison is always new issues where an average of several hundred million dollars’ worth have to be sold each week—however, specific secondary market opportunities (issues already outstanding) may be more attractive than new issues and we can only find out how attractive they are when we are ready to make bids.



The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Buffett Writes From Bond Land

Buffett Writes From Bond Land The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Buffett Writes From Bond Land

Buffett Writes From Bond Land The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Buffett Writes From Bond Land



151





WPPSS BONDS


Buffett quietly bought $139 million worth of Projects 1, 2, and 3 of Washington Public Power Supply System bonds in 1983 and 1984, stunning shareholders in Berkshire’s 1984 Annual Report.

The nuclear power plant construction corporation in Washington state (WPPSS) was so troubled it was dubbed “Whoops” after having to take large write-offs for nuclear power plants No. 4 and 5 when it couldn’t collect rates.

The shock deepened when Buffett explained how WPPSS had defaulted on $2.2 billion worth of bonds issued to help finance Projects 4 and 5. That stigma stained other projects, and Buffett was able to buy the bonds at a steep discount because they had fallen to distress levels in a sympathy move with the failed projects.

Naturally, ratings of the bonds indicated they were a high risk. Buffett was quoted as saying, “We don’t make judgments based on ratings. If we wanted Moody’s or Standard & Poor’s to run our money, we’d give it to them” (Omaha World-Herald, April 14, 1985).

Steve Wallman, head of Wallman Investment Counsel in Madison, Wisconsin, stated: “Our day-to-day lives don’t prepare us in the least for going against the crowd. In almost everything we do, success is a function of how well we go along with the crowd, not how well we go against it. As a result, going against the crowd, and ignoring what psychologists call social proof, is contrary to our nature. Little wonder value investing is so tough and so little used. Most people just don’t have the psychological musculature to carry the burden of negative opinion that goes with 50-cent dollars like WPPSS 1, 2, and 3.”

The bonds had a special appeal, however, offering a fixed 16.3% after-tax current yield, a $22.7 million annual return on the investment. The investment worked out profitably for Buffett. The projects went well, and the bonds rose to the occasion. The after-tax payoff arrived like clockwork into the Berkshire account. Buffett said he bought the bonds because he probably would have had to pay almost twice his WPPSS purchase price for a business bringing in that much after-tax money. Many of Berkshire’s “Whoops” bonds have been called, but Berkshire still holds a portion.

Although Buffett is not a great fan of bonds, he will buy them under special circumstances. He has a history of buying bonds of troubled companies. In the 1970s, he bought Chrysler’s depressed bonds when the firm was near collapsing, and Penn Central bonds for about 50 cents on the dollar after the railroad went bust. Both companies rallied back.

In 1986, he bought an additional $700 million of medium-term, tax-exempt bonds, which he considered the least objectionable alternative to stocks. For decades Berkshire’s bond purchases were handled by Bill Scott, the first employee Buffett ever hired.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value WPPSS Bonds



152





JUNK BONDS


I’m not an engineer. I don’t even know why the light goes on when I flip the switch. I do, however, know how to pick junk bonds,” Buffett said at a NetJets sales evening in Chicago on November 14, 2001.

He said Berkshire at that point held high yield bonds of about 10 companies out of a total of more than 2,000, adding that he never bought bonds when they are first issued or anywhere close to par value.

Back in 1989 and 1990, Buffett bought junk bond offerings of RJR Nabisco. The tobacco and food giant, known for Winston cigarettes, Life-Savers candy, Ritz crackers, Fig Newtons, and Oreo cookies, was the subject of a leveraged buyout by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts in 1988. With a $25 billion pricetag, it was the largest takeover in Wall Street history—a cap to the decade of greed.

The first hint that Buffett might be entering the junk bond market came at the annual meeting in 1990, when a shareholder asked if the junk bond market could ever become a fruitful place for a professional investor. “I’ll let you know in a year or two,” replied Buffett, known for saying, “Junk bonds will one day live up to their name.”

In late 1989, Buffett started accumulating the RJR bonds issued to help finance the takeover. In 1990, he added heavily to the holding. No one knew until the Berkshire Annual Report came out in 1991.

Even then, the news was easily missed; it was not until page 17 of his letter that Buffett made a one-paragraph mention of it. He wrote: “Our other major portfolio change last year was large additions to our RJR Nabisco bonds, securities that we first bought in late 1989. At yearend 1990, we had $440 million invested in these securities, an amount that approximated market value. [As I write this, their market value has risen by more than $150 million.]” Had almost any other company made a quick $150 million, it would have been, in newspaper parlance, the “lead” paragraph of the chairman’s letter.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1990 Annual Report: “In the case of RJR Nabisco, we feel the Company’s credit is considerably better than was generally perceived for awhile and that the yield we receive, as well as the potential for capital gain, more than compensates for the risk we incur (though that is far from nil). RJR has made asset sales at favorable prices, has added major amounts of equity, and in general is being run well.

“However, as we survey the field, most low-grade bonds still look unattractive. The handiwork of the Wall Street of the 1980s is even worse than we had thought: Many important businesses have been mortally wounded. We will, though, keep looking for opportunities as the junk market continues to unravel.”

Fortune reported the Nabisco purchase and asked Buffett if he wished he had bought more. “There are lots of things I wish I’d done in hindsight. But I don’t think much of hindsight, generally, in terms of investment decisions. You only get paid for what you do,” he said.

Many of the RJR Nabisco bonds were paying about 15%, making Buffett’s haul splendid return while he waited for management to sell some of their assets and keep their Oreo cookies stocked in the stores.

As junk bonds tanked, Buffett had spotted a gem, though he didn’t just wing it and buy large well-known company bonds at random. Only after intensive study of the massacred junk bond market, in which he said he found more carnage than he expected, did he pick RJR as the best hope of a good return.

Junk bonds, called high-yield bonds for their double-digit interest rates, were popularized in the 1980s by firms trying to find money to finance takeovers. The bonds were risky because the issuers were saddled with debt. But, once again, Buffett’s reading of the overall financial landscape and his precise timing produced another bonanza for Berkshire. Just as his RJR investment was made public, financial writers began offering stories about a comeback in the junk bond market.

Not only that, RJR was also beginning to get more notice for paring down its debt. As its losses were dropping dramatically, its creditworthiness improved. RJR started refinancing at lower rates.

On May 3, 1991, RJR announced it was retiring most of its junk bonds used to finance the buyout, using money it had raised in a stock offering. The company said it planned to redeem the bonds at face value, bonds that Buffett purchased at a steep discount.

Over the years, Buffett also made real money in Chrysler Financial, Texaco, and Time Warner bonds.

In the case of the Texaco bonds, the company had declared bankruptcy to keep its assets from being bought after a jury awarded Pennzoil $16.5 billion in damages for Texaco’s interference with Pennzoil’s attempted takeover of Getty Oil. “The bonds were cheap, assuming that a ‘reasonable settlement’ could be reached. The case was finally settled for $3 billion, which roughly represented the economic value of the transaction. Having bought the bonds at a discount, Berkshire Hathaway was able to sell them at a premium” (Thomas P. Au, A Modern Approach to Graham and Dodd Investing, p. 66).

Buffett had made a large profit quickly and would regain a lot of cash, which he knows how to deploy. Once again, Buffett created permanent value for Berkshire shareholders.

At year-end 1992, Berkshire held more than $1 billion of bonds in such entities as Washington Public Power Supply System and ACF Industries.

The bonds of ACF Industries, the rail-car manufacturing and leasing firm owned by Carl Icahn, gave Buffett a handsome profit when they were called in 1993.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 2001 Annual Report:

During 2001, we were somewhat more active than usual in “junk” bonds. Early in the Fruit of the Loom bankruptcy, we purchased the company’s public and bank debt at about 50% of face value. This was an unusual bankruptcy in that interest payments on senior debt were continued without interruption, which meant we earned about a 15% current return. Our holdings grew to 10% of Fruit’s senior debt, which will probably end up returning us about 70% of face value. Through this investment, we indirectly reduced our purchase price for the whole company by a small amount.



In the Berkshire 2002 Annual Report, Buffett wrote:

Last year we were … able to make sensible investments in a few “junk” bonds and loans. Overall, our commitments in this sector sextupled, reaching $8.2 billion by year-end.



Investing in junk bonds and investing in stocks are alike in certain ways. Both activities require us to make a price-value calculation and also to scan hundreds of securities to find the very few that have attractive reward/risk ratios. But there are important differences between the two disciplines as well. In stocks, we expect every commitment to work out well because we concentrate on conservatively financed businesses with strong competitive strengths, run by able and honest people. If we buy into these companies at sensible prices, losses should be rare. Indeed, during the 38 years we have run the company’s affairs, gains from the equities we manage at Berkshire (that is, excluding those managed at General Re/Cologne and GEICO) have exceeded losses by a ratio of about 100 to one.



Purchasing junk bonds, we are dealing with enterprises that are far more marginal. These businesses are usually overloaded with debt and often operate in industries characterized by low returns on capital. Additionally, the quality of management is sometimes questionable. Management may even have interests that are directly counter to those of debtholders. Therefore, we expect that we will have occasional large losses in junk issues. So far, however, we have done reasonably well in this field.



At the end of 2002, Berkshire held about $4 billion worth of junk bonds in the energy business and about $2 billion worth in the telecommunications sector.

Buffett rang up a huge gain by investing about $6.5 billion in junk bonds in late 2002. Some have guessed that within half a year or so, he had a return of about 25%.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 2003 Annual Report: “In 2002, junk bonds became very cheap, and we purchased about $8 billion of these. The pendulum swung very quickly though, and this sector now looks decidedly unattractive to us. Yesterday’s weeds are today priced as flowers.”

In Berkshire’s 2004 Annual Report, Buffett wrote:

The junk bond profits include a foreign exchange component. When we bought these bonds in 2001 and 2002, we focused first, of course, on the credit quality of the issuers, all of which were American corporations. Some of these companies, however, had issued bonds denominated in foreign currencies. Because of our views on the dollar, we favored these for purchase when they were available.



As an example, we bought £254 million of Level 3 bonds (103/4% of 2008) in 2001 at 51.7% of par, and sold these at 85% of par in December 2004. This issue was traded in euros that cost us 88¢ at the time of purchase but that brought $1.29 when we sold. Thus, of our $163 million overall gain, about $85 million came from the market’s revised opinion about Level 3’s credit quality, with the remaining $78 million resulting from the appreciation of the euro. (In addition, we received cash interest during our holding period that amounted to about 25% annually on our dollar cost.)



The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Junk Bonds



153





AMAZING AMAZON COLLECTIBLES


According to Bloomberg News (April 7, 2003), Berkshire bought some Amazon.com junk bonds (stock symbol: AMZN—amazing, if you will) in July 2002.

The $98.3 million investment was made shortly after Buffett praised Web vendor Amazon for its “particular courage” to account for stock options as an expense.

Buffett later owned $459 million of the bonds, according to Fortune (May 26, 2003). “I don’t know if Amazon is going to weigh 150 pounds or 300 pounds, but the one thing I do know is that they are not anorexic,” Buffett was quoted. “I’ve been using a computer for eight or 10 years now and still really pay for only three things on the Internet: The Wall Street Journal, online bridge, and books from Amazon. That they are one of only three companies that have gotten money out of my pocket tells me they are doing something right. … Here is a guy who took something that is right in front of us—selling books—and put it together with new technology to create in just a couple of years one of the biggest brand names in the world.”

At a business forum hosted by Microsoft on May 21, 2003, Buffett said that he still did not understand tech companies enough to buy their shares but knew a cheap bond when he saw one. “I try to stick with things I understand. Just take Amazon. I mean I can understand a company that has made it in the consumer field. I don’t understand it well enough to evaluate it, but the bonds were extraordinarily cheap a year, a year-and-a-half ago, and it was very clear to me that they would not only survive, but thrive.”

Berkshire’s GEICO auto insurance unit bought the high-risk, high-yield debt of Amazon, the world’s largest Web merchant, known particularly for its sale of books online. Bloomberg said Buffett sent Bezos a letter in July 24, 2002, praising his stock option stand, adding, “If I could show my appreciation by stepping up my book orders, I would. But you’re already getting all of my business.”

GEICO bought 10% discount notes for $900 per $1,000 face amount, according to filings, the Bloomberg story said. Berkshire also bought $60.1 million of Amazon’s 67/8% convertible bonds in August 2002.

The bonds, redeemable in May 2003 at $1,050 each, meant that Berkshire made 22% on an annualized basis. The bonds were issued in 1998, with no interest to be paid for five years.

Buffett and Bezos have both attended the Allen & Co. conference in Sun Valley.

The Bloomberg story also said filings showed that Berkshire had bought small amounts of the bonds of Tyco International, El Paso Corp., Nextel Communications, AOL TimeWarner, and AT&T Corp.

Amazon seems to sell most everything these days—in addition to their bonds and books, they have now added bras. Tennis beauty Anna Kournikova and Bezos teamed up to sell Anna’s “shock absorber sports bra” on Amazon. As the ad says, the bra “was designed especially for Anna Kournikova because only the ball should bounce.”

Bonds, books, and bras. Bezos must be cackling all the way to the bank.



Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s Kindle

Amazon’s Jeff Bezos and books, books, books

(Rex Rystedt/Time Life Pictures—

Getty Images)

The Story of Warren Buffett



You Can Buy a Book from This Guy.

Amazon.com CEO Jeff Bezos is shown at the online company’s offices overlooking the Seattle skyline on May 2, 2001.

(Photo by AP/Wide World Photos)

Of Permanent Value Amazing Amazon Collectibles



Beauty and Brains

Amazon’s Jeff Bezos and tennis star Anna Kournikova

do their thing.

(Photo by AP/Wide World Photos)



154





$30 BILLION IN FIXED-INCOME SECURITIES


Our largest nontraditional position at yearend was $4.6 billion at amortized cost, of long-term zero-coupon obligations of the U.S. Treasury. … Since rates fell in 1997, we ended the year with an unrealized pre-tax gain of $598.8 million in our zeros,” Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1997 Annual Report.

This was after disclosing “nontraditional” investments in oil and silver.

Over the years Berkshire has accumulated bonds as well as stocks: Berkshire inherited $3 billion in fixed-income securities when it bought GEICO. Berkshire raised its stake in bonds significantly in 1997, and inherited a massive amount of bonds with the General Re acquisition of 1998.

Bonds have been wide-ranging from U.S. Treasury strips to Birmingham, Alabama, Industrial Water Board bonds and Scottsboro, Alabama, water and gas bonds.

Buffett’s bond investments stretch from those Los Angeles County to the Suffolk County, New York sewer district; Cripple Creek, Texas, water and sewer revenue bonds to Utah Housing Authority bonds; Peoria, Illinois, economic development bonds to Massachusetts Turnpike Authority bonds.

The bonds are from $5,000 to millions of dollars in value, spanning from less than a year to more than 20 years in maturity. They pay from 1% to 15%.

It may have been that Buffett’s interest in run-of-the-mill bonds evaporated when convertible preferreds of his own making, such as those in Salomon and Gillette, became available; or perhaps he thought interest rates were getting too low for bonds to be an attractive alternative to stocks. Berkshire now has more than $30 billion in fixed-income investments.

According to Forbes (September 8, 1997), Buffett was buying a large amount of zero-coupon treasuries with maturities of 20 to 23 years. Berkshire actually bought $10 billion face value of U.S. bonds for a little more than $2 billion, according to The Wall Street Journal (September 15, 1997).

Wall Street firms created zero-coupon bonds by separating the principal and interest portions of U.S. Treasury bonds. The investments are sold at deep discounts to their principal amount. They pay no interest over the life of the bond, only the principal amount at maturity.

Each year the cost basis for the bondholder is accreted (increased) for tax purposes. The accretion represents taxable income to the holder even though it has not been received. This is called “phantom income” since tax liability exists even though income has not actually been received.

Should a zero-coupon bond be held to maturity, the bondholder’s cost basis would increase to par;; therefore, there would be no capital gain. A capital gain would occur if the investor sold the bond prior to maturity for more than the accreted basis. If sold for less than the accreted basis, the difference would be a capital loss.

Zeros are volatile, reacting to change in the course of interest rates, which results in swings in their value. If rates rise, zero-coupon bonds fare poorly because investors don’t receive interest payments to reinvest at new, higher rates. On the other hand, if interest rates fall, the locked-in reinvestment level helps them outperform other fixed-income instruments.

A zero-coupon bond eliminates reinvestment risk because interest payments

are not received by the investor but automatically reinvested at the yield-to-maturity. As with any bond, they lose value if interest rates rise, but bonds are beautiful when rates fall in disinflationary and deflationary environments. Investors typically buy zeros if inflation is under control and interest rates are likely to trend down.

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1997 Annual Report that he had sold, net of some purchases, about 5% of Berkshire’s stocks. The sales were made “changing our bond-stock ratio moderately in response to the relative values that we saw in each market, a realignment we have continued in 1998.”

With the 1998 second quarter earnings report, Berkshire announced that it had sold its entire position in long-term zero-coupon bonds and that a substantial portion of its $864 million investment gain that quarter was due to the sale.

Berkshire’s fixed-income investments at mid-2009 include about $2.5 billion in U.S. Treasuries; about $4.3 billion in state, municipalities, and political subdivision securities; about $11.4 billion in foreign government securities; about $13 billion in corporate bonds; and about $4.5 billion in mortgage-backed securities—for a total of about $36 billion.

Buffett originally gave funds to West End Capital’s Value Capital in 1998 and planned to stay in the fund another four years. West End “is diversifying its client risk so that if Buffett leaves they still have investors,” Bloomberg quoted a hedge fund expert as saying. The Value Capital fund tries to make money from bond arbitrage by betting on the price difference of related fixed-income securities. Berkshire’s Value Capital position was closed out in 2006.

The Wall Street Journal (December 29, 2000) reported that Buffett had been buying the junk bonds of Finova Group and Conseco, saying he had put several hundred million dollars into the distressed bonds.

When Finova, a Scottsdale, Arizona-based commercial lender, said it might seek bankruptcy protection, its credit rating lowered. The story reported Buffett bought the bonds at a little over 60 cents on the dollar. A Carmel, Indiana-based insurance and finance firm, Conseco was restructuring its business under new CEO Gary Wendt, the former GE Capital CEO.

Fortune (February 19, 2001) reported that Buffett had bought the junk bonds of Finova but not those of Conseco. Berkshire spokeswoman Debbie Bosanek confirmd The Fortune account.

Buffett reviewed this extensively in Berkshire’s 2000 Annual Report:

An example is a glaring error about Berkshire’s activities that appeared in the December 29 issue of The Wall Street Journal, a generally excellent paper that I have for all of my life found useful. On the front page (and above the fold, as they say) The Journal published a news brief that said, in unequivocal terms, that we were buying bonds of Conseco and Finova. This item directed the reader to the lead story of the Money and Investing section. There, in the second paragraph of the story, The Journal reported, again without any qualification, that Berkshire was buying Conseco and Finova bonds, adding that Berkshire had invested “several hundred million dollars” in each. Only in the 18th paragraph of the story (which by that point had jumped to an inside page) did the paper hedge a bit, saying that our Conseco purchases had been disclosed by “people familiar with the matter.”



Well, not that familiar. True, we had purchased bonds and bank debt of Finova — though the report was wildly inaccurate as to the amount. But to this day neither Berkshire nor I have ever bought a share of stock or a bond of Conseco.



At Wesco’s annual meeting in 2002, Munger gave some detail about how Berkshire buys bonds: “Berkshire holds bonds in two ways. In one way, we hold bonds in the insurance company portfolios because we can’t find stocks attractive enough—and therefore our default option is bonds. By and large, our default option has been mortgage-backed bonds in the last year or so. So most of the bonds are in that category.

“We also buy U.S. government bonds. We even buy a few junk bonds from time to time. That’s one way of investing money when we can’t find stocks that we like.

“The other way of investing in bonds is in our finance subsidiary at Berkshire as part of what I call ‘Miscellaneous Warren Buffett Financial Activity.’ I don’t think there’s a name for that in accounting, but that’s what

it is.

“As long as Warren’s doing it, I love to see it done. And we’ve made a few hundred million pre-tax dollars doing that over the years without much risk or fuss. So we have that extra category,” Munger added.

In a stunning move at the height of the bond market in the second quarter of 2003, Buffett sold about $9 billion of long-term U.S. Government Securities, virtually Berkshire’s entire position. The timing was right and the capital gain was about $600 million.

“A committee might have sold some bonds but never dumped virtually all of them. That’s where Buffett is unique,” said Berkshire shareholder David Hayden.

____________________

With the credit markets of 2008 in disarray, Berkshire beefed up its bond position by billions of dollars.

One example came in Berkshire’s mid-year report:

As of June 30, 2008, fixed maturity securities – Insurance and other included $2.4 billion in Federal Home Loan Bank discount notes that when purchased had maturity dates of more than three months but no greater than six months. Fixed maturity securities also included $6.5 billion (insurance and other—$2.1 billion and Finance and financial products—$4.4 billion) of investment grade auction rate securities and variable rate demand notes issued by various states, municipalities and political subdivisions. The interest rates on these instruments are variable and are periodically reset at up to 35 days intervals. While substantially all of these securities are insured by third parties, acquisitions were limited to securities where Berkshire assessed and concluded that the underlying credit of the issuers was good without the benefit of an insurer’s guarantee. Approximately 80% of these securities were rated A or higher without the benefit of an insurer guarantee and approximately 60% of the remaining securities were not rated on an underlying basis. There were no investments in these securities as of December 31, 2007.



The Story of Warren Buffett

Mark Byrne



(Photo from 2002 White Mountains Annual Report)

Of Permanent Value $30 Billion in Fixed-Income Securities



Berkshire’s Bond Guy

Mark Millard handles fixed-income investments at Berkshire headquarters. In addition to executing Buffett’s trades for Berkshire’s more than $30-billion bond portfolio, he handles billions in foreign-exchange currencies.

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)



155





$2 BILLION IN TXU’S JUNK BONDS


Buffett invested $2.1 billion of Berkshire’s money into high-yielding “junk bonds” issued by Texas electricity producer TXU Corporation according to Fortune (December 3, 2007).

An investment group headed by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, Texas Pacific, and Goldman Sachs bought out TXU for $44 billion in a landmark leveraged buyout.

Banks had agreed to make large bridge loans to help finance the deal, but got stuck with those loans in the enormous credit crunch of 2007. TXU now uses the proceeds from the bond sale, which amounted to a total of $3.9 billion, to pay down the bridge loans.

Berkshire had previously purchased the bonds through Goldman Sachs. Berkshire bought two issues: one of $1.1 billion of 10.25% bonds at 95 cents on the dollar for an effective yield of 11.2%. Berkshire also bought $1 billion of 10.5% PIK-toggle bonds (bonds whose interest can be paid in cash or in more bonds) for 93 cents on the dollar for an effective yield of 11.8%.

Berkshire bought stock in TXU in 2002 when the company was close to bankruptcy and then sold it for a big profit in 2004.

Buffett was quoted as saying the move was a bet on the utility industry. Dallas-based TXU, now known as Energy Future Holdings, serves 2.5 million customers in Texas. Buffett also said these were the only junk bonds he had a current interest in, adding that other junk bond issues may give new meaning to the work “junk.”

Berkshire’s investment came at a time when it stood atop a triple-A credit rating in the midst of one of the worst credit crisis in memory. As once reasonably regarded debt was repackaged and sold during a housing slump and mortgage crisis, Berkshire appeared ready to use its sterling credit rating and cash to pick over distressed debt on sale by mortgage lenders, home builders, and banks. Indeed, Buffett’s junk bond purchase came during a time when many financial institutions had a huge thirst for new capital from a creditworthy source.

Dow Jones Newswires (December 4, 2007) quoted Portfolio’s Felix Salmon as saying, “It’s fascinating to me that Warren Buffett seems perfectly happy to buy up $2.1 billion of this paper. Maybe he thinks that TXU is too politically well-connected to be allowed to default, and he’s making a moral-hazard play. Or maybe he’s making a stealth takeover bid for TXU himself, buying up the senior debt in the expectation that it will default and that he will be able to convert it into cheap equity.”

GETTING BURNED ON BONDS

Buffett recorded a $1 billion loss in 2010 on the $2.1 billion of the TXU junk bonds. The current company has been struggling with a huge debt load and falling natural gas prices. Many of the bonds were trading at 40 to 60 cents on the dollar in 2011.

Berkshire said on June 24, 2011 that “substantially all” of its $1.02 billion impairment on fixed-income holdings in the fourth quarter of 2010 was tied to investments in Energy Future Holdings which is trying to stave off default.

“The development in the fourth quarter and uncertainly regarding the direction of future natural gas prices were collectively viewed as negative,” Berkshire’s Chief Financial Office Marc Hamburg was quoting as saying in a May 9 letter to the SEC.

In the spring of 2011, the Kravis firm gave Buffett and other investors the chance to swap their unsecured debt in the unregulated part of the utility for new notes that were secured against assets but worth only 70% of face value.

While some investors swapped, Buffett did not.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value $2 Billion in TXU’s Junk Bonds



156





LENDER OF LAST RESORT


In 2008 and early 2009, Buffett became the lender of last resort by buying $18 billion in preferred stock and debt, with some investments earning a rate of 15%. Buffett bought $5 billion of preferred stock in Goldman Sachs and $3 billion in GE in 2008. In 2009, he made big investments in Swiss Re and smaller investments in USG, Harley-Davidson, Sealed Air, and Tiffany. All these investments brought high income to Berkshire and often carried the rights to buy more stock.

HOG

Berkshire invested $300 million in Harley-Davidson in February 2009, getting an astronomical 15% annual interest rate return.

Berkshire and Harley’s biggest shareholder, Davis Select Advisers, each bought $300 million in senior unsecured notes that are due in 2014. The money will be used to bolster Harley’s lending activities. Harley’s shares (with the appropriate symbol of HOG) soared with the news after taking a huge hit in the previous year.

SEALED AIR

Also, in February 2009, Berkshire and Davis Select Advisers teamed up in a private offering and each bought $150 million in Sealed Air unsecured senior notes due in 2014. The notes pay 12%.

TIFFANY

On February 13, 2009, Berkshire agreed to buy $250 million of debt from Tiffany & Co., the world’s second-largest luxury jeweler. Half of the investment is in eight-year notes and half is in 10-year notes, all paying 10% a year.

VULCAN MATERIALS

Berkshire also has a $400 million debt position in Vulcan Materials, a crushed stone maker based in Birmingham, Alabama. The investment pays Berkshire a rate of 10.3% a year.

INCOME

Over much of 2008 and into 2009, Buffett made a number of large preferred stock and debt investments with high returns that are bringing Berkshire about $1.5 billion in annual income.

The preferred stock investments include:

Goldman Sachs: $5 billion at 10% = $500 million (redeemed)

GE: $3 billion at 10% = $300 million

Wrigley: $2.1 billion at 5% = $105 million

Swiss Re: $2.7 billion at 12% = $327 million (redeemed)

Dow Chemical: $3 billion at 8.5% = $255 million

Debt:

Wrigley: $4.4 billion at 11.5% = $504 million

Harley-Davidson: $300 million at 15% = $45 million

USG: $300 million at 10% = $30 million

Tiffany: $250 million at 12% = $18 million

Vulcan Materials: $400 million at 10.3% = $40 million

Warrants of Goldman Sachs are in the money at a price of $115.

Warrants of GE are underwater at stock price $22.25.



Buffett Hogs a Harley

Buffett rides a Harley at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2006.

((Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Tiffany & Co. Logo

Of Permanent Value Lender of Last Resort



157





MORE THAN $40 BILLION IN CASH


Berkshire keeps wads of cash in its pockets. At the end of the third quarter of 2010, it had $35 billion in cash. Cash is generally king, but investors like to beat money market rates. The old saying is: “A ship in harbor is safe, but that’s not what ships are for.”

In a write-up about Berkshire (Positive Patterns, September 2003), Bob Howard said that Buffett is “more liquid than comedian Foster Brooks.” This is because Berkshire sits on more than $60 billion in cash and bonds.

“The opportunity created by Berkshire’s unprecedented nest egg is a pretty phenomenal one. Given the non-dilutive, non-leveraged way it has been amassed, it’s probably unprecedented in the history of capitalism” (Oak Value Capital Management report, June 2004).



Liquidity

New money arrives at Berkshire at roughly the rate of $1 million an hour. These are 100s

with Buffett’s autograph.





The Story of Warren Buffett



Liquid Foster Brooks

(AP/Photo)

Of Permanent Value $25 Billion in Cash



158





SAVING SALOMON


“Ingenious Odysseus...Yet learn that your next journey

will be a strange destination.” (Homer)

After a lifetime of denouncing Wall Street’s demented short-term mentality, Buffett made a $700 million preferred stock investment in the Salomon Inc. investment banking firm on September 28, 1987.

“It’s a huge commitment. We’ll know in 10 years whether it was a great idea,” he said at the time. He was fortunate to allow himself such an un-Wall-Street-like time frame. The investment, at best, turned out so-so, not counting huge headaches. In 1997, Salomon was sold to Travelers Group which merged with Citicorp in 1998.

“Without borrowing, it pretty much empties the piggy bank for now,” Buffett said of the firm (The Wall Street Journal, September 30, 1987). Buffett long had been a critic of Wall Street’s short-term trading fixation as well as its excesses ranging from corporate jets to swanky dining rooms. So why Salomon? Why the heart of Wall Street? And why particularly in a firm widely known for aggressiveness and shrewd, hair-trigger trading?

“Why are we vocal critics of the investment banking business when we have a $700 million investment in Salomon? I guess atonement is probably the answer,” he said at the Berkshire annual meeting in 1991.

The real answer may be that he got a sweet deal in a worldwide franchise. Salomon, founded in 1910, was one of the largest and most profitable brokerage firms in the United States. In 1996, Salomon managed more than $310 billion in fixed-income offerings for issuers in 47 countries.

In hindsight, Buffett’s transaction with Salomon could not have been worse. The stock market crash of 1987 was only three weeks away—the day the market dropped 508 points, or almost 23%—its worst single-day loss in modern times.

The crash sent almost all stocks into a nose-dive. To muddy the waters even more, brokerage stocks particularly were hit because of their cyclical nature and because overexpansion in the securities industry had knocked down margins. The crash triggered a lasting tailspin for brokerage stocks, dragging Salomon’s stock price down with it.

When Buffett bought the preferred stock, Salomon’s common stock traded at about $32 a share. After the crash, the common stock eventually sank to a low of $16 a share. (At that price, the firm was called “Shit Brothers” by some.)

Instead of buying Salomon stock, Buffett and then-Salomon Chairman John

Gutfreund (pronounced “good friend”) agreed that Berkshire would buy a newly issued preferred stock—a Salomon financial instrument that would pay Berkshire a 9% annual dividend. Important differences between common and preferred stock made preferred stock more advantageous during that volatile time.

Common stock is a security which represents ownership in a company, and although common stockholders can benefit most if business is good, they assume the primary risk if business sours.

Dividends are paid to preferred stockholders before any are paid to common stockholders. If the company goes under, a preferred stockholder has a claim to the assets before a common stockholder.

Berkshire never lost a cent on its investment in Salomon even though the firm’s common stock languished for years after Buffett’s purchase. Berkshire was insulated, short of bankruptcy, through its preferred investment. Buffett has called such investments, “Treasury bonds with lottery tickets attached.”

Salomon’s 9% dividend paid to Berkshire was largely exempt from corporate taxes because corporations don’t have to pay taxes on 70% of their dividend income on preferred stocks. Perhaps it was the attractiveness of the deal that triggered Buffett into making a move that could have been a severe miscalculation of upside potential. Berkshire shareholders were surprised. After all, they had listened to him deride Wall Street for years.

Buffett got into bed with Salomon, and it caused him some sleepless nights. Gutfreund had to do some hard selling to the Salomon board to get it to bite on a deal that clearly favored Berkshire.

In 1987, Salomon was under pressure from a takeover threat from Revlon Chairman Ronald Perelman. Perelman was trying to buy a 14% stake in Salomon stock held by Mineral Resources, a Bermuda-based company controlled by the South African Oppenheimer family. Buffett got his investment and Perelman backed off. The Mineral Resources block was repurchased by Salomon.

For this and his subsequent preferred stakes in Gillette, US Airways, and Champion International, where takeover threats were real or perceived, Buffett became known as a “White Knight,” stepping in to save the takeover targets.

In Michael Lewis’ Liar’s Poker (p. 227), an account of his bond trading days at Salomon, he recalled Gutfreund saying that if Buffett’s plan were rejected in favor of Perelman’s, he (Gutfreund), would resign. “I never stated it as a threat. I was stating a fact,” Lewis quoted Gutfreund.

In the book’s most famous moment, epitomizing the money madness and loose ways that led to the Salomon scandal in 1991, Gutfreund, a cigar-smoking, gruff, hard-edged man, challenged his chief trader, John Meriwether (who later founded Long-Term Capital Management), to a hand of liar’s poker—a game where a series of players each hold a dollar bill.

This particular challenge which Lewis says took place in early 1986, started when Gutfreund approached Meriwether for a million-dollar hand. Meriwether—realizing a game against his boss was a no-win proposition—outbluffed Gutfreund by saying he’d only play for $10 million. At that point Gutfreund backed off saying, “You’re crazy.” At Salomon, the incident was denied.

The buccaneer spirit at Salomon was exemplified by Gutfreund’s description of a good trader as someone “ready to bite the ass off a bear.” Tom Wolfe partly researched his book, The Bonfire of the Vanities, at Salomon’s trading floor, encountering some “Masters of the Universe” (The New York Times, September 30, 1997).

The high living of Gutfreund, and his socialite wife Susan, was publicized in

articles describing an estimated $20 million fix-up of their $6 million duplex on New York’s Fifth Avenue. They spent millions more on a home in Paris.

Buffett may have had second thoughts about Gutfreund along the way. A Los Angeles Times Magazine piece (February 16, 1992) said Buffett “hit the roof” in October 1990 when Gutfreund came to a Salomon board of directors’ compensation committee with a plan to boost bonuses by $120 million at a time when Salomon was struggling. Buffett asked Gutfreund to lower the figure, but Gutfreund countered with a request for $127 million. Buffett voted against the plan, but it passed anyway.

Even operationally, Salomon had a record of overexpansion, exorbitant bonuses, and an overly ambitious plan to invest in and occupy a dramatic new office tower at New York City’s Columbus Circle that Mortimer Zuckerman hoped to build. Salomon decided to scrap its plans, causing it to forfeit about $100 million.

In February 1991, Salomon moved from One New York Plaza, known for its football field size trading rooms, to 7 World Trade Center, which collapsed in the terrorist attack of September 11, 2001.

A number of Salomon’s investments fared poorly. Forays into merchant banking that used the firms own money for investments in leveraged buyouts of Revco and Southland, which wound up in bankruptcy proceedings, were lackluster. For all Salomon’s worldwide business expertise and range of deep talent apparent from the gilt-edged résumés of its employees, Salomon hadn’t performed well for its shareholders. Its stock price had changed little from where it was a decade earlier although its book value tripled in that time, up from about $11 a share to about $50 a share. Berkshire and Salomon had done business for a long time. Salomon sold some debt for Berkshire in 1973, and conducted business with Berkshire even before that.

Buffett has thrown a lot of business Salomon’s way just on behalf of Berkshire. Berkshire’s zero-coupon bond was underwritten by Salomon, and Salomon and Berkshire have traded huge amounts of securities back and forth.

In 1996, Berkshire (and its affiliates including GEICO) bought about $4 billion in securities from Salomon and sold $3.7 billion, paying fees of about $10.4 million.

“IRREGULARITIES”

On August 9, 1991, Salomon, a Wall Street powerhouse largely from government bond trading, disclosed that it had uncovered “irregularities and rule violations” in connection with its bids at Treasury securities auctions, the most important of all financial markets. It’s not the sort of thing that gets votes for the vestry.

The Salomon scandal was underway. The firm had been buying more than its fair and legal share of the bonds sold to finance government debt.

Salomon said bids were submitted in the names of firms that had not authorized Salomon to make them. Also, the 35% threshold—intended to keep one buyer from dominating the market—was in some instances deliberately breached. Although the firm itself revealed the infractions and suspended four employees, it was hardly out front with the disclosures, making them known only after the government was six weeks into an investigation of a “squeeze” in the May auction of two-year Treasury notes. A squeeze occurs when a group of buyers controls a disproportionately large amount of securities and forces other buyers to pay more for securities later, thus undermining fairness in the market. In this case, Salomon was investigated for “cornering” but was never charged.

A government probe was launched after competing firms complained that Salomon had corralled too big a piece of the $12.26 billion notes sold in May and then squeezed competitors by driving up prices (The Wall Street Journal, August 12, 1991). Even though Salomon had time to assess their situation, the Gutfreund management team released information about only part of its maneuvers.

On August 14, the firm said that although top Salomon officials, including Gutfreund, President Thomas Strauss, and Vice Chairman John Meriwether, knew in April of an earlier illegal bid, they had not reported it to authorities. Salomon had disclosed nothing until faced with a federal investigation. It was Munger who alerted Buffett that information was being withheld from the board (Fortune, October 27, 1997).

Salomon said it bought $1.1 billion in government securities from customers under questionable arrangements, and further, that a bogus bid for $1 billion of bonds was carried out inadvertently as a result of a botched practical joke!

Salomon officials later reported that Salomon’s government-bond trading chief Paul Mozer put a client up to making a false bid that he would later stop and then have the client call to complain that the order had not been filled. The client was to call and rattle a soon-to-retire saleswoman on whom Mozer was trying to play a joke. But the joke was on Mozer. Although Mozer crossed out the bid, a clerk did not understand that it was canceled and submitted it anyway. Some joke.

Early reaction to the scandal was summarized best by William Simon, former Treasury secretary and former Salomon partner: “Good God. I’ll be damned. Good God. That can be my only reaction” (The Wall Street Journal, August 15, 1991).

Within days, Salomon’s stock fell from $36 to $25 a share, eventually plummeting to a low of $20 a share in September 1991. Its bonds plunged as credit agencies threatened lower ratings; some big investors ceased to do business with Salomon as many corporations gave their underwriting business to rival firms.

The Treasury Department yanked Salomon’s status as a primary dealer in the Treasury market. However, hours later that fateful August 18, 1991, Salomon was allowed to retain its role as a primary dealer but was temporarily suspended from submitting bids for its customers at Treasury auctions.

The New York Times headline read: Treasury Punishes Salomon Brothers and then Relents—Buffett Now Chairman—Resignations and Dismissals, an Appeal to Brady, End Suspension of Firm. Then began the story:

In an extraordinary action, the Treasury Department yesterday suspended Salomon Brothers Inc., one of Wall Street’s biggest trading and investment houses, from bidding at Treasury auctions because of the scandal involving the firm’s alleged illegal bidding in that market. But hours later, the department partly reversed itself after a personal appeal to Nicholas F. Brady, the Treasury Secretary, by Warren E. Buffett, who was named chairman and chief executive officer of the scandal-torn firm at a dramatic weekend board meeting yesterday.



In the four hours of suspense between the two actions [the Treasury’s ban and partial reversal], Buffett struggled passionately to ward off a tragedy he saw threatening to unfold. In Buffett’s opinion, the ban put Salomon … in sure danger of having immediately to file for bankruptcy. Even more important, he believed on that day, as he does now, that the collapse of Salomon would have shaken the world’s financial system to its core.



Buffett told Brady of his deep concerns, adding, “Nick, this is the most important day of my life.”



Brady said, “Don’t worry, Warren, we’ll get through this.”



During the meeting about Salomon’s fate, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan said, “The trouble, unfortunately, is that what we can’t do is suspend them temporarily as a primary dealer. It’s like executing somebody technically and then resuscitating them” (The Wall Street Journal, January 10, 1997).

Still, a crisis swept the firm with investigations into every facet of its activities while droves of lawsuits were stamped in at the courthouse. Gutfreund said he would resign and a frantic call was placed to Buffett, “Mr. Clean,” who offered to tackle the top job. He immediately flew to New York.

From that moment of management overhaul forward, Buffett would never again be unknown. But that was hardly the point. Buffett had to face the mess at Salomon.

Gutfreund told a colleague that reading The Wall Street Journal story about top Salomon officials knowing about illegal bidding was like reading his obituary (Institutional Investor, September 1991). He called Buffett and said that he and Strauss were going to resign. Later that morning, Buffett called Gutfreund back and volunteered to head the firm on an interim basis. In the same interview, Buffett said: “You won’t believe this—because I don’t look that dumb—but I volunteered for the job of interim chairman. It’s not what I want to be doing, but it will be what I will be doing until it gets done properly.”

In a talk to University of Nebraska students October 10, 1994, Buffett said:

Salomon owed more money than any other institution in the United States, with the exception of Citicorp, the big bank. … Salomon’s total liabilities were just under $150 billion. Now $150 billion was roughly equal to the profits of all of the companies on the New York Stock Exchange that year. … The problem about this $150 billion was that basically, it almost all came due within the next couple of weeks … so we were faced with the fact all over the world, because the money was owed all over the world, that people on that Friday and the following Monday were going to want us to pay back $140 odd billion or something close to it, which is not the easiest thing to do.



Buffett faced the complex issues of appeasing investors and clients, dealing with criminal and civil investigators, and worrying about some new bomb exploding on his watch. But Buffett was the logical person to turn to, and he got things off on the right foot when he quickly met with Salomon’s managing directors at the World Trade Center, telling them that the firm’s reputation for staying just within the bounds of the rules would not be acceptable (The New York Times, August 17, 1991). He told them he would be open and that the firm faced a huge management job in dealing with fines and litigation costs.

The story was covered by everyone including Barron’s Alan Abelson, who took his usual satirical approach (August 19, 1991): “The caretaker appointed to look after Salomon in the absence of Gutfreund and Strauss is an out-of-towner, from Omaha, Nebraska, to be exact, and he runs a textile company. But he’s supposed to be a fast learner, so we’ve no doubt he’ll pick up enough about the securities business while on the job to keep the traders from sneaking off to play paddle ball or catch the 3 p.m. showing of Terminator 2.”

This is what Buffett did on the Sunday afternoon of August 18, 1991:

1) accepted the resignations of Gutfreund, Strauss, and Meriwether; 2) fired Paul Mozer as well as Thomas Murphy; 3) named Deryck C. Maughan, the former Tokyo-based chairman of Salomon Brothers Asia Ltd., chief operating officer; telling Maughan minutes before a press conference he was to be Salomon’s CEO; 4) successfully appealed to Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady to partially lift an hours-old government suspension of Salomon trading in Treasury securities auctions.

“I had no idea,” Maughan said at Borsheims before the Berkshire annual meeting in 1994 when asked if he knew Buffett would pick him. “He called 12 of us in for 10 minutes each and asked each of us who should run the firm. I told him I was not a U.S. national and was not a trader.

“We got in an elevator. He punched a button and he said, ‘Deryck, you’re the one.’” Two minutes later they met with the press.

Maughan said Buffett immediately had to keep up his constant calls to Nicholas Brady. Maughan had to be on the trading floor supervising massive selling.

“We were selling out. Our CEO was gone,” Maughan said as the firm faced a sudden loss of business and funding. Salomon had even quit trading its own paper.

Buffett and Maughan met with the press for about three hours August 18, 1991, saying the illegal trading first came to the attention of Salomon in April, when Mozer received a photocopy of a letter indicating the Treasury was aware of a problem in one of its auctions. The letter from a federal regulator was sent to a customer whose name Salomon had used to make a bid without authorization.

Mozer approached Meriwether and “showed him a letter which was clearly going to lead to Mr. Mozer being in trouble,” Buffett said.

Top management discussed the matter with its lawyers and determined that the government should be told, Buffett said, but it was not done.

“I cannot explain the subsequent failure to report,” Buffett said, adding that he had long been an admirer of Gutfreund but that he was distressed by management’s actions. “The failure to report is, in my view, inexplicable and inexcusable.” Buffett and Gutfreund agreed on September 3, 1991, not to talk to one another during the investigation.

ROOTING OUT THE SCANDAL

Buffett pledged to root out the scandal and improve the firm’s reputation. Richard Breeden, then chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, later told The New York Times (March 18, 2002), “that if I wanted an S.E.C. enforcement lawyer to sit next to him in his office” that would be acceptable. Salomon itself was acting under intense pressure during the crisis. Once a reporter called to speak to Salomon’s spokesman, Robert Baker, and was told, “I’ll have Mr. Buffett call you.” The reporter replied, “Gosh, that’d be great.”

When Baker called back, the reporter suddenly broke off saying he’d have to call back. Baker replied, “Warren’s on the line.” Later Baker said Buffett had set the company on a new path, even while dividing his time between New York and Omaha. At the beginning of the crisis, Buffett stayed in New York several days a week and then began visiting about one or two days a week. “He’s found he can run things from Omaha pretty well,” Baker said. “Warren has given the company its strategic direction. … He has kept his focus on the regulators and the capital structure.”

Buffett focused most of his attention on matters in Washington. Baker said, “It’s our belief that those who misbehaved are gone. New management dealt with that very swiftly. Warren has cleaned house. I see no reason for the government to shut us down. … We are cooperating with the government in an unprecedented way. We are cooperating to a greater degree than in any case in the history of Wall Street.”

Salomon’s business, Baker said, began rebounding with the return of such clients as the World Bank and the state of Massachusetts.

“Our bond underwriting is returning fast. We still have some trouble on some of the equity underwritings because of the two-, three-, four-month lead time. Some clients don’t want to deal with the uncertainty for that long. This has to hurt us in getting some new business,” Baker said.

A story in The Wall Street Journal reported that Buffett stayed at the Plaza hotel and wore expensive suits, But Baker denied this: “He stays at the Marriott for $190 a night so he can walk to work.” Okay, said Baker, he has a couple of expensive suits. “They’re not even tailored and he jokes that when he wears an expensive suit, he makes it look like a $300 suit,” Baker added.

As for staying at the Plaza, Buffett has stayed there in years past on spring trips, largely because Mrs. Buffett liked to stay there, according to Buffett’s daughter, Susan. “He’d just as soon stay at Motel 6. … He’s been staying at either the Vista or the Marriott,” she said.

In subsequent days of the Salomon scandal, Buffett fired Salomon’s top lawyer, Donald Feuerstein, and replaced him with Robert Denham, a 1971 Harvard Law School graduate. Denham was the managing partner of the Los Angeles–based Munger, Tolles & Olson law firm founded by Charles Munger, Berkshire’s vice chairman.

Buffett said at the Berkshire annual meeting in 1994 that he quickly called Robert Denham, who was living a peaceful life in California. “I told him I was in a mess.” He also called Salomon’s treasurer, John MacFarlane, who was competing in a triathlon. “Not a practice Charlie and I follow,” Buffett quipped. MacFarlane now works for Tutor Investments Corporation.

Buffett described Denham, the top student in his freshman law class, as his first and only choice. For 17 years, Denham had worked with Buffett on such Berkshire acquisitions as Scott Fetzer and on such investments as American Express, Champion, and Salomon itself (Business Week, September 9, 1991).

Soon Buffett told the Salomon sales force, “It’s my job to deal with the past. It’s your job to maximize the future, and it can be a huge future.” He added, “Everyone must be his own compliance officer. That means that everything you do can be put on the front page of the newspaper, and there will be nothing that cannot stand up to scrutiny.”

Buffett accepted the resignation of Salomon’s outside counsel—Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz—a highly regarded firm that had represented Salomon for years and had helped Gutfreund bring in Buffett as an investor in 1987 (The Wall Street Journal, September 3, 1991).

As for the number of lawsuits Salomon faced, Buffett later said, “I may be the American Bar Association’s Man of the Year before the year is over.” Buffett slashed bonuses, making them payable largely in stock rather than cash, reduced debt, and had every Treasury auction bid cross-checked at least twice.

He told Salomon’s Phibro Energy unit to cut all ties with Marc Rich & Company, a major client of Phibro’s, saying Salomon wouldn’t do business with Marc Rich, a U.S. fugitive who later was granted a controversial pardon by President Clinton.

Amidst the crisis, what about Berkshire?

“Berkshire works pretty well, some say, without me,” Buffett said. “It really is a lot less complicated operation than Salomon. I’ve always said I could run [Berkshire] working five hours a week. Maybe we’ll test that. But I hope not for too long.” Buffett added, “I was practically looking for a job” when the crisis broke because Berkshire’s managers run things so well.

“The only thing I am is an addressee on the envelope when they send me the check,” he said. “I can spend whatever time is needed. … If I quit thinking about this, I’d probably just have a big hole up there.”

Buffett’s selection of Maughan quickly proved wise as he rose to the occasion, calling for integrity by all at the firm.

Maughan began following Buffett’s lead on humor. Maughan pointed out he was not from Salomon’s trading culture. “You cannot graft the head of an investment banker onto the body of a trader and not get tissue rejection,” Maughan said.

Soon, Buffett testified before Congressional committees. On September 4, 1991, he testified before the House Energy and Commerce finance subcommittee. At the end of the session, subcommittee chairman Edward Markey asked him to sum up his recommendations in one minute.

“I’m not sure I can drag it out for one minute,” Buffett replied. “Integrity is paramount.”

On September 11, 1991, Buffett addressed Congress with the following:

A week ago when I testified before the House subcommittee, I began by apologizing for the misdeeds of Salomon employees that have brought us here. Normally, I would not wish to be repetitious. But in my opinion this particular message bears repetition many times over. The nation has a right to expect its rules and laws to be obeyed, and Salomon did not live up to this obligation.



Our customers have a right also to expect that their names will not be drawn into some underhanded scheme. So to you and them and the American people I apologize on behalf of more than 8,000 honest and decent Salomon employees as well as myself.



Mr. Chairman, I also want to thank you for holding these hearings in such a timely manner. You and the American people have a right to know exactly what went on at Salomon Brothers, and I am here to tell you the full truth as I know it to date. When and if I learn more it will immediately be disclosed to the proper authorities.



Many decades ago J.P. Morgan stated the objective of his firm: “First-class business run in a first-class way.” I have yet to hear of a better goal. It will guide me at Salomon Brothers, and I invite you to measure our future conduct by that yardstick.



At a cost of $600,000, Salomon took out an unusual two-page ad October 29, 1991 in The Wall Street Journal, The New York Times, and The Washington Post, with Buffett’s letter to shareholders and the firm’s newly shrunken balance sheet.

It worked for Salomon, whose stock price rose 8% that day. Shortly thereafter the World Bank, after a three-month suspension of doing business with Salomon, resumed ties—a major plus for Salomon.

Even under Buffett’s leadership, Salomon still frequently had its snakebit days. On March 25, 1992, a clerk mistook a customer’s order to sell $11 million of stock as an order to unload 11 million shares, some $500 million. The huge sale in the closing minutes of the trading day wiped out a 12-point rally on the Dow, which closed instead with a one-point loss. The clerk was not fired. Buffett said it was an honest mistake; in fact, Buffett asked that he not be told the clerk’s name.

At the three-hour Salomon annual meeting in May 1992, corporate gadfly Evelyn Y. Davis asked Buffett how he could justify charging Salomon $158,000 for his corporate jet flights from Omaha to New York during the crisis.

Buffett replied that he was working for $1 a year for Salomon. “I work cheap, but I travel expensive,” he said.

When she asked him whether the company’s $25 million in legal fees to deal with the scandal was too much, Buffett deadpanned, “I would be delighted to have you negotiate with them, Evelyn. And I think the mere mention of that would be enough to induce a little moderation.”

On May 20, 1992, Salomon reached a $290 million settlement with the government. Salomon agreed to pay $190 million in fines and forfeitures relating to the cheating in the Treasury auctions, in additon a $100 million fund was established by Salomon to compensate victims who lost money as a result of the wrongdoing.

As part of the settlement, Salomon was suspended from trading with the Federal Reserve for a two-month period ending August 1, 1992. At that time, the Treasury Department said sanctions imposed on Salomon would be lifted, allowing the firm to resume submitting bids for customers. The settlement was one of the largest ever for wrongdoing in the securities industry, but the good news for Salomon was that it escaped criminal charges.

“We believe,” Buffett said, “that the intense regulatory and investigative focus on Salomon has ended. We can now move forward to show that high ethical standards and meaningful profits are not only compatible objectives, but ones that can reinforce each other. I believe Salomon would have gone under without Warren Buffett,” said Steve Forbes, head of the Forbes publishing empire. “There is no question he saved it.”

That view is supported by someone else in the midst of the crisis. Don Howard, Salomon’s chief financial officer, who oversaw the sale of $50 billion in assets and a total balance sheet restructuring said: “I never thought, ‘We aren’t going to make it’ … I did wonder how in the hell we were going to get through” (CFO, March 1992). He said if the firm had replaced Gutfreund from within, it might not have survived.

“Warren’s reputation gave the market confidence,” said Howard, adding, “He’s incisive, he knows what he wants, he understands very quickly, he goes to the essence of the problem very quickly.”

For years, people had asked, “Who’s Warren Buffett?” Now the world knew. In the end, Buffett did save Salomon. He ousted the old management and overhauled the firm with a new management—emphasizing ethics, openness, and compliance rather than risk-taking and bravado.

Overseeing Robert Denham’s legal team in its strenuous negotiations with the government, Buffett managed to help Salomon avoid, against heavy odds, criminal penalties that could have brought the firm to its knees. Indeed, Salomon—while settling civil matters for $290 million—was able to keep criminal charges at bay in part because it fully cooperated with government investigators.

Late in 1993, Mozer pleaded guilty to two counts of making false statements about two illegal $3 billion bids at a 1991 Treasury auction. Mozer’s fine and sentence seemed light to Buffett: “Mozer’s paying $300,000 and is sentenced to prison for four months. Salomon’s shareholders—including me—paid $290 million, and I got sentenced to 10 months as CEO” (Fortune, January 10, 1994).

If he had not repositioned the firm, he would not have been able to get anything in the negotiations with the government. Omaha stockbroker George Morgan said that Buffett’s reputation helped smooth potentially acrimonious talks with the Treasury Department, the SEC, and the Justice Department.

Taking a more conservative fiscal stance, Buffett reduced Salomon’s balance sheet by selling about $50 billion in assets, lowering Salomon’s exposure to huge borrowings. His message was that ultra-easy access to funding often leads to undisciplined decision making. Slashing bonuses, Buffett set up fairer compensation standards. He restructured Salomon’s stock and bond-trading units, cutting back on stock trading, and moved the firm back to its bond-trading roots, the source of its prominence.

He assuaged clients, employees, shareholders, and the government itself by setting the highest standards in Salomon’s business dealings. His actions illustrated that good profits and good behavior go hand in hand. Salomon had learned an expensive lesson but was ready to move forward as both an ethical and profitable company, letting those elements complement and reinforce one another.

Buffett kept his pledge about staying on with the firm until the investigations were completed. He also kept his pledge about turning the firm around and rebuilding its reputation. “We have managed to preserve a firm with a proud history and promising future,” he wrote Salomon shareholders. “You have our pledge that we will conduct our business in the future so as to merit your continued trust.”

Along the way, Buffett had setbacks. Many people defected from the firm, and some groused about Buffett. There was kidding about his “Jimmy Stewart” personality and his supposed naiveté about Wall Street’s quick-buck ways.

In the end, the mild-mannered, straight-arrow, determined Midwesterner put a stop to Salomon’s brash, cut-corners mentality. The emphasis would be on solid business relationships and understandings—not on rigging Treasury market bids or hiding wrongdoing. Buffett brought about a corporate culture metamorphosis at Salomon by imposing his values of fair-mindedness. As a result, Salomon righted itself and its stock steadily rebounded.

Speculation arose about who Buffett would name as chairman of the parent firm, Salomon Inc. But Buffett’s “sole recommendation” for the job was Robert Denham, who had served Buffett so well during the Salomon crisis.

At Salomon’s annual meeting in 1993, Denham addressed Buffett’s $1 pay,

saying that on a prorated basis Buffett was due 79 cents, but Buffett merited a

dollar anyway, “Given pay for performance, and in light of our belief in pay for performance, I think we should award him the whole dollar,” Denham said. Buffett replied, “Bob may look at this as pay for performance, but I look at it as interest for late payment. Twenty-one cents for four months is 80% interest, which is a rate I extend only to my best credits.” Denham presented Buffett a $1 bill, his salary for saving Salomon, encased in Plexiglas. Chief Financial Officer Don Howard said, “Don’t think you don’t have to pay taxes on it, just because it’s in Plexiglas.”

Under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act, institutional investors must get clearance before buying more than 15% of a company for investment purposes. Two years to the day after the Salomon scandal broke, Berkshire announced it planned to raise its stake in Salomon. The plan was to boost it to 15%, up from the 14.3% it held by way of the preferred stock investment. Berkshire also announced it was seeking clearance from federal regulators to allow it to buy up to 24.99% of Salomon. Permission was granted.

Buffett later lifted his Salomon’s stake to slightly above 20% thus giving him a tax break on his Salomon preferred investment. But Salomon stock spent a lot of 1994 declining. “The move was not my most brilliant investment to date,” Buffett said (Forbes, December 5, 1994).

In 1996, word came that Buffett would not convert his preferred stock into common stock. Instead he took $140 million in cash and said:

I am making a single decision about whether I want to put $140 million into Salomon common stock at $38 today or whether there is something else I would rather have Berkshire do with the money.



Every day the stock market offers Berkshire an option to buy shares of Coca-Cola, Gillette, Salomon, or thousands of other companies. So far this year, Berkshire has not exercised this “market” option to buy shares of any of the three mentioned companies (including Salomon when it was trading below $38).



Obviously, the fact that Berkshire has not exercised its market option to buy more Coca-Cola or Gillette does not mean that I am negative on these companies nor should that interpretation be placed upon the non-exercise of a “company” option to purchase more Salomon common shares.



In 1996, Berkshire converted its slice of the preferred stock into Salomon

common stock. Still, Buffett left his options open by saying that at some future time he might sell some Salomon common stock. In late 1996, Berkshire issued $440 million of 5-year exchangeable notes—Berkshire notes exchangeable into Salomon common stock.

It was a way to get cash up front for a portion of his investment in Salomon. Berkshire planned to issue $400 million of notes, but investor demand pushed it up to $500 million. The notes amounted to an insurance policy on Buffett’s decision to commit to Salomon’s common shares. They would let him bail out of some of his Salomon stock in three years and have cash instead. “It must come sometimes ‘to jam today,’” as Alice in Wonderland famously said.

Buffett said at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1997: “It’s a way of taking the capital out of that block of stock at a very low interest cost to use elsewhere while we take a limited position of the upside in the Salomon stock. We just decided … that we might have good opportunities at some point to use the money. And we thought that raising the money at a current cost of a little over 1% and a cost to maturity of 3%—and we think the actual cost is likely to be closer to 1%—made sense.”

DELEGATE AND EVAPORATE

Buffett’s ultimate decision about his Salomon stake came in 1997 when he sold it to Travelers and swapped Salomon stock for Travelers stock.

Salomon’s Maughan and Travelers’ CEO Sandy Weill, who served together on the Carnegie Hall board, began talking about a sale of Salomon. The talks were relayed to Denham and on to Buffett who gave his approval (Monica Langley, Tearing Down the Walls, pp. 265–266). Travelers and Citicorp were merged into Citigroup in 1998.

“Just before the Salomon directors were to vote on the deal, Sandy asked Bob Denham to get a quote from Buffett to put in the news release that was being prepared. Buffett took a piece of paper and began writing by hand: ‘Over several decades, Sandy has demonstrated genius in creating huge value for his shareholders and skillfully implementing …’ He stopped to scratch out ‘implementing’ and wrote ‘blending’ over it, then continued, ‘and managing acquisitions in the financial-services industry. In my view, Salomon will be no exception.’

“Denham took the paper back to the telephone to read the quote to Sandy. ‘Will you save it for me, the actual piece of paper?’ Sandy implored. As soon as he got his hands on it, Sandy had the paper framed for his office” (Monica Langley, Tearing Down the Walls, p. 269).

Don Keough, Coca-Cola’s former president and Buffett’s friend, has said the Salomon crisis “measured the man more than any other event” (MSNBC, April 7, 2000).

The Story of Warren Buffett



Michael Lewis’

Liar’s Poker

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Saving Salomon

Saving Salomon The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Saving Salomon



“Deryck, You’re the One.”

Buffett, left, and Deryck Maughan held a press conference August 18, 1991, explaining Salomon’s bond-trading scandal.

(AP/Wide World Photos)



Robert Baker

(Photo by

Lisa Nichols)

Saving Salomon The Story of Warren Buffett



Robert Denham

Former Salomon Chairman Robert Denham managed the Salomon crisis.

(Photo courtesy

of Salomon Inc)

Of Permanent Value Saving Salomon

Saving Salomon The Story of Warren Buffett

Salomon Survivor

Former Salomon Brothers’ CEO Deryck Maughan is shown here on the firm’s equity trading floor. He later went to Citigroup but ran into a banking scandal in Japan. Afterwards, he oversaw Kohlberg Kravis Roberts’ Asian operations.



(Fred R. Conrad /

New York Times

Pictures)

Of Permanent Value Saving Salomon



159





PROCTER & GAMBLE


In what Buffett called “a dream deal,” Procter & Gamble announced on January 28, 2005, its intent to buy Gillette for about $57 billion in a tax-free stock-swap deal. P&G popularized the concept of mass-market advertising.

Cincinnati-based consumer products giant Procter & Gamble exchanged 0.975 of a share for each Gillette share. P&G cut about 6,000 jobs of 140,000, or about 4% of the combined workforce.

It was the largest purchase in P&G’s history, which includes the purchases of Clairol in 2001 and the Wells AG shampoo business in 2003.

The combined company now has annual sales of more than $76 billion and increased marketing clout to impose better prices at large retailers such as Wal-Mart or Target. Wal-Mart accounts for 17% of P&G’s sales. The company is known particularly for its Tide, Crest, Tampax, Pampers, and Olay brands.

In P&G’s stable of products, 22 brands have more than $1 billion in sales, and 18 brands have more than half a billion dollars in sales. With sales of more than $1 billion in a dozen countries and more than $1 billion in sales with seven different retailers, the company claims its brands touch customers three billion times a day.

Buffett bought more shares of P&G in 2005, and now has more than 100 million shares. Berkshire is the largest shareholder.

Berkshire owned 88.6 mllion shares at the end of 2009, and 78 million shares by mid-2010.

P&G former CEO A.G. Lafley, known during his rise for a number of innovations, including Liquid Tide and Tide with Bleach, has focused heavily on beefing up the company’s health and beauty brands. Gillette, of course, is known mainly for its Mach3 razors and Duracell batteries. In 2009, Robert McDonald succeeded Lafley as chairman and CEO. In 2010, Lafley formed the private-equity firm of Clayton, Dubilier & Rice.

Kilts told the press he approached P&G about the deal which he saw as “strength plus strength equals success.” The marriage of the companies united the chemistry of P&G’s female product lines with Gillette’s male product lines.

Kilts said the reason for the merger was “scale.” He wrote in the Gillette 2004 Annual Report: “As a $10 billion company, we faced customers and competitors with exponentially greater sales, reach, and resources. And they were gaining on us every day.”

Reports said that Kilts called Buffett in November 2004 for his views about a possible combination of the two companies. Buffett indicated he would support a deal, provided it offered sufficient value to Gillette shareholders.

The combined company, in addition to having greater price leverage with retailers, should gain more efficiency with more products coming through its vaunted distribution channels. More power in negotiating advertising contracts may be yet another benefit.

“This merger is going to create the greatest consumer products in the world,” Buffett said. P&G grew from a two-man, soap- and candle-making business founded in 1837 to the global brand powerhouse it is today, with 30% of its sales in China, Russia, and other developing countries.

In 2007, it announced a stock buyout of $24 billion to $30 billion over a three-year period. In 2008, P&G spun off its Folgers coffee unit.

THE GILLETTE COMPANY

Every day more than 1.2 billion people around the world use a Gillette razor.

“He’s glad there are more people growing hair on their faces,” says one Berkshire employee of Buffett. After all, it has to be shaved off. From the Berkshire viewpoint, shaving should be done only with a Gillette razor—and twice a day at that! The stock symbol for The Gillette Company is G, but it once was “GS” for Gillette Safety Razor Company. Some suggest it was for a Good Shave.

Having an interest in Gillette gives Buffett sweet dreams. “It’s pleasant to go to bed every night knowing there are 2.5 billion males in the world who have to shave in the morning,” Buffett told Forbes (October 18, 1993).

“There are 20 to 21 billion razor blades used in the world a year. Of those, 30% are Gillette, but 60% by value are Gillette. They have 90% market shares in some countries—in Scandinavia and Mexico. Now, when something has been around as long as shaving and you find a company that has both that kind of innovation, in terms of developing better razors all the time, plus the distribution power, and the position in people’s minds … You know, here’s something you do every day—for $20 (per year) you get a terrific shaving experience. Now men are not inclined to shift around when they get that kind of situation” (The University of North Carolina, Center for Public Television, 1995).

Berkshire’s nick-free investment in Gillette, until the sting of profit warnings in 1999, is a direct result of Buffett’s voracious reading of annual reports.

Buffett once told reporter Sue Baggarly of WOWT-TV in Omaha, (October 14, 1993) that he buys 100 shares of many companies. He does it for the purpose of getting the annual reports on time, “not lost at some brokerage house.”

One night, at home in his favorite reading chair, Buffett was looking through the 1988 Gillette Annual Report when it occurred to him Gillette could use more capital. “It was my thought that they might be interested in a big investment in their shares because they had used up all their capital in repurchasing shares,” Buffett said (Gordon McKibben, Cutting Edge, p. 225).

After checking the list of directors, he called Joe Sisco, who had also served with Buffett on GEICO’s board, and asked if he might talk with management about an investment. Buffett created the investment by proposing to Sisco, “an equity issue that might make sense” (Business Week, August 7, 1989).

Sisco, while serving as undersecretary for political affairs in the Ford administration, had negotiated the Egypt-Israel ceasefire of 1970. He later served as chancellor and president of American University in Washington, D.C. (Gordon McKibben, Cutting Edge, p. 225).

Sisco immediately got in touch with then-Gillette Chairman Colman Mockler and a few days later Mockler, returning from a business trip to Mexico, landed in Omaha. Buffett picked him up and drove him to the Omaha Press Club for a lunch of hamburgers, Cokes, and ice cream desserts. “We hit it off, a couple of Midwestern boys. I liked him, the chemistry was good,” Buffett said (p. 226). Buffett suggested a preferred stock investment. “I do know that I told him, ‘any amount between $300 million and $750 million, and he could pick the number, whatever he felt was appropriate’” (p. 227). Negotiations ensued.

“Gillette had in the summer of 1989 a higher long-run value than its low market price. Looking at Gillette’s consistent earning power, good cash flow, its management in place, and its everyday products such as razors and blades and pens, it would have been hard for Warren Buffett to miss that Gillette was a real opportunity for his investment arm, Berkshire Hathaway” (Rita Ricardo-Campbell, Resisting Hostile Takeovers: The Case of Gillette, p. 208).

Ricardo-Campbell said Gillette’s board was happy to accept Buffett’s investment, but the terms remained to be negotiated. Though Buffett and Mockler liked one another, Mockler didn’t like Buffett’s initial proposal. Final negotiations between Berkshire’s Vice Chairman Charles Munger and lawyers for Gillette’s board took place before an agreement was reached between Buffett and Mockler (p. 211).

In July 1989, Buffett invested $600 million in a preferred stock stake in Gillette, which was subsequently converted into an 11% common stock stake. Buffett said, “Gillette is synonymous with highly successful, international consumer marketing and is exactly the sort of business in which we like to invest for the long term.”

Gillette bought the Liquid Paper Corporation in 1979 and sold it at the end of 2000. First named Mistake Out, it was invented in the kitchen of a young Dallas divorcee, Bette Nesmith. She worked as an executive secretary to support her nine-year-old son, Michael. A decade later he achieved stardom as one of The Monkees (Hey, Hey. We’re the Monkees) in a TV sitcom about a rock group of the same name. He later became founder and owner of Pacific Arts, a video-distribution company in Los Angeles.

Bette Nesmith sat down at her kitchen table one evening in 1951 and mixed up a watery paint which would “white out” her mistakes. Nesmith had dabbled in art and knew that artists corrected their mistakes by painting over them with white paint. She tried the technique to correct her typing errors, and this led to the development of Mistake Out. Later she went to work for IBM but remained absorbed at night with her fledgling company. One day she signed an important document dictated by her boss with her company’s name Mistake Out Company rather than IBM. She was fired on the spot. That was okay because her company grew into a typewriter ribbon and correction fluid business that Gillette purchased. At her death, she left $25 million to her son (p. 84–85).

Gillette also owned Paper Mate and Waterman pens; in 1993, it bought

privately held Parker Pen Holdings of Britain (the sole supplier of pens to the Queen since 1962) for $561 million. Parker, which offers mid-priced lines of writing instruments, complements Gillette’s low-price Paper Mate and its luxury Waterman lines. The Parker purchase made Gillette the world’s largest seller of writing instruments. However, pen sales slumped, and in early 2000, Gillette called on Merrill Lynch to find a buyer for its writing products business.

In 2000, Gillette sold its stationery products business—including Paper Mate, Parker, Waterman writing instruments, and Liquid Paper—to Newell Rubbermaid.

Gillette’s distribution network sets it apart. “Think there’s little synergy between an Oral-B toothbrush, a stick of Right Guard deodorant, and a Paper Mate ballpoint pen? Look closer. They all share distribution channels. That means Gillette can keep costs low by warehousing and shipping products together” (Financial World, April 8, 1996).

As with his investment in Coca-Cola, Buffett again picked a U.S.-domiciled company running a huge overseas business, this one headquartered in Boston.

Gillette Chairman Colman C. Mockler, Jr., a Harvard Business School graduate who took over management in 1975, died of a heart attack at Gillette headquarters on January 25, 1991. Mockler had fended off takeover attempts and stabilized Gillette after a brief period of negative net worth in the late 1980s; he lived to see the extraordinary success of its Sensor razor.

Forbes’ February 4, 1991 issue arrived at subscribers’ homes the day Mockler died. On the cover was a picture of Mockler reaching the top of the mountain against competitors. The story inside highlighted Gillette’s many achievements.

CHANGING OF THE GUARD: GETTING THE RIGHT GUARD

Gillette’s profits slumped during Michael Hawley’s reign and on October 29, 2000, the board asked him to step down. Buffett, the chairman of Gillette’s executive committee, said the change was “in the best interest of the company’s stockholders.” Buffett noted, “You have a .320 hitter but you feel you need a .370 hitter.”

He delivered the news to Hawley in a one-on-one meeting at Gillette headquarters. “We felt we had a good person in Hawley. But we made a decision that it was possible to find a better one” (Business Week, December 11, 2000). It was all reminiscent of the ousting of Coca-Cola CEO Doug Ivester in 1999—not to mention Salomon’s management in 1991.

When Nabisco CEO James M. Kilts was named Gillette’s new chairman and CEO, he became the first outsider named chief executive in 70 years. Credited with a turnaround at Nabisco, Kilts previously headed Philip Morris’ worldwide food group, integrating Kraft and General Foods. DeGraan continued as president and chief operating officer.

Buffett made up his mind about hiring Kilts after only one meeting. “It was a natural move. He made as much sense in terms of talking about business in general as anybody I’ve ever talked to. If you listen to Jim analyze a business situation, you get absolutely no baloney. And frankly, finding someone like that is a rarity” (Fortune, December 17, 2002).

When Kilts took over Gillette, it had missed its quarterly earning 14 times in a row. After his involvement in more than a dozen previous turnarounds, Kilts was prepared to go to work in his methodical, no-nonsense way. He overhauled the company’s financial reporting systems from a quarterly effort to a daily output, improved the supply chain by buying Gillette’s supplies in bulk, and pushed executives to get costs down.

____________________

King C. Gillette, whose safety razor was a landmark invention, was not only an entrepreneur but a visionary who dreamed of a social utopia. He founded Gillette in 1901 as the American Razor Company and began operations in an office located over a fish market on the Boston waterfront (Rita Ricardo-Campbell, Resisting Hostile Takeovers: The Case of Gillette, p. 74). The company became Gillette Safety Razor Company in 1904.

Gillette’s founder made business history by inventing the disposable razor blade and making a fortune on replacements. He was working for Crown Cork & Seal as a salesman and dabbling with inventions when his boss, William Painter, posed the question to him: “Why don’t you invent something that is thrown away, once used, and customers will have to come for more?”

It is said some men do their best thinking while shaving. Apparently this was true for 40-year-old Gillette because while shaving one morning in 1895, the idea of a razor with disposable blades popped into his head. Gillette later described how the whole idea of a small, thin piece of steel came to him:

The way the blade could be held in a holder; the idea of sharpening the two opposite edges of the thin piece of steel; the clamping plates for the blade, with a handle halfway between the two edges of the blade. All this came more in pictures than conscious thought, as though the razor were already a finished thing and held before my eyes. I stood there before that mirror in a trance of joy. My wife was visiting Ohio, and I hurriedly wrote to her. “I’ve got it! Our fortune is made!” Fool that I was, I knew little about razors and nothing about steel, and I could not foresee the trials and tribulations I was to pass through before the razor was a success. But I believed in it with all my heart (Peter Hay, The Book of Business Anecdotes, p. 269).



In 1903, Gillette’s firm began selling the Gillette Safety Razor and 20 blades for $5. Its annual sales in 1904 were 91,000 razors and 124,000 blades (Rita Ricardo-Campbell, Resisting Hostile Takeovers: The Case of Gillette, p. 46). Gillette grew into a multinational company well before World War I.

In 1926, Gillette said: “There is no other article for the individual use so universally known or widely distributed. In my travels, I have found it on the most northern town in Norway and in the heart of the Sahara Desert.”

For all his success, Gillette died broke in 1932 as a result of poor investments

and debts in the 1920s. Unfortunately also, his idealistic vision of forming a

utopian society based on universal cooperation came to nothing.

____________________

Gillette was riding high on its new Sensor razor—the world’s first razor that continuously senses and automatically adjusts to contours of the face. The Sensor features twin blades that are individually mounted and “float” on tiny springs. The revolutionary Sensor razor was launched in January 1990, hyped by $3 million worth of ads that claimed Gillette is “The Best a Man Can Get.” The ads were first aired during the 1990 Super Bowl. The company has been known for its Cavalcade of Sports advertising campaign, and its efforts to reach men have also included ads in connection with boxing events and sponsorship of World Cup soccer.

Now, Sensor and the new SensorExcel shaving system, introduced in 1993, account for hundreds of millions of razors and billions of blades sold, enough to give Gillette 68% of the U.S. market in wet shaving. Schick has about 16%, Bic, about 9%, and American Safety Razor, about 6%. Gillette has about 70% of the female market.

Sensor for Women, introduced in 1992, was the first time Gillette had ever designed a product solely for women. In 2000, it introduced a triple-blade razor for women called Venus, named after the goddess of love and beauty. The year 2003 brought the Passion Venus, a vibrant pink razor, and a Spa collection featuring three colors. This was followed by the successful launch of Venus Divine.

Buffett said that after the Venus came out, he started counting women’s legs at bedtime instead of men’s faces but joked that he had to give it up because he couldn’t get to sleep.

The Sensor was a big hit, and as the world’s economies became more closely linked, it was believed that Gillette’s value as the leading brand name in razors could only rise. Gillette currently has won more than 700 million shavers around the world from its operations in 200 countries. Gillette gets $7 of every $10 that the North American man spends for blades and razors.

Gillette’s constant barrage of cutting-edge products includes deodorants, antiperspirants, and shave creams. In 2002, Gillette introduced the Mach3 Turbo with price tags of about $9 for the razor and $9 for packs of replacement blades.

For nearly a decade, at least 40% of Gillette’s sales have come from products launched within the previous five years. In 1999, Gillette launched its Oral-B Cross Action toothbrush; in 2004, Gillette bought Rembrandt, a tooth whitener; and in 2001 nearly 30 products were in various stages of launch.

The company claims about a fifth of the U.S. deodorant market with its Right Guard, Dry Idea, and Soft & Dri brands, second only to giant Procter & Gamble.

Gillette’s Braun small household products and electric shaver lines have been among international leaders over the years, but in recent years sales have faltered. Braun is the top marketer of electric shavers in Germany and is among the leaders in Europe, North America, and Japan. Braun’s Flex Control electric razor was the first pivoting swivel-head electric razor. Gillette bought the Braun unit in 1967 for only $68 million.

After fending off a series of major takeover attempts in three years—three by Revlon’s chieftain Ron Perelman in 1986, and one by now-defunct Coniston Partners in 1988—Gillette restructured. The workforce was reduced by 8% and under-performing operations were sold. To escape the takeovers, Gillette bought back almost 30% of its common stock, ballooning its debt from $436 million to nearly $2 billion. It has been paying that down quickly by using its superior cash flow and the help of Berkshire’s $600 million investment.

Buffett’s privately arranged a transaction for $600 million worth of Gillette’s 83/4% convertible preferred stock. The stock was convertible after two years into 12 million shares at $50 a share, with the stock trading at about $41 a share at the time. If not converted, the preferred stock would have been required to be redeemed by Gillette within 10 years.

Newsday columnist Allan Sloan, who has followed Buffett’s career off and on since Buffett was buying (and selling) Detroit bank stocks some 20 years ago, argued that Buffett’s stake in Gillette was immediately worth about $40 million more than he paid for it, although a Gillette spokesman disagreed.

Sloan said:

The stock bought by Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway Inc., carries a dividend of 8.75% a year, and he can trade $50 worth of it for one share of Gillette common stock. In other words, he agreed to pay “a conversion premium” of 83/8 a share over the 455/8 that regular investors were paying for Gillette at the time the deal was negotiated.



But look. Buffett is getting 43/8 a year in dividend income (the 8.75% interest times $50) for each Gillette share he controls. The holder of a share of Gillette common stock gets a dividend of only 96 cents a year. So, while Buffett has agreed to pay a premium of $8.375 a share for Gillette, he gets an extra $3.415 a year in dividend income ($4.375 minus 96 cents) while he’s waiting. Work it out, and in less than 21/2 years, the extra dividends that Buffett will receive make up for the premium he has agreed to pay.



You still with me? Now watch. In the arcane world of convertible securities, three and a half years is the norm for breaking even in a security such as this Gillette convertible. Run the numbers through Gillette’s black box, which the company graciously did for me, and you’ll find that to reach the break-even point in three and a half years, Buffett would have had to pay 531/4 a share, rather than 50. That’s a 7% difference. Now, multiply that by $600 million, and Buffett is $42 million ahead.



Sloan reported that Buffett and Gillette agreed with the math, but not the interpretation. “Gillette claims that certain aspects of the stock—the fact that Gillette can call it in for early redemption, that Gillette has the right of first refusal to buy the stock should Buffett decide to sell, and other arcana—offset the relatively high dividend and relatively low conversion price.” He reports that Buffett told him, “We thought we made a good investment or we wouldn’t be in it,” and noted that Gillette was getting his services. “Charlie and I agree to work on the company for 10 years. We don’t charge a fee, we don’t even bill for transportation services to come to board meetings.”

Gillette redeemed Berkshire’s preferred stock investment of $600 million in 1991, and Berkshire converted its stake into 12 million shares of Gillette stock, about 11% of the stock.

In 1996, Gillette bought battery maker Duracell International Inc. That purchase of $7.8 billion in stock and debt was Gillette’s largest acquisition ever. The buyout came after Zeien approached Duracell in January 1996. Gillette thought of buying Duracell in 1987, but didn’t offer a high enough price. Duracell was sold to Kohlberg Kravis Roberts in 1988 for $1.8 billion. When Gillette bought Duracell, it was a case of one brand name buying another brand name. The combined company would have the advantages of using Gillette’s formidable sales channels to further extend Duracell’s products.

It turned out that Buffett, objecting to the investment banking fees, abstained from the Gillette board’s vote about the merger. Buffett felt that the $30 million fee was excessive. However, according to The Wall Street Journal (November 25, 1996), $10 million of the fees went to Morgan Stanley and Company and $20 million to Kohlberg Kravis Roberts and Company, the buyout firm that owned 34% of Duracell.

“Duracell and Gillette share numerous characteristics, including global brand franchises, common distribution channels, exceptional merchandising opportunities, and geographic extension potential. Given the distribution similarities of blades and batteries, we expect the Duracell business will gain significant economies of scale and greater market penetration through Gillette’s worldwide distribution network,” said Gillette’s 1996 Annual Report. “With only 20% of Duracell’s sales outside North America and Western Europe, there are significant growth opportunities ahead.”

Duracell, based in Bethel, Connecticut, at Berkshire Corporate Park, makes alkaline, lithium, and specialty batteries. Named for its location in the foothills of the Berkshire mountains, it is the world’s biggest maker of alkaline batteries, a disposable energy source that powers a range of consumer products. Duracell opened alkaline battery plants in China and India in 1997, which together produce about five billion household batteries annually, or about one-fourth of the world’s total.

____________________

After 14 years of service, Buffett left Gillette’s board in 2003, saying the increasing demands on his time resulting from Berkshire’s acquisitions of new companies led to his decision. “Leaving the Gillette board is difficult. However, I feel very good about the company’s future. Under the leadership of James Kilts, the company has moved aggressively to turn around its performance and restore Gillette’s leadership of the consumer products sector.”

SMUCKERS

In late 2008, J. M. Smuckers Company made a $2.65 billion purchase of P&G’s Folgers Coffee unit. Berkshire thus came into about 2.2 million shares, or about a 2% stake, in Smuckers, known for its jams and jellies and its ownership of Carnation, Jif, and Cane oils. Smuckers made a series of buys and now owns Knott’s Berry Farm food brand, purchased from ConAgra Foods. As the old ad says, “With a name like Smuckers, it has to be good.”



A. G. Lafley

Procter &Gamble’s former CEO

(AP/Photo)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Game-Changer

By P&G Chairman A. G. Lafley and Ram Charan



P&G’s former CEO Alan Lafley and Gillette CEO James Kilts at the time of the merger announcement

(AP/Photo)

Rising Tide

P&G’s legendary discipline and thoroughness in bringing brand names to market are described in this book.



(Photos by Mary Porter)



(Courtesy of The Gillette Company)

The Gillette Company logo

Of Permanent Value Procter & Gamble



Cutting Edge

by Gordon McKibben

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Procter & Gamble The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Procter & Gamble



Gillette’s Sensor

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Procter & Gamble The Story of Warren Buffett



Duracell Battery

If at first you don’t succeed… get new batteries.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Procter & Gamble



160





M&T BANK CORP.


In 1991 with the banking industry in shambles, Buffett sensed consolidation and returned to Buffalo for a new but not news investment.

On March 15, 1991, First Empire State Corporation, an old-fashioned plain-vanilla lender based in Buffalo, New York, agreed to issue 40,000 shares of 9% preferred stock to Berkshire’s National Indemnity Co. for $40 million. With that $40 million First Empire, known as M&T Bank Corp., after its 1998 name change, expanded the bank by buying two bankrupt Buffalo thrifts.

His first Buffalo investment was in The Buffalo News. At the time that the deal was struck, M&T stock was trading at about $63 a share and began climbing steadily thereafter. The preferred stock was convertible at any time into shares of M&T’s common stock at an initial conversion price of $78.91 per share.

Based on the 6,637,138 shares of common stock outstanding as of March 13, 1991, complete exercise of the conversion privilege was equal to 506,930 shares, or about 7% of the common stock outstanding following conversion, now worth more than half a billion dollars.

M&T had the right to redeem the preferred stock without premium on or after March 31, 1996. In other words, Buffett had five long years to make his investment work—that is, for M&T’s price to reach about $79 a share, which it did in short order. In the meantime the perfectly satisfactory 9% return kept arriving on Berkshire’s doorstep.

In Berkshire’s 1995 Annual Report, Buffett said that on March 31, 1996, Berkshire would “convert and keep” its First Empire common shares. At the end of 1999, Berkshire owned 510,310 shares, or 6.65% of the stock. At the end of 2001, after a 10-for-1 stock split in 2000, it owned about 6.7 million shares, or 7.22%. By mid-2010, the stake was at 5.4 million shares.

M&T historically has carried low debt levels and has an excellent long-term record. In the past decade its stock moved up many times from the $7 to $10 a share level where it traded in 1981. Earnings have been up an average of 18% in the past decade and the return to shareholders has been up 32% per year since Robert Wilmers, a French-speaking Harvard graduate, took over in 1983.

M&T’s subsidiaries are Manufacturers and Traders Trust Co., The East New York Savings Bank, and M&T Bank, National Association.

M&T Bank, in upstate New York, has a clean balance sheet and is heavily owned by its officers, directors, and institutional investors. Employees own 20% of the stock.

The message to shareholders in M&T’s 1990 Annual Report is one of the more articulate looks at the U.S. banking scene. It’s in plain English.

In 1991, the FDIC closed Goldome, a Buffalo-based savings and loan, dividing its assets between competitors KeyCorp and M&T. Wall Street apparently liked the deal. M&T stock jumped right through the conversion point so that Buffett, in addition to getting the 9%, is way in the money on the stock side.

Under Robert Wilmers, M&T was a steady performer in the early 1990s. By early 1998, with the company buying back its own shares, the stock hit $500 per share.

In the early 1980s, Wilmers left his job as head of private banking in Belgium with Morgan Guaranty. Along with other investors, he began buying shares of M&T, then a struggling local community bank with $2 billion in assets. He became chairman after what was essentially a hostile takeover. “He set about cleaning the place up, dumping its moribund loans to Venezuelan car dealers and Mexican department stores. Henceforth, the bank would concentrate on knowing and lending to its New York neighbor” (The Wall Street Journal, July 1, 1998).

In 1983, a Wilmers-led group bought 30% of the bank. Since then the bank has made 18 acquisitions.

In 2005, Wilmers longtime No. 2, Robert Sadler, then 60, was named president and CEO replacing Wilmers, then 71, who remained chairman. Then in 2007 Sadler stepped down as CEO, and Wilmers reclaimed the job.

Wilmers has had a huge impact on Buffalo. He helped turn around an urban elementary school, saved the Philharmonic from bankruptcy, and preserved a house built by Frank Lloyd Wright. Also, he’s worked to cut millions from the city’s budget and has pledged millions of his own money to improve the local zoo. Wilmers was introduced to Buffett by Stan Lipsey, publisher of The Buffalo News.

“The thing that hits you in the face is that insiders own 23% of the stock. When a financial institution has that much of its officers’ money in it, it’s not going to make risky loans, and it won’t make acquisitions just for the sake of growing, because the company’s entire worth is dependent on the price of the stock. Warren Buffett is a big shareholder,” says Blaine Robbins of Janus Balanced Fund (Kiplinger’s Personal Finance Magazine, November 1996).

In 1997, M&T announced it would buy ONBANCorp for about $872 million in stock and cash, thus creating the largest bank in upstate New York. M&T bought 29 branches in upstate New York from the Chase Manhattan Bank in 1999.

On May 17, 2000, M&T and Keystone Financial Inc., of Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, said they would merge, with M&T paying $1 billion in stock and cash for Keystone. In addition, M&T bought Premier National Bancorp in 2000.

Former Securities and Exchange Chairman Arthur Levitt serves on the M&T board. From 1983 through 2002, the company’s common stock prices rose at a compound annual rate of 23%.

____________________

On September 26, 2002, Allied Irish Banks (AIB) and M&T Bank reached an agreement for M&T to buy Allied’s troubled U.S. unit, Baltimore-based Allfirst, for $3.1 billion in cash and stock. (The Ravens Stadium then became the M&T Bank Stadium.)

The agreement followed revelations earlier that year of a scandal at Allfirst where a currency trader allegedly rang up losses of $691 million over five years, damaging earnings. John Resnak pleaded guilty to bank fraud in 2002, and was sentenced to a 71/2 years in prison.

The merger of M&T and Allfirst with 262 branches throughout Pennsylvania and Virginia created a mid-Atlantic banking franchise of more than 700 offices.

AIB, Ireland’s largest bank, got a 22.5% stake, or 26.7 million shares, in the enlarged M&T as well as $886 million in cash. In addition to AIB’s big stake in M&T, Berkshire now owns about 5.8%; officers and directors hold 9%; and Wilmers owns about 5.1 million shares, or 4.6% of the stock.

After the merger, M&T Bank laid off more than 1,100 employees at Allfirst, about 20% of the bank’s workforce.

Wilmers wrote the following in M&T’s 2002 Annual Report: “There can be no doubt that this acquisition is a watershed for M&T. Not only do Allfirst’s $17 billion in assets make it larger than any of our previous 17 acquisitions since 1987, but Allfirst alone is bigger than was the whole of M&T as recently as March 1998. Combining our operations will create a bank holding company that on a pro forma basis would rank 18th among the publicly traded firms based in the U.S., as measured by total assets.”

In 2003, M&T Bank, through its Matthews, Bartlett & Dedecker Agency, bought the Lounsbury Insurance Agency, a property and casualty insurance agency in Manlius, New York. The insurance unit is now called M&T Insurance Agency.

In 2004, M&T Bank was added to the S&P 500 after Concord, formerly an S&P 500 component, was bought by First Data.

M&T now operates more than 650 banking offices in New York, Delaware, Pennsylvania, Virginia, West Virginia, and Washington, D.C. It employs more than 13,000 people, including 5,000 in the Buffalo region, and has assets of $57 billion. M&T had profits of $839 million in 2006.

Shareholders who invested $3,625 in the early 1980s with Wilmers are now millionaires.

Buffett has called the investment in M&T “one of the best we’ve ever made” (The Buffalo News, August 14, 2005). As Munger would say: “Damn right.”

M&T, founded in 1856, celebrated its 150th year in business on August 29, 2006.

M&T’s shares dropped sharply in April 2007, when it became another casualty of a cooling housing and mortgage sector. The bank said its low-documentation loans, known as “At-A,” were proving difficult to sell. Such mortgages are between the highest rated, or prime loans and the riskiest category, or subprime loans.

In July 2007, M&T said it planned to buy Partners Trust Financial Group for about $555 million, adding 33 branches in upstate New York. Based in Utica, Partners Trust has branches in six upstate New York counties and $3.65 billion in assets. In late 2008, M&T agreed to buy Provident Bankshares Corp. for about $400 million in stock to expand in the mid-Atlantic area. The Provident purchase gave M&T about $70 billion in assets and another 800 branch banks in seven U.S. states and Washington D.C.

At M&T’s annual meeting in 2008, CEO Wilmers said the federal government must take more action to ensure the long-term stability of capital markets. He called for the creation of a federal agency to buy distressed home loans and issue new loans, adding that there are 3 million mortgage borrowers who are behind on their payments.

Wilmers wrote in the 2008 Annual Report:

Last year, in this message, I wrote that it was my hope “next year in this space, to report better news.” The figures below make clear that I cannot do so. Although M&T remained solidly profitable throughout last year, that can neither obscure nor provide consolation for the fact that the significant earnings decline in 2007 has been followed, in the year past, by another year of the same. It is incumbent upon a chief executive to offer an explanation for such performance and, herewith, I will undertake to try ...





In short form, M&T’s results for 2008 can be told thusly. The positive forces resulting from a 12% growth in average earning assets and a 7% rise in fees and other noninterest income earned in our core businesses were consumed by significantly higher credit costs, further losses in our investment securities portfolio, and the virtual elimination of activity in the securitization markets previously accessed by Bayview Lending Group (BLG)——an originator of small balance commercial mortgage loans of which M&T owns 20%.





Buffett praised Wilmers (CNN Money.com, April 17, 2009) saying, the bank has “been run very well since Bob took it over. The tone at the top is important in any business, but there is no business where it’s more important than banking.”

___________________

In 2009, M&T bought the failed Baltimore-based Bradford Bank. M&T picked up about $452 million in assets and deposits of about $383 million. The buyout enlarged M&Ts position in Baltimore where it had bought Provident Bankshares Corp. in 2008.

In 2010, M&T Bank became a possible acquisition target after the Irish government forced Allied Irish Bank to raise more capital through asset sales, one of those being Allied’s 22.5% stake in M&T.

BUYING WILMINGTON TRUST

In 2010, M&T bought struggling Wilmington Trust Corp. of Delaware in an all-stock fire-sale deal for a bargain price of about $351 million. The offer valued the company at $3.84 a share, a discount of about 46% from the previous closing price of the stock.

M&T will repay $330 million that Wilmington received as part of bailout money from the U.S. Treasury in 2008.

Founded in 1903, Wilmington, a regional bank and wealth manager which once helped manage the DuPont family, had been plagued with losses from commercial mortgages and construction loans.



M&T Bank booth at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2002

(Photo by Andrew Kilpatrick)

The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo courtesy of

M&T Bank Corp./

Robert L. Smith)

Robert Wilmers

In 1983, a Wilmers-led group bought 30% of M&T bank. Since then the bank has made 18 acquisitions.

Of Permanent Value M&T Bank Corp.



“Everything’s Coming up Roses!”

M&T Director Arthur Levitt’s aunt was Ethel Merman.

(AP/Wide World Photos)

M&T Bank Corp. The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value M&T Bank Corp.



161





AMERICAN EXPRESS REVISITED


American Express announced on August 1, 1991, that it would accept a cash infusion of $300 million from Berkshire.

To the Omaha World-Herald, Buffett delivered this punchline: “He [American Express Chairman Jim Robinson] has not offered to let me pay for this transaction on my credit card.”

Buffett had returned to American Express, the scene of one of his early investment victories. With his newly acquired stake, Buffett became a major shareholder in the giant company known for its credit cards, traveler’s checks, and the struggling Shearson Lehman Brothers brokerage firm into which American Express had recently pumped more than $1 billion to restructure. The hard-hit subsidiary had lost $900 million the year Buffett invested.

American Express was founded in 1850 by Henry Wells and William Fargo, who also founded Wells Fargo, another major Berkshire investee.

American Express began as a freight-forwarding company, later becoming a

travel company which was known for its credit cards. Today, the global financial and travel services company is a leader in financial planning, securities brokerage, asset management, international banking, investment banking, and information services.

Honored in 180 countries, the company’s credit card is accepted as far away as the Mongolian People’s Republic. Travel and tourism may be the largest industry in the world, and American Express is the world’s largest travel company, with a related network of more than 1,700 offices around the globe.

This second time around, Buffett had a much larger amount invested in American Express. Recall that in 1964, during the American Express salad oil scandal, Buffett invested only about $13 million. In 1991, he invested $300 million. In addition, American Express pledged to pay him an 8.85% dividend, a return made even better because of the 70% corporate-tax exemption on

the dividend income: Berkshire was earning more than 11% on a taxable equivalent basis.

This investment, called a “Perc” (from PERCS, Preferred Equity Redemption Cumulative Stock), was somewhat different from Buffett’s earlier convertible preferred stakes in Salomon, Gillette, US Airways, and Champion; in the end, it offered Buffett less potential upside and gave American Express more control over its outcome. Although the arrangement gave Buffett a much heftier dividend on its American Express shares than common shareholders received, the deal limited Buffett’s capital gains.

The preferred shares were exchangeable into common shares at the option of American Express, not Buffett, making them different from convertible shares. “There’s not much upside potential with this one. I’m not sure why he did it,” said Newsday columnist Allan Sloan.

“Convertible preferred shares have unlimited upside,” Buffett told The Wall Street Journal (August 2, 1991). “With this, we get less of an investment opportunity.”

The Berkshire–American Express agreement called for Buffett’s non-transferable preferred shares to be exchanged for common stock within three or four years under terms of the investment, a private placement.

American Express would redeem the securities issued to Berkshire no later than maturity by exchanging common shares for the preferred stock. The number of common shares issued was to be determined by the American Express share price at the time of the redemption. If American Express didn’t redeem before maturity (three years, with the possibility of a year extension if American Express stock was below $24.50 at the time), it would exchange about 12 million common shares for the preferred stake, about a 2.5% stake in American Express. Amex stock was trading at about $25 a share when Buffett bought his preferred stake.

“When I heard they needed some equity funds, I told Jim [Robinson] that Berkshire would be interested in investing $500 million. I was willing to buy more, but Jim didn’t want to sell more than $300 million,” Buffett told The Wall Street Journal.

When Buffett invests in a company, he often joins the board, but in this case he did not. Robinson told USA Today (August 2, 1991), “I don’t think he needs to be on the board to provide that [counsel]. We would have welcomed him on our board, but he’s on a number of boards. He has a full plate. Also, he’s on the Salomon board and we own [rival] Shearson.” As for Buffett, he told the Associated Press he wouldn’t play a role in running American Express, but that he would “speak when spoken to.”

Taking on numerous interviews in connection with the announcement, Buffett told the Omaha World-Herald (August 2, 1991) that the then-recent losses at Shearson were temporary. “It really doesn’t take any of the luster off the really great franchises—the cards, the traveler’s checks, and the information systems,” Buffett said, shortly before the company’s setbacks in its Optima card operations.

As usual, when Buffett made his investment, things did not look good at American Express. Making matters worse for American Express, but creating the perfect buying opportunity for Buffett, a wave of merchants (initially a group of restaurants in Boston that were subsequently dubbed the “Boston Fee Party”) voiced complaints that American Express cards took too large a commission from sales billed to its cards.

Value Line said at the time of Berkshire’s American Express holding, “These shares seem unexciting … not confident that the stock will show any special strength for the year ahead. And prospects for 1994-96 aren’t well-defined.”

Enter Warren Buffett.

Omaha World-Herald columnist Robert McMorris ran this item August 2, 1991:

Lunch-table conversation overheard at a west Omaha restaurant: I understand Warren Buffett is investing $300 million in American Express.



That so? You know, American Express owns Shearson Brokerage, and Warren already has Salomon.



Yeah, pretty soon he’ll own all of Wall Street. Think he’ll move there so he can be close to his money?



I doubt it. Warren would probably say Wall Street is a nice property to own, but he wouldn’t want to live there.



Over the next several years, Buffett continued to follow events at American Express. In an unsuccessful effort to become a “financial supermarket” during the 1980s, American Express had become a disjointed collection of mergers and acquisitions. Though it lacked a clear focus, it still had terrific cash flow and was one of the greatest brand franchises in the world, and it generated huge amounts of float. The stock price had drifted sideways for nearly a decade.

Buffett converted his American Express investment into 14 million common shares in the summer of 1994 and began buying more American Express stock. Then more and more and more and more. By the end of 1994, he was up to 27.76 million shares and added another 20.7 million in the first month and a half of 1995.

Just over 30 years after his first investment in American Express, Berkshire announced that it owned 9.8% of American Express. The announcement came across the wire as a one liner.

Here’s how Buffett explained the move in Berkshire’s 1997 Annual Report:

In addition to the convertible preferreds, we purchased one other private placement in 1991, $300 million of American Express Percs. This security was essentially a common stock that featured a tradeoff in its first three years: We received extra dividend payments during that period, but we were also capped in the price appreciation we could realize. Despite the cap, this holding has proved extraordinarily profitable thanks to a move by your Chairman that combined luck and skill—110% luck, the balance skill.





Our Percs were due to convert into common stock in August 1994, and in the month before I was mulling whether to sell upon conversion. One reason to hold was Amex’s outstanding CEO, Harvey Golub, who seemed likely to maximize whatever potential the company had (a supposition that has since been proved—in spades). But the size of that potential was in question: Amex faced relentless competition from a multitude of card-issuers, led by Visa. Weighing the arguments, I leaned toward sale.





Here’s where I got lucky. During that month of decision, I played golf at Prouts Neck, Maine with Frank Olson, CEO of Hertz. Frank is a brilliant manager, with intimate knowledge of the card business. So from the first tee on I was quizzing him about the industry. By the time we reached the second green, Frank had convinced me that Amex’s corporate card was a terrific franchise, and I had decided not to sell. On the back nine I turned buyer, and in a few months Berkshire owned 10% of the company.





The investment amounted to 48.5 million shares of American Express. Buffett said he wanted clearance to buy above 10% of the company. Late in 1995, Berkshire raised its stake in American Express to 49,456,000 shares. By December 1995, Berkshire had invested a staggering $1.4 billion and owned 10.5% (12.2% at the end of 2005) of the company because of stock buybacks, making American Express Buffett’s largest allocation of new capital at that time. It was even larger than the initial investment in Coca-Cola, which had a cost basis of $1.3 billion.

Most significant is American Express’ contribution to “look-through” earnings. In Berkshire’s 1996 Annual Report, Buffett wrote, “Reported earnings are a poor measure of economic progress at Berkshire … dividends typically represent only a small fraction of the earnings attributable to ownership … on balance we regard the undistributed earnings of our investees as more valuable to us than the portion paid out. The reason is simple: Our investees often have the opportunity to reinvest earnings at high rates of return. So why should we want them paid out?” He estimated Berkshire’s share of undistributed operating earnings from American Express as $132 million. Of all of Berkshire’s major investees, only Coca-Cola delivers a greater contribution in the form of undistributed look-through earnings. At 1999 year-end, Berkshire’s look-through portion was $228 million.

Buffett agreed to limit his stake and influence at American Express as part of an agreement with the Federal Reserve Board that allowed him to buy more than 10% of the stock of American Express.

Because American Express owns a bank, the Fed could decide Berkshire had a controlling interest in American Express and thus was subject to regulations for bank holding companies. That would mean Buffett would have to get out of everything banks aren’t allowed to do, such as owning newspaper and candy companies.

With the agreement to be a passive investor, Berkshire can continue its other operations. Under the agreement, Berkshire said it will keep its stake below 15% if it receives board representation and below 17% if it doesn’t (Bloomberg, November 16, 1995). As of this time, Berkshire has the right to own up to 17% of American Express. Berkshire has pledged to vote its shares in line with recommendations from the American Express board as long as Kenneth Chenault is CEO.

In the 1994 Annual Report, Buffett wrote:

My American Express history includes a couple of episodes: In the mid-1960s, just after the stock was battered by the company’s infamous salad-oil scandal, we put about 40% of Buffett Partnership Ltd.’s capital into the stock—the largest investment the partnership had ever made. I should add that this commitment gave us over 5% ownership of Amex at a cost of $13 million. As I write this, we own just under 10% which has cost us $1.36 billion. (Amex earned $12.5 million in 1964 and $1.4 billion in 1994.)





My history with Amex’s IDS unit, which today contributes about a third of the earnings of the company, goes back even further. I first purchased stock in IDS in 1953 when it was growing rapidly and selling at a price-earnings ratio of only three. (There was a lot of low-hanging fruit in those days.) I even produced a long report—do I ever write a short one?—on the company that I sold for $1 through an ad in the The Wall Street Journal.





Obviously American Express and IDS (recently renamed American Express Financial Advisors) are far different operations from what they were then. Nevertheless, I find that a long-term familiarity with a company and its products is often helpful in evaluating it.





“The key will be in how the credit card does,” Buffett said of American Express at the Berkshire Annual Meeting in 1995. “Credit cards are going to be a very competitive business over time, and American Express needs to establish special value for its card in some way, or it gets commodity-like.”

As for American Express Financial Advisors, Forbes (July 1, 1996) reported: “Today it sells financial and estate planning, annuities, its own mutual funds, life insurance, pension plans, 401(k) plans, loans, and accounting services to individuals and businesses through 8,000 financial advisors in 50 states. It’s a nice business, producing a third of AmEx’s net income.”

Later in 1996, it was disclosed that American Express had talked to Citicorp about the possibility of selling American Express to Citicorp. Nothing came of the talks.

Barron’s (April 27, 1998) quoted money manager Kurt Feuerman: “Berkshire is tough … because we can’t talk to management, and that breaks one rule we have. It’s a unique situation where you own a portfolio of growth stocks where the management can influence the holdings. You get Warren Buffett and his ability to act. Was he involved in Travelers-Citicorp? I don’t know. But he was involved in selling Cap Cities to Disney. I own American Express and once asked Harvey Golub how often he spoke to the Great One. He said, ‘every week.’ That made me feel good about American Express and great about Berkshire.”

In 1997, golf superstar Tiger Woods signed a multi-year, multimillion-dollar deal to be a spokesman for American Express, and comedian Jerry Seinfeld starred in the classic American Express commercial. The Seinfeld commercial, which aired during the Super Bowl, depicted Jerry “rescuing” Lois Lane at the checkout line of the store when his friend and superhero, Superman, is shown to be helpless without an American Express card. Actor Robert De Niro and actress Kate Winslet have also appeared in American Express ads. Talk-show host Ellen DeGeneres was tapped by American Express to do ads as well; she told The Wall Street Journal (November 17, 2004), “Now I use the cool black one. Sometimes I just drop it on the street and say, ‘Oh, there is my card.’”

Don’t leave home without it!

In October 1998, after American Express had been hit by an international financial crisis, Buffett bought a little more than one million shares at just about the stock’s low point, upping Berkshire’s stake to 50,536,900 shares before a 3-for-1 split. Berkshire now owns 151,610,700 shares, or 12.6% of American Express.

As the crisis blew over and Berkshire’s new purchase rebounded strongly into 1999, American Express and Costco, a leading wholesale warehouse club operator, began to issue cobranded credit cards. It was the first time American Express shared its brand with a retailer so that consumers could use an American Express card that doubled as a Costco membership card.

Berkshire, with its large position in American Express, also had a small stake in Costco. Munger, Berkshire’s vice-chairman, serves on the board of Costco and has a personal investment in the giant retailer, too.

“American Express and Costco make a powerful fit. And there may be other natural affinities among Berkshire and her investees,” says Berkshire devotee Michael Assael. “Though the business synergies today may seem minor and incidental, the occasional blending of brands and resources could prove increasingly valuable in the years ahead. As markets develop and industries evolve to serve new customers worldwide, Berkshire and her investees will be there, with competitive products and attractive prices.”

American Express is a financial services supermarket serving more than 70% of the Fortune 500 companies with the American Express Corporate Card. An AmEx card is being swiped somewhere in the U.S. every hundredth of a second (Fortune, January 22, 2001).

But with a slowing economy, American Express’ profits took a big hit in 2001 because of a junk-bond portfolio slammed by defaults. About 14,000 jobs were cut. The attack of September 11 damaged not only the American Express Tower near the World Trade Center but also the company’s travel-related businesses.

In 2003, American Express bought London-based Threadneedle Asset Management Holdings fund management firm from Zurich Financial Services for $567 million. The fund, with $75 billion in client money, was American Express’ first move into investment management outside the U.S.

Also in 2003 American Express bought Rosenbluth International, a leading global travel management company. The privately held company based in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, has travel operations in 15 countries and had business travel volume of more than $3 billion in 2002.

MBNA ISSUES AMERICAN EXPRESS CARDS

A piece of good news did emerge in 2001: A federal judge ruled that top U.S. credit-card networks Visa and MasterCard had to let member banks issue rivals’ cards. That ruling revamped the card industry and handed companies like American Express a big victory.

In its first major deal since that favorable 2001 antitrust ruling against Visa and MasterCard, American Express said in early 2004 that it had agreed with MBNA to issue its credit cards in the U.S. as well as in Canada, Spain, and the U.K.

MBNA issued its own American Express branded cards later in 2004. MBNA, the nation’s largest independent issuer of credit cards, was already using Visa and MasterCard cards.

American Express CEO Chenault said: “This is a milestone agreement for us,” calling the alliance with MBNA a “transformational move in the credit card industry.”

AMERICAN EXPRESS SPINS OFF FINANCIAL ADVISORS UNIT

On February 1, 2005, American Express said it planned to unload its 12,000-broker financial advisory unit, shedding a slower growth business to better compete against MasterCard and Visa. American Express Financial Advisors was about one-third as profitable as its credit card business.

The move to spin off the business, now called Ameriprise Financial, to shareholders was a way to get rid of the business tax-free without having to sell it. With the spin-off, Berkshire wound up with 30.3 million shares, or 12.2%, of Ameriprise.

In March 2006, Ameriprise bought 6.4 million shares, or 2.3% of its shares outstanding, from Berkshire for $274 million. This left Berkshire with a 9.8% stake in Ameriprise. Berkshire agreed not to reduce its ownership stake “for the foreseeable future.” Still, Berkshire sold much of its Ameriprise stock later in the year.

AMERICAN EXPRESS AMENDMENT

In 2008, American Express approved a measure that makes the company easier to sell. It reduced the vote required for a sale to more than 50%, down from two-thirds. Berkshire already owns 13% of the company so that effective approval of a buyout would be about 37%.

Analysts said the company could eventually sell itself or go private. Speculation centered on Berkshire. It would fit into the $60 billion range that Buffett has said Berkshire could possibly do for the right business.

If American Express were taken over by Berkshire, and there has been such speculation, then Berkshire’s ownership would bring a reduction of costs at American Express: no board members, no annual report, and no costs for Sarbanes-Oxley—only regulations and shareholders services.

AMERICAN EXPRESS BECOMES A BANK

Hit by the global credit crunch and consumer spending slowdown in 2008, American Express announced it would become a bank.

Using emergency power to act swiftly, the Federal Reserve granted approval for the company to become a bank-holding company, thereby allowing it greater access to Federal funding and government rescue programs.

Two weeks before the announcement, American Express said it planned to layoff 7,000 employees after reporting a 24% drop in quarterly profits. Further, reports said American Express would ask for $3.5 billion in U.S. aid.

BUYING LOYALTY PARTNERS

In late 2010, American Express agreed to buy Loyalty Partners for up to $660 million.

Loyalty Partners, a transaction processor in Germany, has 34 million customers. It sells awards programs to customers and merchants in Germany, Poland, and India.



American Express in New York

The American Express Tower is a landmark at the World Financial Center at Ground Zero.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

The Story of Warren Buffet

Of Permanent Value American Express Revisited

The World at Their Fingers

American Express President Ken Chenault, left, posed for a portrait with the company’s chairman and CEO Harvey Golub at American Express headquarters April 26, 1992. Chenault, a Bowdoin College history major and a Harvard Law School graduate, succeeded Golub as CEO in 2001.



(AP/Wide World Photos)

American Express Revisited The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value American Express Revisited



Dancing Ellen DeGeneres

(AP Photo)

American Express Revisited The Story of Warren Buffett



Artifact of a Stock Certificate

American Express’ William Fargo signed this stock certificate on February 2, 1881. This early artifact from a leading American company features a watch dog and the slogan “Safety and Dispatch.”

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value American Express Revisited



162





THE BODY OF HIS WORK


KEEP IT SIMPLE

Buffett surely could subscribe to Einstein’s words: “The levels of intelligence are ‘Smart, intelligent, brilliant, genius, simple.’”

COMMON SENSE

From the beginning, common sense is the trait that has most characterized Buffett’s body of work. It may be the most important factor in how Buffett makes more money in the stock market than anyone else. He is the only person on the Forbes 400 richest Americans list who got there entirely by investing.

“We don’t buy and sell stocks based on what other people think the stock market is going to do. The course of the stock market will determine, to a great degree, when we will be right, but the accuracy of our analysis of the company will largely determine whether we are right. In other words, we tend to concentrate on what should happen, not when it should happen,” he wrote in a Buffett Partnership letter dated July 22, 1966.

“One piece of advice that I got at Columbia from Ben Graham that I’ve never forgotten: You’re neither right nor wrong because other people agree with you. You’re right because your facts are right and your reasoning is right. That’s the only thing that makes you right,” Buffett said at the Berkshire annual meeting in 1991.

Buffett likes to keep things simple. His usual corporate strategy is, “hoping the phone rings.” He wants bad news out quickly; good news will take care of itself. He wants red tape and meetings cut out in favor of by-the-seat-of-your-pants judgments. He wants action, not paperwork. He likes people who want to manage a business, not one another.

In the words of Ralph Waldo Emerson, “Common sense is genius dressed in its working clothes.”

STICK TO YOUR “CIRCLE OF COMPETENCE”

Ben Graham, who liked to dance, once gave Buffett certificates to take dance lessons. Buffett never went to the classes. Apparently, dancing is outside Buffett’s “circle of competence.”

In the world of business, Buffett sticks to what he knows and what he can do. He does not try to do what he cannot. He understands media, financial, and consumer product companies and has concentrated his assets particularly in those areas over the years. “Know your own bone, gnaw at it, and gnaw at it again,” Thoreau once said.

Buffett would subscribe to the wisdom of Orson Scott Card: “Most victories come from instantly exploiting your enemy’s stupid mistakes and not from any particular brilliance in your own plan.”

Finally, Buffett would subscribe to the proverb: “Best is to know—and know you know. Next best is to know that you don’t know. Third best is knowing but not realizing it. Worst is not to know that you don’t know.”

MENTAL DISCIPLINE

You need mental discipline to stick to what you’re about and not go down some side trail nor take chances in areas which are not your game. Buffett’s friend Jack Byrne once recalled a story about Buffett’s attitude toward betting:

The bet was the kind that rich golfing buddies like. Investment wizard Warren Buffett’s $10 against $20,000 that he wouldn’t score a hole-in-one over the three-day outing.



Eight of us had gotten together to play Pebble Beach, and in a loose moment, after dinner and a couple bottles of wine, I offered the bet. It was meant as a fun thing, and the other six took me up on it. Everyone except Warren.



Well, we heaped abuse on him and tried to cajole him—after all, it was only $10. But he said he had thought it over and decided it wasn’t a good bet for him. He said if you let yourself be undisciplined on the small things, you’d probably be undisciplined on the large things, too (Chicago Tribune, December 8, 1985).



It doesn’t hurt to be gifted either. The same Chicago Tribune story quoted Byrne:

He works at his trade awfully hard. And he has the most amazing memory I’ve ever encountered. Someone can bring up some obscure company, and what Warren knows about it will leave you slackjawed. He’ll tell you the number of shares outstanding, the square footage of retailing space they have in Minneapolis.



Let me tell you. I follow the insurance industry pretty closely, and Warren still will bring up important facts from some annual report that I’ve missed completely.



Although a stratospheric IQ probably accounts largely for Buffett’s success, so too does plain old hard work. He’s a combination of a sort of genius squared who pushes very hard. “He focuses very hard on the task at hand and then he focuses very hard on the next task,” said a Berkshire employee.

BE YOUR OWN REPORTER

Buffett has the unique ability to separate what is true from what merely seems true. The practical manifestation of this ability in the stock market is to buy a good out-of-favor business. Buffett wants to buy a great business—or, in his words, a “wonderful business,”—at a time when its price is temporarily depressed due to some unwarranted stigma, fear, or misunderstanding about the company.

His purchases of American Express, GEICO, and Wells Fargo are examples. He originally bought American Express when scandal surrounded the high-quality business, and he bought Wells Fargo when it seemed its real estate loans might cripple the bank. Being your own reporter means keeping up not only with the businesses you own, but also with competitors.

At the Berkshire annual meeting in 1993, referring to the number of annual reports he reads, Buffett said, “And we’d be interested not only in any business that we own or are thinking of owning, but we’ll be interested in reading their competitors’. I get the Bic Annual Report. I get the Warner-Lambert Annual Report to read about Schick. I get the PepsiCo Annual Report. I get the Cott Beverage report. Cott Beverage makes more of the generic colas than anybody—at least in this hemisphere. I want to know what competitors are doing and talking about, what results they are getting and what strategies seem logical to them.”

THE MARKET IS NOT ALWAYS EFFICIENT

Buffett has shot holes through the efficient market theory, which holds that every stock price is fairly priced because it already incorporates all known information about a company. The theory argues that nothing is to be gained by digging for new information.

According to the theory, since market prices at any given moment reflect all knowledge, the prices in the stock tables are the right prices. There are no bargains. The efficient market theory says it’s useless to try to outperform the market. Further, all future prices are subject to new, random information. At Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1997, Buffett summarized his problem with advocates of an efficient market theory, “Observing correctly that the market was frequently efficient, they went on to conclude incorrectly that it was always efficient.”

Many times Buffett has said, “It has been helpful to me to have tens of thousands turned out of business schools taught that it didn’t do any good to think.”

Buffett often has joked that he wished more people would subscribe to the

efficient market theory so fewer investors would be trying to figure out where the market has gone astray, where it does not reflect intrinsic value. It is in this murky arena that Buffett thrives, doing his lab work and capitalizing on fear and uncertainty while other investors are panicked into selling. That’s how Buffett became the second richest person in the world. He thinks the efficient market theory is absurd; that it’s better to turn it on its head, believing that the market can be inefficient, subject to fear, greed, fads, and herd behavior—in short, subject to temporary insanity.

Buffett does not maintain the market is always wrong. Indeed, it is often correct, he says. The trick is figuring out when, on occasion, it’s wildly off base.

“The man is a living refutation of the random walk theory,” says Newsday’s Allan Sloan.

Buffett wrote an article for Barron’s (February 23, 1985), outlining the investment results of a number of value investors who have consistently beaten the market. What one has to wonder about the efficient market theory is how anything can be efficient when fear and greed infect Wall Street. It is not a mathematical refutation of the theory. The only sure way to refute is to just present the record of Buffett who has consistently beaten the market over a lifetime.

Also consider that the market dropped 23% on October 19, 1987. That was the day they were throwing rocks at the stock market. But did the underlying economic world change 23% that day?

Buffett said: “When the price of a stock can be influenced by a ‘herd’ on Wall Street with prices set at the margin by the most emotional person or the greediest person or the most depressed person, it is hard to argue that the market always prices rationally. In fact, market prices are frequently nonsensical” (“The Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville,” Hermes, Fall 1984).

Buffett has also said, “I’d be a bum on the street with a tin cup if the market were always efficient.”

Though the theory carries enormous weight in academia, former U.S. Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers told The Wall Street Journal after the 1987 crash, “The efficient market hypothesis is the most remarkable error in the history of economic theory” (Roger Lowenstein, When Genius Failed, p. 74).

PRICE VS. VALUE

Early on, Buffett’s common sense led him to the simple premise that there is a difference between price and value. “Price is what you pay. Value is what you get.” Ben Graham taught Buffett that concept.

“Price does not imply that you got a thing equal in value to what you paid,” says Buffett wanna-be George Morgan, the Omaha stockbroker who wrote Buffett and I Have Zero in Common: He Just Has More of Them Than I Do. Morgan recalled a story told by Joe Garagiola:

Yogi Berra once told his friend Whitey Ford that he had just purchased a valuable house. Ford replied that he was familiar with the house and didn’t think it was very valuable. Yogi responded with, “You may not think it’s valuable now but you will after I tell you the price.”



In contrast, Buffett seeks to buy a valuable house for a bargain price.

People who have traded with Buffett describe him as very tough on pricing. “You know people who want to argue about a 32nd on a trade, well, he’ll try to get the last 100th out of it,” is one description of Buffett’s focus on price. Buffett does not however like to haggle. When buying or selling companies, he has one price; then it’s take it or leave it.

INFLATION

Buffett is also always mindful about the havoc that inflation can wreak. An investment that can’t beat inflation is useless. Only gains in purchasing power count.

Buffett says, “If you forego the purchase of 10 hamburgers and place those

dollars in the bank for two years, you will receive interest which after tax will buy two hamburgers. Then at the end of the two years, you will receive back an amount equal to the number of dollars in the original deposit but which will only purchase eight hamburgers. You will feel richer but you won’t eat richer.”

The hamburger parable is an example of Buffett’s genius. You do not have to read a textbook or an economist’s over-blown explanation of inflation. It’s all there, simply put, in one paragraph.

Buffett, at the Berkshire annual meeting in 1986, said this about valuations: “I always crank through something for inflation.”

COMPOUNDING

Something else Buffett understands is the beauty of compounding. Buffett ruminates, “$1,000 invested at 10% for 45 years grows to $72,800. At 20% the same $1,000 becomes $3,657,262. This difference strikes me as a significant difference that might conceivably arouse one’s curiosity.”

Let’s look at what some other people have said about compounding.

Albert Einstein once said, “What is the greatest miracle known to man? Compounding!” Bernard Baruch said: “Compounding is the eighth wonder of the world.”

Ben Franklin once wrote of compounding: “’Tis the stone that will turn all your lead into gold.… Remember that money is of a prolific generating nature. Money can beget money, and its offering can beget more.”

As Sidney Homer says: “A thousand dollars invested at just 8% for 400 years grows to $23 quadrillion. But the first 100 years are the hardest.”

George Morgan’s example of compounding is: “You start a company by issuing 100 shares at $10/share. The company is now worth $1,000 [equity]. During your first year, you make a $200 profit, which is equal to 20% of your company [equity]. You put your profit back into the company and it is now worth $1,200 [in equity]. Next year, you experience an additional 20% return on equity which is now $240. This increases your total equity to $1,440. Do this for 79 years and the original investment [equity of the shareholders] of $1,000 is now worth [equity] $1,800,000,000.”

Since 1965, Berkshire has averaged a 22% annual return on equity. That is how Buffett has pulled off his monumental achievements.

GOOD VS. BAD BUSINESSES: COMPANY A VS. COMPANY E

In addition to nuggets of wisdom, Buffett really does know almost all the people, the numbers, the facts, and even the minutiae involved in an investment decision. He makes a dogged, detailed study. But the art of investing centers on the search for value—not gimmicks, not hunches. For all his intellectual powers, Buffett has long boiled things down to investing in good businesses at reasonable prices, rather than bad or so-so businesses even at a bargain-basement price. And there’s been no interest in smokestack industries. They present too much chance for high costs and obsolescence.

On occasion, Buffett has talked about good and bad businesses and has described their characteristics, often talking about hypothetical “Company A and Company E.” Why Companies A and E? “That’s Agony and Ecstasy,” Buffett once told Kiewit Construction’s Mike Faust, the assistant to Walter Scott, head of the huge privately held conglomerate. Buffett has owned companies in both categories. But Buffett has had a lot more Company E’s than Company A’s and now runs one of the greatest Company E’s on earth.

In some ways, Buffett adds value to a business when he buys it because then it’s not just a business—it’s a Berkshire business. Kahn Brothers’ Irving Kahn says, “His skill is finding private companies that are revalued when public.” So many times, Buffett has bought an unrecognized business and given it a halo with just a one-paragraph mention in a Berkshire annual report.

OLD-FASHIONED VALUES

If great achievement comes from both natural talent and the environment of one’s upbringing, then Buffett has it all. In addition to Buffett’s natural mental gifts, his recall for facts and numbers, and his energy, he also has the advantage of having grown up in a family engaged in the commercial and political affairs in a place best known for its economic pursuits—Omaha, Nebraska, where the state slogan is “The Good Life.”

Buffett has a rule against trading while he’s in the frenetic city of New York. He makes his trades in the peace and calm of Omaha (Fortune, November 27, 1995).

Omaha, the soil from which Buffett grew and flourished, was mainly a meatpacking and grain-handling center in the early decades of the 20th century, but it is now a center for telemarketing, hotel reservations, and insurance. The city once had a slogan that reflected its meat-packing days as well as its carefully planned layout: “Omaha: Rare, Well Done.” The city’s slogan was later changed to “O!”

Named in 1854 after a local Indian tribe, Omaha is not a nowheresville place where the buffalo roam. However, corn does grow tall right outside this city, which is unmarred by the complaints of a bigger metropolis: rush-hour traffic, pollution, and high crime rates. This comfortable, business-oriented city provided the right locale for a passionate, practical-minded man like Buffett.

Omaha is also near the Strategic Air Command (SAC). Forbes (May 31, 1999) listed Omaha as one of the best cities to live in and asked if the U.S. Nuclear command is “Shielding Warren Buffett.”

Omaha folks are straightforward, open, friendly, and businesslike, just like Buffett himself. He takes his calls. He responds as quickly as possible to mail. He does not leave people hanging for answers. With Buffett, there is no show, pretense, or dissembling. Old-fashioned values prevail, and honesty and decency are assumed.

With Berkshire’s financial clout, Buffett could easily pull a lot of tricks—

threaten takeovers, corner markets, or create market turmoil to his advantage. But that is not his style. Buffett does not go where he’s not wanted.

He once took a relatively small stake in a company and expressed interest in a larger stake. A top executive told Buffett that the company wanted to buy back its stock and asked him not to buy any more shares. Buffett honored the request immediately. Buffett could have bought the whole company; instead he honored the wishes of management.

LOOK AROUND YOU AND WORK ON

WHAT IS AT HAND

Buffett, no doubt, subscribes to this saying of Theodore Roosevelt: “Do what you can, with what you have, where you are.”

The birthplace of TV dinners, Omaha was founded mainly on business. It provides a stable, comfortable home for Buffett where he can operate without a lot of distractions. “Successful analysis, like successful investment, requires a fairly rational atmosphere to work in and at least some stability of values to work with,” Ben Graham wrote in Security Analysis.

Buffett’s Omaha, smackdab in the middle of the American heartland, boasts a metro-area population of 700,000. Omaha has produced down-home and famous folks such as Buffalo Bill Cody; novelist Willa Cather; Dick Cavett; Dorothy McGuire; Fred Astaire, who was the son of an Omaha brewery worker; Montgomery Clift; Malcolm X; President Gerald Ford, whose birthplace was at 32nd Street and Woolworth Avenue; Bob Gibson; Paula Zahn; Nick Nolte; Marlon Brando who lived in Omaha until he was 6; and Henry Fonda. Ted Sorenson, adviser to President Kennedy, was born in Lincoln, Nebraska, to a mother born in Omaha.

Brando’s mother, Dorothy Brando, encouraged Fonda on stage, and he starred in Grapes of Wrath in 1940. Fonda and NFL Hall of Famer former Chicago Bears running back Gale Sayers both attended Central High School in Omaha.

Buffett understands that Omaha has contributed to his success: “I can be anywhere in three hours—New York or Los Angeles.… This is a good place to bring up children and a good place to live. You can think here. You can think better about the market; you don’t hear so many stories, and you can just sit and look at the stock on the desk in front of you. You can think about a lot of things” (Adam Smith, Supermoney, p. 182).

Recalling his days of living in New York when he worked for Graham-Newman, Buffett has said he longed for Omaha:

I was never going to be part of anything in the community. I didn’t know who my neighbors were. When I read the Omaha paper, and I look in the divorce section it’s interesting. But in White Plains [New York] it meant nothing to me.



In Omaha people also leave me alone socially. If I was in New York I’d be expected to go to something every night. I don’t like to do that. I’d rather sit home and watch the World Series or something (Georgia Tech Alumni Association, TechTopics, Spring 2005).



Not everyone is clear that Buffett is from Omaha. A wire service once said: “Buffett’s office in Kansas City said he could not be reached to elaborate.”

GOOD MANAGEMENT

Buffett has earned success through a love of what he’s doing, an ability to keep on learning, and extraordinary day-to-day persistence. In spite of all his ability, he is well-aware of what he cannot do. “I don’t run the businesses,” he has said. “Can you imagine me doing what [Borsheims former president] Ike Friedman does?”

Buffett takes a common sense approach about letting others run the businesses, but he does assert himself in some ways. “I set the price on See’s Candies every year. I set the circulation prices at The Buffalo News. There are certain things, with certain managers who want me to do it, in which it’s better to have it centralized. Because a person who is too close to a business probably would not tend to price as aggressively as they can,” he told Columbia business students on October 27, 1993.

PART VALUE INVESTOR, PART CONTRARIAN, PART DEAL MAKER

Buffett is part value investor, part contrarian, and part deal maker. He knows it’s better to buy a great business when fickle Mr. Market values it unreasonably low.

It is Buffett’s genius that leads him to simple solutions. In The Money Masters

(pp. 40–41), John Train relates the following story: Buffett once met a leading executive of a capital-intensive business giant at a time when the company was selling in the market for one-quarter of its replacement value.

Buffett asked the executive: ‘Why don’t you buy back your own stock? If you like to build new facilities at one hundred cents on the dollar, why not buy the ones you know best and were responsible for creating at 25 cents on the dollar?

Executive: We should.

Buffett: Well?

Executive: That’s not what we’re here to do.

This is reminiscent of Samuel Beckett’s Waiting for Godot, an imaginary figure who never comes:

Estragon: Charming spot. Inspiring prospects. Let’s go.

Vladimir: We can’t.

Estragon: Why not?

Vladimir: We’re waiting for Godot.

It is through rationality that Buffett, sometimes at the expense of less rational people, has made investing his art form. He is blessed with common sense, even genius, but the one ingredient that overrides it all is a love of what he is doing.

“Buffett loves the investing process in the same way an artist loves his creation,” says Omaha stockbroker George Morgan.

Buffett is intensely passionate about what he does. One question on his pretend job application other than “What’s your IQ?” might be, “Are you a fanatic?”

Take genius, love of what you do, and common sense. Stir well and the result can be huge success. KISS—“Keep It Simple, Stupid” is another Buffett tenet. His passion is for analysis and problem solving. His aim is to simplify.

NO STOCK SPLITS

Buffett feels it makes no sense to pay dividends automatically or do stock-splits, though Berkshire did have a “backdoor” split with the issuance of an additional new class of stock in 1996. (See “A Do-It-Yourself Stock Split” chapter.) Buffett has said splitting makes no sense because transactional costs are greater and it draws more speculation to Berkshire. Besides, he says, splitting the stock is like asking for a pizza to be sliced into six pieces because you can’t possibly eat eight.

“I disagree with him about not splitting the stock,” says Dr. Wallace Gaye of Durham, New Hampshire. “One, I don’t think the transactional costs are less. And I don’t think there would be speculation if he split it 10 to 1 … but that would make it easier to deal with.” He lamented the high stock price, saying, “My dad left $5,000 for each kid, and with that, I can’t buy [even] a share of Berkshire for them.”

Michael Assael believes that “total transactional costs and speculative turnover are less on the unsplit stock,” and that “the Berkshire shareholder community benefits from saying being higher grade and longer term.” He also believes a point may come when the shares become too unwieldy.

“Hopefully, if Berkshire’s price passes Pluto and the shares look as though they are becoming irretrievably illiquid, Buffett will reconsider. But not to worry—there are always mutual funds that could buy shares at $10,000 apiece,” Assael said. Maybe $100,000.

“And perhaps someone will start a fund for young people to invest in Berkshire. Just think of it: Kids could shovel snow, sell lemonade, or babysit and then invest their profits in Berkshire for as little as say, five hundred bucks,” Assael posed. Indeed there are new investment vehicles available that invest in Berkshire and Berkshire-related stocks. “There is no substitute, though, for owning Berkshire directly and enjoying the wonderful learning experience,” continued longtime shareholder Assael.

For now and perhaps for always, splitting stock is just another charade that makes no particular sense to Buffett, at least for Berkshire. To him splitting a stock is only a cosmetic exercise. It involves paperwork and creates unnecessary stimulation and a false sense of progress.

What is the difference whether you have one share of Berkshire at price x or 100 shares at 100th of x? Stock splits are something stockbrokers like because they increase trading, giving speculators a false energy and feeling of wealth.

Each year Buffett is asked about the possibility of splitting Berkshire’s stock. When asked at the 1990 annual meeting, he replied, “I don’t see a stock split in the unforeseeable future,” Buffett replied. Even Buffett was wrong on this as stock splits did occur later.

A 2-FOR-1 AGE SPLIT

Buffett has joked that he does plan, when he reaches 80, to have a 2-for-1 split of his age. “I have a stockholder friend of mine who is 60. I just sent him a telegram on his birthday that said, ‘May you live until Berkshire Hathaway splits,’” Buffett remarked at the Berkshire annual meeting in 1987. With the issue of the Class B shares in 1996 (Class B shares sell at 1/30 of the price of the Class A shares), Buffett may need to revise his salutation to say, “May you live until Berkshire’s Class Z shares are issued.”

Larry Page and Sergey Brin, who founded the Internet search company Google, have expressed admiration for Buffett’s corporate policies, saying they also have no plans to split Google stock.

NO DIVIDENDS

Buffett doesn’t believe in paying dividends so long as retained earnings are compounding at a high rate. Berkshire paid a 10-cent dividend back in early 1967. Buffett said later, “I must have been in the bathroom at the time” (Forbes, October 21, 1991). Berkshire has not paid a dividend since. At Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2000, Buffett said:

We paid a dividend in what—1969, Charlie? We paid 10¢ a share. I can’t remember, but it’s in the records.… We would be very likely to pay either very large dividends or none at all because our test is whether we think we can use the money in a way that creates more than $1 of market value for every dollar that we retain.



Obviously, if we can keep a dollar and have it become worth more than $1 on a present value basis, then it would be foolish to pay it out because shareholders can instead get $1.10 or maybe $1.20—or whatever it may be—by selling the stock …



Again, we’d never have a conventional dividend policy. The idea of paying out 20% of earnings—or 10% or 30%—as dividends strikes us as nuts given our characteristics. You may get yourself into a position where you have to do it because you build these expectations in people’s minds. However, there’s no logic to it whatsoever.



If you can create more than $1 of value for each dollar you retain, why in the world would you pay [any of] it out? And if you can’t, then why wouldn’t you pay all of it out?



ARBITRAGE

Perhaps one of the least understood areas of Buffett’s success is his use of

arbitrage—again an area that calls for common sense, judgment, and sizing up the odds on discrepancies in the marketplace.

Arbitrage, a French term for profiting risklessly, involves trading on the differences in prices in different markets. Arbitrage, or “workouts,” applies to a range of pursuits; but these days, it often applies to stock traders betting on the outcome of a merger deal or reorganization plan. Buffett enters the field of arbitrage only after a deal has been announced.

Buffett makes his evaluations on information, not rumors. He looks at the probability of the announced event occurring, the length of time the money will be tied up, the opportunity cost of losing out on a better use of the money, and the probability of loss if the announced deal collapses.

After the takeover announcement, when the stock of the target firm often soars to just below the takeover price, Buffett might step in, buy and hold the stock until it reaches its full takeover price achieved when the deal finally goes through. This technique enables him to make a tidy percentage in a relatively short time.

In 1962, arbitrage saved the Buffett Partnership from a down year. The market was declining, but earnings from the workouts allowed the partnership to have a decent year. “They allowed the partnership to be up 13.9% compared with the Dow’s miserable performance of being down 7.6%” (Mary Buffett and David Clark, Buffettology, p. 253). In years of declining markets, successful arbitrage can provide a competitive edge.

Here’s an example of arbitrage: On February 13, 1982, Bayuk Cigars Inc. announced that it had approval from the Justice Department to sell its cigar operations to American Maize Products Co. for $14.5 million, or about $7.87 a share. It also adopted a plan of liquidation and said it would distribute the proceeds to shareholders. Shortly after the announcement, Buffett bought about 5.7% of Bayuk Cigar’s stock for $572,907, or $5.44 a share. Buffett concluded the whole plan had a high likelihood of going through in a reasonably short amount of time (Mary Buffett and David Clark, Buffettology, pp. 756–757). The Bayuk Cigar arbitrage went through successfully. The deal must go through or, if he isn’t nimble, the investor/arbitrageur can be axed.

Since Buffett is a good judge of the probabilities of these deals occurring, he has consistently brought Berkshire a little extra return. He describes one of his earliest arbitrage moves, one which was not a takeover arbitrage, in the 1988 Annual Report:

I participated in one of these when I was 24 and working in New York at Graham-Newman Corp. Rockwood & Co., a Brooklyn-based chocolate products company of limited profitability, had adopted a LIFO [last in, first out] inventory valuation in 1941 when cocoa was selling for five cents per pound. In 1954, a temporary shortage of cocoa caused the price to soar to over 60 cents. Consequently Rockwood wished to unload its valuable inventory—quickly, before the price dropped. But if the cocoa had simply been sold off, the company would have owed close to a 50% tax on the proceeds.



The 1954 Tax Code came to the rescue. It contained an arcane provision that eliminated the tax otherwise due on LIFO profits if inventory was distributed to shareholders as part of a plan reducing the scope of a corporation’s business. Rockwood decided to terminate one of its businesses, the sale of cocoa butter, and said 13 million pounds of its cocoa bean inventory was attributable to the activity. Accordingly, the company offered to purchase its stock in exchange for the cocoa beans it no longer needed, paying 80 pounds of beans for each share.



For several weeks I busily bought shares, sold beans, and made periodic stops at Schroeder Trust to exchange stock certificates for warehouse receipts. The profits were good and my only expense was subway tokens.



Moral: Know thy tax code.



In 1981, Berkshire bought the stock of Arcata, a forest products and printing firm, at about $33.50 a share. Arcata was the subject of a buyout by KKR. In 1978, the U.S. government seized more than 10,000 acres of redwood timber to expand the Redwood National Park. The government was to pay Arcata for the trees, but the question was how much.

Buffett, who has said he “couldn’t tell an elm from an oak tree,” added that he coolly evaluated the claim at somewhere between zero and a whole lot. The deal with KKR fell apart, but Arcata sold out in a later offer. Berkshire made about 15% on its investment, selling at about $37.50 a share, but in 1988 received an additional $19.3 million, or $29.48 a share, when the government agreed to pay a total of $519 million for the timberland (Robert Hagstrom, The Warren Buffett Way, pp. 166–167).

At the end of 1993, Berkshire held $146 million worth of Paramount Communications stock. Apparently Berkshire had it through the Viacom takeover of Paramount, making money through arbitrage. Buffett is at ease with whatever makes money be it arbitrage, deal making, value investing, or understanding the importance of brand names. It has been estimated that Buffett has added several percentage points a year to Berkshire’s returns through his workings in arbitrage.

EASY ON THE DERIVATIVES, PLEASE

Buffett lets his horse sense tell him some other things, too; one result is he

doesn’t care much for program trading.

He often tells the story that if a group of people were stranded on an island, you might well set a certain number to farming, a certain number to building shelter, even some to figuring out how to get off the island, but you would not select several of the people to trade options based on the output of the other workers. Whenever he tells that story, and Munger is around, Munger will say of program traders, “I like them less than you do.”

No securities are offered on Gilligan’s Island either. In our world, at least, options trading is not available on Berkshire’s stock.

Buffett generally deplores options, program and derivatives trading, and anything else that brings a casino-like atmosphere to the marketplace, especially where a little leverage can control a lot of assets.

In March 1982, John Dingell, chairman of the House Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, was considering whether to allow the Chicago Mercantile Exchange to trade futures. Buffett wrote the following:

We do not need more people gambling on the nonessential instruments identified with the stock market in the country, nor brokers who encourage them to do so. What we need are investors and advisers who look at the long-term prospects for an enterprise and invest accordingly. We need the intelligent commitment of investment capital, not leveraged market wagers. The propensity to operate in the intelligent, pro-social sector of capital markets is deterred, not enhanced, by an active and exciting casino operating in somewhat the same arena, utilizing somewhat similar language and serviced by the same work force.



Buffett’s investments are straightforward—no hot tips, no betting on the next quarter’s earnings report. Using his meticulous research and common sense, he comes to decisions to buy common stocks such as 20th Century Industries, the insurer in California; or National Service Industries, the lighting equipment company in Georgia. He carefully negotiates purchases of pieces of businesses, such as Bowery Savings Bank of New York, which Berkshire had some ownership in from 1985 to 1987.

ETHICS

Back when Buffett decided to buy shares of the Washington Post Co., he got in touch with Omaha broker Cliff Hayes, now with Wallace Weitz & Co. in Omaha.

“He asked me to buy Post shares,” recalls Hayes. Hayes said when he raised a question of what price to try to buy them for and how much to buy, Buffett told him, “You don’t understand, I just want to buy.”

“It was just totally expected for me to use my best professional judgment in making the purchases. We’d buy a third or a half of the day’s volume, then step back.” Hayes said it was understood that the buyer should not upset the market with big orders or alert the market to a big purchaser in the wings.

Offering his version of a lesson from Ecclesiastes, Buffett told Hayes, “There is a time to bid for them, and there is a time to take them.”

Does common sense in the stock market always pan out right away? No. “We started buying the Post at $20 (at 1973 prices), and we were buying it at $12 when we were done,” Hayes said. Even though Buffett was a big purchaser, the Post’s share price steadily declined. All the better for Buffett in the long run.

“He does a lot of his trading now at Salomon—but he often asked me to accumulate small positions, sometimes over a two- or three-year period,” Hayes said.

“I did the GEICO buying.… We bought baskets of it when it was an almost busted company,” Hayes said. Again, Hayes bought a healthy percentage of the day’s volume but not so much that the market could detect a big buyer.

It was understood things were to be kept quiet. “He didn’t say keep it a secret. It was just implied,” Hayes said, adding it was also understood everything was to be on the up-and-up. “We never traded ahead of him.” He said if anything was amiss, it was best to tell Buffett immediately and not let any problem fester. One time, word leaked about what Buffett was buying, and Hayes said he told Buffett about it right away. He wound up trading for Buffett for years. But other brokers who did not report problems quickly to Buffett were not used again. “He’s dropped brokers,” Hayes said.

Hayes emphasized that it would be very rare for a broker to leak a trade, but leaks in the brokerage community often happen in the back office, through the stock transfer agent—or anyone else along the way who may have access to the trade or stock delivery process.

BUSINESS FRANCHISE

Another lesson Buffett discovered early is the importance of a business franchise. A franchise is a business that, for one reason or another has a dominance in the marketplace—a leading business, such as Pinkerton’s, in a difficult-to-breach market. It can be a monopoly newspaper, such as The Washington Post; a strong brand name such as General Foods (a stock Buffett bought in 1981 at about half its investment price and sold in 1985 to Philip Morris for about twice its steadily growing investment); or the ultimate brand name, Coca-Cola. It is the business with a superior competitive edge. Such a business is so formidable that it is difficult for those wishing to compete with it even to break into the industry.

Something Buffett has tried to do, especially in recent years, is to seek out businesses with extremely strong franchises, impregnable but unrecognized franchises.

Buffett saw an archetype of this idea in the monopoly newspaper. He explains:

The test of a franchise is what a smart guy with a lot of money could do to it if he tried. If you gave me a billion dollars, and you gave me first draft pick of 50 business managers throughout the United States, I could absolutely cream both the business world and the journalistic world. If you said, “Go take The Wall Street Journal apart,” I would hand you back the billion dollars. Reluctantly, but I would hand it back to you.



Now, incidentally, if you gave me a similar amount of money and you told me to make a dent in the profitability or change the market position of the Omaha National Bank [forerunner of FirstTier Bank] or the leading department store in Omaha, I could give them a hard time. I might not do much for you in the process, but I could cause them a lot of trouble. The real test of a business is how much damage a competitor can do, even if he is stupid about returns.



There are some businesses that have very large moats around them and they have crocodiles and sharks and piranhas swimming around in them. Those are the kind of businesses you want. You want some business that, going back to my day, Johnny Weissmuller in a suit of armor could not make it across the moat. There are businesses like that. Sometimes they’re regulated. If I had the only water company in Omaha, I’d do fine if I didn’t have a regulator. What you’re looking for is an unregulated water company. The trick is to find the ones that haven’t been identified by someone else. What you want is a disguised television station or newspaper (Investing in Equity Markets, Summer 1985).



The reason one would like a monopoly television station or newspaper is because most other businesses have to go through that business to advertise. That amounts to what Buffett calls a royalty on the other guy’s gross sales—a payment that almost every business in town must pay. If you have the only newspaper, television, or radio station in town, you have to get a good percentage of the advertising business.

This was a major reason, one not recognized by many in the 1970s, that Buffett was buying such stocks as the Washington Post Co., Time Inc., Knight-Ridder Newspapers, Media General, Multimedia, and Affiliated Publications, which owns the Boston Globe.

Buffett also recognized large advertising firms as huge business franchises. It is with the large ad agencies with global interests that the giant global firms go to advertise.

An IBM, Coca-Cola, or General Motors is going to insist on a worldwide ad campaign, and it doesn’t want to fool around with 100 different ad agencies in 100 different countries. Instead it picks an Ogilvy & Mather or an Interpublic Group, two firms Buffett made large profits in before selling in 1985, when he thought their merits were fully recognized.

Buffett reached another conclusion: a number of poor businesses do exist, and it’s best to steer clear of them. Buffett has stayed away from big, heavy industries requiring constant new investments, businesses with rising competition, rising labor costs and rising need for more capital [except US Airways].

Also, Buffett tries to examine the opposite of a proposition—some good businesses have little need for new capital, businesses that have little competition and, hence, ultimately throw off new cash.

DURABILITY OF THE BUSINESS FRANCHISE

Buffett, putting on his teacher hat in a talk at Notre Dame in 1991, discussed the perils of mindless imitation of peers and the importance of durability of the business franchise:

The last thing I want to show you before we get into your questions is an ad that was run June 16, 1969, for 1,000,000 shares of American Motors. This is a reproduction from The Wall Street Journal of that day. Now, does anybody notice anything unusual about that ad?



Everyone in that ad has disappeared. There are 37 investment bankers that sold that issue, plus American Motors, and they are all gone. Maybe that’s why they call them tombstone ads.



Now the average business of the New York Stock Exchange in 1969 was 11 million shares. Average volume now is 15 times as large. Now here’s an industry whose volume has grown 15 to 1 in 20 years. Marvelous growth in the financial world. And here are 37 out of 37, and those are some of the biggest names on Wall Street, and some of them had been around the longest, and 37 out of 37 have disappeared. And that is why I say you ought to think about the long-term durability of a business because these people obviously didn’t.



BUYING PART OF A BUSINESS

Overall, what Buffett sees in the stock market is a way to pick up assets that produce a steady stream of cash. Buffett buys at a good price because he often buys only a part of a company—not the whole company, for which he would have to pay a premium.

When a whole company is put on the block, everyone looks at the deal in the open; and it usually sells at full value to the highest bidder. It is different in the stock market: You can buy shares, portions of the business, often quietly with little competition. Better yet, you can operate at the time of your picking.

You do not have to succumb to what Buffett terms the “Swing, you bum,” syndrome. You can wait for the perfect pitch two inches above the navel, as Buffett says.

“Investing is the greatest business in the world because you never have to swing. You stand at the plate; the pitcher throws you General Motors at 47! U.S. Steel at 39! And nobody calls a strike at you. There’s no penalty except opportunity. All day you wait for the pitch you like; then when the fielders are asleep, you step up and hit it” (“Look at All Those Beautiful Scantily Clad Girls Out There,” Forbes, November 1, 1974). That is for Buffett, the appeal of the stock market.

Explains Buffett, “When I buy a stock, I think of it in terms of buying a whole company, just as if I were buying the store down the street. If I were buying the store, I’d want to know all about it. I mean I look at what Walt Disney was worth on the stock market in the first half of 1966. The price per share was $53 and this didn’t look especially cheap, but on that basis you could buy the whole company for $80 million when Snow White, Swiss Family Robinson, and some other cartoons, which had been written off the books, were worth that much. And then you had Disneyland and Walt Disney, a genius, as a partner.”

Buffett’s huge network of knowledgeable and influential friends also has been a help along the way. Buffett has been an original thinker, but it cannot have hurt to discuss prospects for a television station with Tom Murphy, chat about a common investment with Laurence Tisch, or talk with Jack Byrne about insurance.

“His network of friends has been very important,” says broker Cliff Hayes.

ABILITY TO READ PEOPLE

For all Buffett’s understanding of the inner workings of business, his greater understanding may be of human nature. He would certainly subscribe to John D. Rockefeller’s warning: “A friendship founded on business is better than a business founded on friendship.” Buffett is also well aware of the adage: “Fools rush in where wise men fear to trade.” He reads people quickly and accurately; and his judgment of their abilities, motives, and ambitions is almost always on the money. He can see the first class person fast and the fraudulent person even faster.

One example of this is Larry King of Omaha. The community believed King to be an upstanding citizen; however, the once manager-treasurer of the Franklin Community Federal Credit Union ultimately pleaded guilty and is serving a 15-year prison sentence for crimes connected with Franklin’s 1988 collapse and the disappearance of $39 million in deposits.

GQ magazine looked at King in its December 1991 issue: “Very few people in Omaha closed their doors to Larry King. One who did was Warren Buffett.… In 1978, King asked Susan Buffett if she would be willing to host at her house a 10th anniversary party for his wife, Alice, and him, an act of chutzpah even by King’s standards. Susan Buffett said yes, but her husband said no. ‘I knew that King was a phony,’ says Buffett, ‘and I think that he knew I knew. I’m probably the only person in Omaha he never asked for money.’ How did Buffett know? ‘It was like he had a big sign on his head that said PHONY, PHONY, PHONY.’”

“No less an authority than John F. Welch, CEO of General Electric Co., considers Buffett a superb judge of managerial talent. Buffett and Welch have gotten to know each other over the years as golf partners and as rivals in auto insurance and other businesses. ‘Take 20 people you know quite well but Warren has just met casually,’ Welch says. ‘If you ask Warren his opinion about them, he’ll have each one nailed. He’s a master evaluator of people, and that’s the biggest job there is in running a company’ ” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

AVOID TECHNOLOGY AND DRUG STOCKS

A shareholder once asked Buffett what he thought of pharmaceutical stocks. He said that was not the sort of thing in which Berkshire had expertise. (Of course that was before he bought some Bristol-Myers Squibb stock in 1993.)

Buffett added, “That does not mean there are not good ones.” What Buffett was driving at is that while pharmaceutical firms were beyond Berkshire’s expertise, he had no doubt that some, Merck for example, are superb firms. But Buffett cannot predict which drug will be a winner and which one will wind up drawing lawsuits.

In a way, they are like his forbidden category of technology stocks, a group whose performance Buffett says he has no way of predicting because he knows little about present technology and even less about future competitors’ technologies.

Buffett would say that others can make those determinations about technology or pharmacology better than he—but then he is not sure their determinations are so hot either. Those areas are too tricky for a sensible investor trying to cut risks and guesswork.

Buffett said at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1998: “I’ve been an admirer of Andy Grove and Bill Gates, and I wish I’d translated that admiration into action by backing it up with money. But when it comes to Microsoft and Intel, I don’t know what the world will look like 10 years from now, and I don’t want to play in a game where the other guy has an advantage. I could spend all my time thinking about technology for the next year and still not be the 100th, 1,000th, or even the 10,000th smartest guy in the country analyzing those businesses. There are people who can analyze technology, but I can’t.” It will be a chilly day in Hades when Buffett buys into tech stocks. He knows what he knows.

DEBT IS POISONOUS, CASH IS GOOD

Comic writer P. G. Wodehouse [“Shakespeare’s stuff is different from mine, but that is not to say that it is inferior”] once wrote a wonderful paragraph about debt: “Bingo, you see, is not a man who finds it easy to float a really substantial loan. People know too much about his financial outlook. He will have it in sackfuls some day, of course, but until he realizes his Uncle Wilberforce—who is 86 and may quite easily go to par—the wolf, so far as he is concerned, will always be in or about the vestibule. The public is aware of this, and it makes the market sluggish.”

Buffett’s sparing use of debt has been his hallmark from the start. When much of the rest of the investing world, burdened by debt, encounters some new crisis forcing a panic, Buffett is usually calmly standing there with little debt and a loaded gun of cash ready to “bag rare and fast-moving elephants.”

Little debt and lots of cash give him an ability to respond quickly when the right investment comes in his sights. He does not have to call bankers to get a loan. After dogged investigation in the 1950s, Buffett bought Western Insurance at $16 when it was earning $16 a share, and National American Insurance at one times earnings (Forbes, November 1, 1969).

Then in 1962, he found Gurdon Wattles’ American Manufacturing selling at a 40% discount from net worth. “If you went to Wattles of American Manufacturing or Howard Ahmanson of National American Insurance and asked them to be partners, you could never get in at one times earnings,” Buffett told Forbes.

When his reading puts him onto something, he’ll do some informal field research. In one case in 1965, Buffett spent the better part of a month counting tank cars in a Kansas City railroad yard. He was not, however, considering buying railroad stocks. He was interested in the old Studebaker Corp. because of STP, a highly successful oil additive. The company wouldn’t tell him how the product was doing. But he knew that the basic ingredient came from Union Carbide, and he knew how much of STP one car could carry. Hence, the tank-car counting. When shipments rose, he bought Studebaker stock, which subsequently went from 18 to 30.

On occasion Buffett has asked Omaha cab drivers how their business is doing. He’s always watching, asking, reading, and looking for investment possibilities.

DON’T OVER-DIVERSIFY

“Behold, the fool saith, ‘Put not all thine eggs in one basket’ which is but a manner of saying, ‘Scatter your money and attention’: but the wise man saith, ‘Put all your eggs in the one basket AND WATCH THAT BASKET’” (Mark Twain, Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar).

For all his conservative, sure-footed ways, Buffett is also capable of remarkable boldness when he sees an opening. It’s not that he throws caution to the wind; it’s that his intensive research usually has ferreted out an investment with excellent prospects. Then he launches a big position in that one place.

Buffett wrote: “Our policy is to concentrate holdings. We try to avoid buying a little of this or that when we are only lukewarm about its business or price. When we are convinced as to attractiveness, we believe in buying worthwhile amounts” (1978 Annual Report).

No investment is a sure thing—including Berkshire. But in the early days when he committed so heavy a percentage of his worth to American Express and The Washington Post Co., he had to be right.

BE BOLD AND ORIGINAL WHEN

THE FAT PITCH COMES

No matter how vast Buffett’s wealth, it was a bold move for him to take $1 billion and buy stock, even if it was Coca-Cola at a down time.

In addition to being bold, he is original. At a time the industry was spooked about writing officers’ and directors’ liability insurance due to the lack of any statistical history and the unpredictability of court awards, Buffett took out an ad in an industry publication saying that Berkshire would write the insurance.

It read: “To those paying or who are willing to pay over one million dollars for this O&D coverage—you tell us the amount of liability coverage you want and what premium you are willing to pay—and we will tell you if we wish to write the coverage.”

Perhaps because he’s in the business, Buffett often comes up with ideas on how to sell insurance. In the fall of 1990, when the savings and loan crisis and banking problems were front-page news, he came up with a suggestion to help the federal government with depositor’s insurance: Have private insurers write a piece of the action.

“What is needed is a system that combines the ability of private insurers to evaluate risk with the ability of government to bear it. Coinsurance arrangements, varying by size of bank, would appear to be the way to go,” he wrote in a piece that ran in The Washington Post. Later, Buffett said that Berkshire would be happy to write that kind of insurance.

Over the years, Buffett has made investments in scores of companies ranging from insurance firms to R.J. Reynolds; to Philip Morris; to National Presto, the pressure cooker and appliances firm; and to National Service Industries.

Other companies he has invested in include Handy and Harman, 20th Century Industries, General Foods, Affiliated Publications, Interpublic Group, Time Inc., City National Corp. (the bank holding company in Beverly Hills), Melville Corp., and the retailer and pet food maker Ralston Purina.

ADMIT MISTAKES

Has Buffett made a few mistakes? Yes. He was too devoted to buying really cheap companies in the early days. Remember Berkshire’s textile operation?

He also told Forbes (October 18, 1993) he left $2 billion on the table by not buying enough Fannie Mae, and then sold his small position too early. He said, “It was easy to analyze. It was within my circle of competence. And for one reason or another, I quit. I wish I could give you a good answer.”

Another example was when he sold Affiliated Publications stock because he didn’t fully understand the value of Affiliated’s big position in McCaw Cellular. “I missed the play in cellular because cellular is outside of my circle of competence.”

Still, there is great trust in Buffett’s thinking. People often write him with their investment ideas. He once replied to an August 21, 1991, inquiry, “With my idea and your money, we’ll do OK.”

For all Buffett’s monumental achievements, he still was unknown to the ordinary citizen and not universally known even in the business world until he stepped in to resolve the scandal at Salomon contrarily.

DO IT RIGHT

On October 12, 1986, Alan Gersten, an Omaha World-Herald reporter, called a Burroughs executive to inform him that Buffett owned 9.9% of the company’s stock, an arbitrage position Buffett soon sold. The spokesman asked, “Who’s Warren Buffett?” People were still asking that question when Buffett became interim chairman of Salomon.

Because of Buffett’s wisdom, his counsel (and money) are often sought. When Salomon was considering taking part in the bidding for RJR Nabisco, Salomon Chairman Gutfreund called Buffett for advice. Buffett said. “I’ll tell you why I like the cigarette business. It costs a penny to make. Sell it for a dollar. It’s addictive, and there’s a fantastic brand loyalty.”

Gutfreund asked if Buffett wanted to invest in the tobacco deal with Salomon. Not this time, Buffett said. Although he toyed with the tobacco companies in the 1970s and early 1980s, at this time he was not willing to be an active participant in the death merchant aspects of cigarettes. “I don’t need to own a tobacco company.”

Salomon made its own bid, but the Kohlberg, Kravis & Roberts firm eventually won the tobacco giant.

BUY BACK STOCK

Buffett has often been asked about the possibility of Berkshire buying back its stock. Buffett says he has no problem with buying it back.

But rather than just willy-nilly buying back stock, he takes the common sense approach. Clearly, the stock would have to be at a good price, and if Berkshire were selling at a cheap price, it’s quite likely that would be at a time when something else is selling even more cheaply.

“We’d go wherever we’d get the most for our money,” he said at the annual meeting in 1991.

BE DEAD RIGHT ABOUT THE BIG DECISIONS

Buffett has said many times that every investor ought to have a lifetime decision card with just “20 punches.” Buffett says his success is due to being right on a few big decisions.

Buffett has made a number of small mistakes and might have just an above-

average record were it not for the monumental decisions to buy big stock stakes at the right time in American Express, the Washington Post Co., GEICO, and Coca-Cola. He looks for “haystacks and not the needles,” as he said at the annual meeting in 1994. “What I try to do is come up with a big idea every year or so.”

FORGET THE ALGEBRA

Knowing Buffett’s distrust of algebraic formulas, Robert Greene, a stockbroker with Robinson-Humphrey in Macon, Georgia, once sent a brokerage report to Buffett containing an enormously complicated algebraic formula for predicting interest rate risk carried by a given fixed-income security.

Buffett replied: “Thanks for the secret formula. With its help, Berkshire should be able to conquer the world.”

“BETTER PLANT THE TREE TODAY”

At a June 22, 1998 conference for analysts, shortly after Berkshire announced it would buy General Re, Buffett was asked if this was a good time for General Re to expand its insurance operations in Asia. He said yes, that it’s important to build long-lasting relationships, as soon as possible. He told the story of a fellow who asked his yardman about planting a tree and was told it could be put off because it would take 50 years for the tree to grow. The fellow told the yardman, “Then we better plant the tree today.”

BE CAREFUL ABOUT PREDICTIONS

Predictions are often wrong and amount to very little in most cases. After all, Walter Chrysler stated this prediction in 1929: “The year 1929 should be one of unprecedented prosperity. Good times should be experienced not only by the great majority of our people but by those of almost every other country in the world which is at peace.”

About 50 people on the Internet predicted Berkshire’s closing price for 2002 with guesses ranging from a low of $75,000 to $109,000. The closing price was $72,750.

And, as Buffett says, “Thirty years ago, no one could have foreseen the huge expansion of the Vietnam War, wage and price controls, two oil shocks, the resignation of a president, the dissolution of the Soviet Union, a one-day drop in the Dow of 508 points, or treasury bill yields fluctuating between 2.8% and 17.4%” (1999 Annual Report).

SMART IS GOOD BUT TEMPERAMENT IS PARAMOUNT

Buffett has said over and over that winning in investing doesn’t necessarily go to the highest IQ. It goes to the person with the best temperament for it. He has remarked how Isaac Newton, “arguably the smartest person in history, lost his shirt” in a stock market bubble during the 1600s (talk to University of Chicago Graduate School of Business students, May 2005).

OCCASIONALLY THINGS—EVEN FOR BERKSHIRE—LOOK AWRY

ABOVE ALL, AVOID DRAGONS

Buffett often has said he prefers avoiding dragons to fighting them. However, he does praise his friend Jim Burke, the former Johnson & Johnson chairman, known for facing problems:

I would say Jim Burke is a national asset.… There are all kinds of people who have 500 horsepower motors who only get 100 horsepower of output. But Jim has a motor with horsepower equal to anyone else’s, and the efficiency is 100% …



He likes to work on problems; I try to avoid problems (USA Today, February 16, 1993).



When Buffett was asked once what he does, how he spends his time, he responded:

“Well, first of all, I tap-dance into work. And then I sit down and I read. Then I talk on the phone for seven or eight hours. And then I take home more to read. Then I talk on the phone in the evening.… We read a lot. We have a general sense of what we’re after. We’re looking for seven-footers. That’s about all there is to it.”

Buffett’s looking for seven-footers to make slam dunks.

“DON’T FORGET YOUR HELMET.”

Buffett has said that Notre Dame has the motto of “Play like a champion” and Nebraska has the motto of “Don’t forget your helmet,” and that both concepts are important in the business world, but he prefers the latter.

Buffett’s work ethic is reminiscent of Voltaire’s Candide, who concludes whether this is the best of all possible worlds or not (it isn’t!), the thing to concentrate on is this: “We must go and work in the garden.”

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Body of His Work

Lab Work

In a cartoon by Ismael Roldan, Sherlock Buffett, having moved from Baker Street to Farnam Street, pursues his investing lab work. “‘Holmes!’ I cried. ‘Is it really you? Can it indeed be that you are alive?’” (Arthur Conan Doyle, The Return of Sherlock Holmes, p. 8). Buffett and Munger can be thought of as the “Holmes and Watson” of

investing.

(With permission of Ismael Roldan)



The Body of His Work The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Mary Porter)

Detective Work

Arthur Conan Doyle’s The Hound of the Baskervilles “Mr. Holmes, they were the footprints of a gigantic hound!”

Here’s a story that illustrates Buffett’s thinking about supposedly efficient markets: Two University of Chicago professors were walking down the street when one of them spotted a $100 bill lying on the sidewalk. “Hey, I think that’s a $100 bill. Let’s stop and pick it up,” said one. “No, don’t bother,” replied the other. “That’s not a real $100 bill. Since the market is efficient, a real $100 bill would have been picked up long ago” (Business Week, November 9, 1998).

Of Permanent Value The Body of His Work



Heartland of Capitalism

Omaha is the capitalist capital of the world and home of the first transcontinental railway which ran from Omaha to Sacramento, California. On August 13, 1859, railroad lawyer and politician Abraham Lincoln, who was running for president, gave a talk in Council Bluffs, Iowa. In the audience was Grenville Mellen Dodge, a young railroad engineer. After the talk, Lincoln met Dodge and immediately asked him, “What’s the best route for a Pacific railroad to the West?” Dodge replied, “From this town [Council Bluffs], out the Platte Valley.” When Lincoln asked why, Dodge said because of the building of railroads from Chicago and because of the uniform grade along the Platte Valley all the way to the Rocky Mountains (Stephen Ambrose, Nothing Like It in the World, pp. 23–24). Omaha, Nebraska, founded in 1854 just across that state line from Council Bluffs, was hit hard by the financial panic of 1857. The town got a new start in 1862 with the passage of the Pacific Railroad Act. The law signed by President Lincoln directed the Union Pacific and the Central Pacific Railroad Co. to link the country from Omaha to Sacramento.

The Body of His Work The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photos by Mary Porter)

Stephen Ambrose’s

Nothing Like It in the World



(Photos by Mary Porter)

Stephen Ambrose’s signature



A Ford

Former President Gerald Ford visited Omaha in the summer of 1980 to dedicate the Gerald R. Ford Birthplace. Since then a Gerald R. Ford Conservation Center has been built there.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

A Fonda House

Actor Henry Fonda grew up in this house.





Henry Fonda

This photo of Henry Fonda was taken at the Omaha Community Playhouse in 1981, the year before he died.

(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value The Body of His Work



(Photo by Mary Porter)

Waiting for Godot

by Samuel Beckett

The Body of His Work The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Body of His Work

The Body of His Work The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Body of His Work

The Body of His Work The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Body of His Work



Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar for 1894

The Body of His Work The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Body of His Work



Carhenge

This is “Carhenge” in northwest Nebraska. Modeled after the mystical Stonehenge rock formation in England, this monument to cars is the brainchild of Nebraskan Jim Reinders. Inspired by a trip to Stonehenge in 1987, Reinders used the bodies of old cars to create his own variation of the 4,000-year-old English landmark. His version juts out of the prairie on the family farm.

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

What Buffett Is Looking For

“I look for what is permanent, and what is not.”



(Photo courtesy

of ABC News/

Steve Fenn © 1999)



163





THE PRESS CLIPPINGS


Overall, the press coverage of Buffett has been laudatory and generally—but not always—accurate. Sometimes a few writers, eager to spot some flaw in Buffett’s character, speculate that he hobnobs with celebrities, owns a few expensive suits, and occasionally stays in expensive hotels. Sometimes a story will refer to him as a millionaire. Accurate, but not complete.

The press did have its firestorms during the Salomon and Gen Re crises and over the resignation of David Sokol.

For the first couple of decades of his career, he received little press coverage. People who knew him were aware of his brilliance, but he operated in such a publicity-shy style, or at least a style of choosing his publicity, that the press was late with the story. Buffett rarely gives interviews, and when he buys or sells his stocks—or suits—he doesn’t yell it out from Kiewit Plaza.

In the 1960s and 1970s, the Omaha World-Herald and The Wall Street Journal ran stories about Buffett as an investment wunderkind. The first major story was by Robert Dorr and was published in the Omaha World-Herald, May 29, 1966. Dorr got in to see Buffett several years after Buffett had moved his partnership operations to Kiewit Plaza.

“I was the business reporter. … I had heard stories about how well he was doing. There were rumors in Omaha. I decided to do a story and approached him, and he said he didn’t want it done. … He was reluctant,” recalled Dorr. “He said he didn’t know how to deal with the press and that it was going to be hard to write an accurate story about what he was doing.”

When Dorr said he was going ahead with the story, with or without Buffett’s help, Buffett read the story and helped with facts. “He made a few corrections,” said Dorr, still a newsman with the Omaha World-Herald. “I believe I was the first person to write a story about him.”

Book-collector Roland Schank believes that the first printed mention of Buffett is in The Conglomerate Commotion (1970) by the editor of Fortune. In a chapter entitled “The Merger Movement Rides High” Buffett is quoted from a February 1969 Fortune article, as saying, “The ‘releveraging’ of capital by conglomerates will be important enough to be described as a ‘real restructuring of American business.’”

In Supermoney (1972), Adam Smith wrote a highly favorable chapter about Buffett’s investment abilities; this appears to be the first substantive account in a book.

Jonathan Laing wrote a long piece about Buffett for the The Wall Street Journal, which was published March 31, 1977. Buffett’s reputation surged in the 1980s as authors Adam Smith and John Train (The Midas Touch) described his endeavors.

More recently, some reporters have viewed Buffett as being overly famous, and a number of press accounts have begun to pick on any flaws.

One of the first critical pieces (of Berkshire’s worth, not Buffett) was a Barron’s story that suggested Berkshire’s stock price was way overvalued. Berkshire shareholders naturally thought the story was off base. (See Berkshire’s Intrinsic Value chapter.)

With the Salomon scandal of the early 1990s, the press became aware of Buffett almost overnight, and everyone wrote stories, with some seeing Buffett as having had little experience in running businesses. That was an odd opinion about a fellow who founded his own business; has run Berkshire’s insurance business for years and continues to do so; and has tinkered for years with other businesses such as the Washington Post Co. and The Buffalo News. Further, he speaks constantly with Berkshire’s managers.

Most press coverage has been accurate. Institutional Investor had a balanced and detailed article on Salomon (September 1991), as did Bernice Kanner in a cover story about Salomon for New York magazine (December 9, 1991).

Another article (Business Week, February 17, 1992) said that Buffett did well in stepping in to save Salomon; but in Buffett’s running of the firm, he had not set a clear strategy, employee defections were rampant, policy was inconsistent on bonuses, and he was wrongly trying to run New York–based Salomon from Omaha. As for Buffett spending only a day or so a week at Salomon, Berkshire’s then Chief Financial Officer, J. Verne McKenzie, said, “We have telephones in Omaha.”

The story that really got under the skin of Buffett fans was Michael Lewis’ cover piece in the February 17, 1992, issue of the New Republic entitled “The Temptation of Saint Warren” which depicted Buffett as a “fallen angel.” Lewis, author of Liar’s Poker, detailing Salomon’s excesses, seemed to favor the theme that because Buffett is not a saint, he must be a sinner. At no point has Buffett taken a vow of poverty.

“Suddenly there was a delicious gap between what the moralist said and what he did,” wrote Lewis, saying Buffett—a critic of Wall Street—had suddenly accepted all its excessive ways because Salomon dealt in leveraged buyouts, junk bonds, and all the rest. Lewis portrayed Buffett as on a moral crusade to save Salomon when what Buffett had said is that he hoped to put the stigma on the dishonest Paul Mozers and get it off the good employees of Salomon.

Buffett had talked about changing the corporate culture at Salomon but not about becoming a saint himself. But what is sinful or un-American in Buffett’s efforts to save Salomon and help Berkshire? Lewis cast Buffett’s efforts as merely trying to save Berkshire’s money there. Lewis maintained that Buffett, as proof of his new fast-buck Wall Street ways, had recently become an arbitrager speculating on pending takeovers.

Munger, in an interview published in the Omaha World-Herald (February 12, 1992), said that Berkshire has no rule restricting its activities solely to long-term investing, and that Buffett has practiced arbitrage on publicly announced takeovers every year for the past 40 years and has said so many times. Buffett long has explained in annual reports that Berkshire, from time to time, practices arbitrage.

Newsday’s Allan Sloan says Buffett naturally isn’t a saint. “He hasn’t ever said he didn’t want to make money.” And there are times when Buffett can be very tough on people. Buffett will drop accountants and brokers in an instant if they don’t see things his way. “But he is an honorable businessman,” Sloan said.

No, Buffett is not a saint, but neither is he a fallen angel.

Munger also told the Omaha World-Herald (February 12, 1992), “I’ve known a lot of people for a long time,” Munger said. “I would say that Warren has changed less in many decades than almost anybody else I know.”

Munger was asked at the Berkshire annual meeting in 1995 how much Buffett had changed over the years. Munger said, “about one stone … it takes one to know one.”

Munger adds, “What he [Lewis] says is that Buffett has lost his soul. He thinks there’s some huge change in the way Warren’s mind works, and, of course, there isn’t any big change in the way Warren’s mind works.”

Munger went on to cite a number of errors in the Lewis story. For example, Lewis said Buffett considered backing the Ross Johnson bid for RJR Nabisco. Munger denied this and said Berkshire turned down the chance to participate.

Buffett said emphatically:

I neither offered nor gave financial backing to Ross Johnson or anyone else involved in the RJR buyout. Berkshire was invited to participate in an early attempt by Hanson Industries to enter the bidding and declined. Salomon elected to support Johnson and I, as a director, said I believed the transaction would work well at $90 a share. Neither I nor other outside directors were consulted about future escalations in price …



On a Sunday in 1988, I was called in Omaha by Salomon and was asked if Berkshire Hathaway would participate in a small way in a purchase offer that Salomon and Hanson Industries might make for RJR. The reason they needed us (or somebody) in the deal was that each partner wished, for some reason, to keep its interest just below 50%. I said I had previously concluded that I did not want Berkshire to own a direct interest in the tobacco business (a decision I made when we were offered a chance to buy Conwood Co., a maker of smokeless tobacco products). But I said I had no problem if Salomon itself wished to proceed and indeed thought it a good economic decision at the price being talked about.



In the process of this discussion about economics of tobacco, I related a story told years before by Father Reinert, then president of Creighton University, as he introduced me to a Creighton class as someone who was going to tell them a lot about investments. But, he said, the real secret of investing was to buy into a business that had a product that “cost a penny, sold for a dollar, and was habit-forming.” I have told that story many times in speeches to business schools, and also at the Berkshire annual meeting, to make the point about the economic characteristics of certain companies, among them tobacco companies.



Lewis’ 1992 New Republic cover story also portrayed Buffett’s financial success as pure luck in the same way someone could win 40 coin tosses in a row.

To this suggestion Munger fired this cannon: “He’s got the idea that Warren’s success for 40 years is because he flipped coins for 40 years, and it has come up heads 40 times. All I can say is, if he believes that, I’ve got a bridge I’d like to sell him.”

After Buffett saved Salomon, Business Week (June 1, 1992) said, “By coming clean with both investigators and customers, Buffett kept the firm alive.”

Probably no CEO in the country has been more a subject for the press or understands the press better. He now certainly knows how reporters work. “Some people are very talented; some are not talented at all; and you get a lot in the middle,” Buffett said in a talk to the Omaha Press Club (Omaha World-Herald, September 3, 1992). “You get some people who are superethical. You get a great majority who are reasonably ethical, but if the story’s big enough, they might forget to mention they are a reporter for just a few minutes into the interview. And you get a few who are patently unethical.… The tough part about it is, essentially, there is no one, virtually, with the exception of an assassin, that can do you as much damage as somebody can in the press if they do something the wrong way.” (As Mae West once said: “The curve is more powerful than the sword.”)

In the same talk, Buffett added that over the years, a number of reporters have interviewed him about Berkshire and written glowing accounts about the company’s merits. He said the same reporters who wrote the stories have called back asking him to name a good company in which to invest. “Somehow, their brains aren’t quite connected to their eyeballs sometimes,” Buffett said.

Following the Forbes proclamation of Buffett as the richest person in the U.S. in 1993, Buffett made the National Enquirer (October 26, 1993). But the article contained no aliens, no scandals; it portrayed the richest man in the country as a regular Joe.

In 1994, Robert Hagstrom, a principal with the Lloyd, Leith & Sawin money management firm in Philadelphia, wrote The Warren Buffett Way. The book took a close look at Buffett as a value investor influenced by Phil Fisher and Ben Graham. It made the best-seller lists, reportedly selling more than a million copies. In 2004, a second edition of The Warren Buffett Way was published.

In 1995, Roger Lowenstein, a reporter for The Wall Street Journal, came out with Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist. It also made the best-seller lists. Lowenstein became a director of the Sequoia Fund in 1998, and later wrote When Genius Failed and then Origins of the Crash.

Hagstrom, now with Legg Mason Focus Capital, wrote a second book in 1999, The Warren Buffett Portfolio: Mastering the Power of the Focus Investment Strategy.

The late Creighton University administrator Richard Blankenau once spotted Hagstrom’s book at the Denver airport. He was taken aback at the way the store categorized the book. It was in the Science Fiction section. Close to it was a book called History of God (Omaha World-Herald, March 22, 1995).

In its April 1995 issue, Money magazine said Berkshire was overvalued and quoted the Overpriced Stock Service newsletter as saying Berkshire’s stock price “makes sense only if the company is run by God.”

In its December 1995 issue, Money offered a confession but remained unrepentant:

In April we told you not to buy Berkshire Hathaway, the firm run by Warren Buffett. The stock was trading in the nose bleed zone of $22,500 per share, a price that made sense, we said, only if your portfolio were run by God. Well, in late October, the stock was up 31% to a staggering $29,500. We’re a little red-faced, that’s for sure; but we’re still not about to run out and start the First United Church of Warren.



The day the issue arrived at homes, Berkshire jumped $1,100 and then another $1,500 the next day to close at $31,600.

As Buffett’s reputation ballooned ever larger, phrases such as: “living saint of value investing,” “near-mythical stock-picking success,” and “international icon” popped up in the press. On June 16, 1997, Barron’s came out with one article saying Berkshire was worth $40,000 a share, not $48,000. Barron’s offered its fair enough opinion, but more critical was a second article reviewing the Janet Lowe 1997 book Warren Buffett Speaks, a collection of Buffett’s wit and wisdom.

Reviewer John Liscio mentioned the likes of Jim Jones, Jim Bakker, and David Koresh, and declared Buffett a “false god.” He went on to call Buffett a “disingenuous elitist,” dismissed Janet Lowe as an “apparent sycophant” and then weighed in with another final blow: “Indeed, Lowe even makes Buffett’s living arrangement sound like an act of philanthropy. He persuaded wife Suzie [sic] to conquer her fears and move to San Francisco to pursue a singing career, leaving him free to move in current ‘companion’ Astrid Menks. Ever the canny businessman, Buffett manages to get some on the side, avoid a costly divorce and have his wife praise him for loving her enough to let her follow her lifelong dream. Hey, the guy is a genius.”

Although the story hit below the belt, Berkshire’s stock dropped only $2,500 that day. Barron’s has been consistently wrong about Buffett and Berkshire.

In 1990, Barron’s ran a poll about the price of Berkshire when it was trading at $7,700: “Is Buffett’s Stock Too High?” (February 12, 1990). The financial weekly sounded a similar warning in 1997 with the story “Why Buy Berkshire?” saying that it was worth only $9,400 when it was selling for $16,000 (Barron’s, April 18, 1997).

Barron’s December 27, 1999, cover story entitled “Warren, What’s Wrong?” provides a general idea of Barron’s coverage with its cover subtext “Warren Buffett, America’s most renowned investor, stumbled badly this year. Will his Berkshire Hathaway recover? Or does his style of investing simply not work in today’s market?” But a November 6, 2000, piece in Barron’s did a good job of covering the waterfront. Andrew Bary wrote both of these Barron’s articles, and he also wrote a bullish article about Berkshire published in the April 29, 2002, issue of Barron’s.

Until 2000, Barron’s had been so consistently wrong about Buffett and Berkshire that it started to appear that if a bullish story about Berkshire were ever to come out it would be time to unload all your stock at the opening bell!

Then Barron’s (April 12, 2004) returned to its previous line of thought with a story stating Berkshire “recently [since 1998] has had a losing track record.”

On a different note, a Forbes story (July 28, 1997) called Buffett the “folk hero of U.S. capitalism.”

In 1996, Robert V. Keeley, through his Five and Ten Press in Washington, D.C., published 500 copies of a 49-page pamphlet entitled Annals of Investing: Steve Forbes vs. Warren Buffett. Keeley recounted three years of dismal results following the recommendations of the Forbes Special Situation Survey stock-picking service published by Steve Forbes’ company.

After following several dozens of the survey’s selections and making only about 1% a year, Keeley put all his IRA money—$61,404—into Berkshire: “On January 4, 1995, that bought me exactly three shares, at $20,450 each.” Keeley reported that he paid $54 to a discount broker and never looked back.

In 1997, Mary Buffett, who was married to Buffett’s son Peter for 12 years, published Buffettology along with David Clark. She and Clark, an attorney in Omaha, wrote how Buffett uses “business perspective investing.” In 2002, they came out with an update, The New Buffettology.

Mary Buffett wrote about the privacy pact among Warren Buffett’s family members: “While married to Peter, I was instructed more than once not to speak to anyone outside the family about Warren and his investment operations. Writing this book simply would have been out of the question.” She continued, “But in 1993, Peter and I were divorced, which shattered my heart into a thousand tears” (p. 15).

She shared some recollections from Christmases past: “In the early years of my marriage, Warren celebrated Christmas morning by tossing out to each of his children and their spouses envelopes with a gift of $10,000. Like a jolly billionaire version of old Saint Nicholas, he would fling the envelopes across the living room, laughing ‘Merry Christmas’ to each of the delighted recipients. Later he decided that we should be taking a stronger interest in the family business and replaced the $10,000 with $10,000 worth of stock in a business in which he had recently invested. The stock of Capital Cities, Americus Trust for Coca-Cola (a publicly traded trust, no longer in existence, that held Coca-Cola stock), Freddie Mac, and ServiceMaster were some of the great companies I found in my Christmas stocking” (pp. 16–17).

Mary Buffett and David Clark went on to write The Buffettology Workbook, The New Buffettology, and The Tao of Warren Buffett.

In 1997, the Cardozo Law Review published a volume of The Essays of Warren Buffett: Lessons for Corporate America. The September-November 1997 issue features Berkshire’s annual reports and has many excellent articles about corporate governance, accounting, boards of directors, and other business and legal subjects.

Lawrence A. Cunningham, now a professor of law and business at Boston College, selected, arranged, and introduced this professional summary of Buffett’s letters to shareholders. The work was compiled with Buffett’s blessing.

Thoughts of Chairman Buffett, a small book of Buffett’s best quotes compiled by Simon Reynolds, was published in 1998. Janet Lowe wrote Warren Buffett Speaks that same year. Berkshire shareholder Marlin Stockwell of Trinity, Florida, has a copy signed by Lowe, Buffett, and Munger. “I don’t plan to put it on eBay any time soon,” Stockwell said.

In an October 12, 1998 story, Forbes proclaimed Buffett, “a national hero.”

A story in The New York Times (January 17, 1998) looked at why Berkshire’s stock had declined at the time and offered this: “Investors say Berkshire’s relative weakness is mostly a temporary result of its $22 billion acquisition, announced last summer of General Re, the giant reinsurance company. As it turned out, General Re stockholders did not jump at the chance to become Buffett’s investment partners by exchanging their shares for Berkshire.”

Timothy Vick wrote Wall Street on Sale, which was published in 1999. It is a book about value investing and has a chapter on Buffett.

Buffett: Step-by-Step by Richard Simmons was published in 1999, as was Robert Miles’s self-published book, The World’s Greatest Investment: 101 Reasons to Own Berkshire Hathaway.

Two conferences were held in 1999 where a number of authors spoke about Buffett. Analyst magazine sponsored one conference in London, while Berkshire Securities sponsored the other in Toronto. Simultaneous conferences were being held at the Toronto hotel: one about human reproduction; the other about making a living trading stocks.

As 1999 turned into a poor year with Berkshire’s positions in Coke and Gillette slumping at the same time as a soft insurance cycle hit. Stories began to crop up with the tune of “Has Buffett Lost His Touch?” and “Is Buffett Washed Up?” Time (October 25, 1999) weighed in with “Berkshire’s Buffett-ing,” saying: “This might be the year the rest of us got smarter than Warren Buffett.”

The New York Times (December 25, 1999) ran a story entitled “Investing Diary: A Three-Decade Legend Loses Some Luster.”

In late 1999, Jay Steele’s short paperback, Warren Buffett: Master of the Market was published. Timothy Vick’s How to Pick Stocks Like Warren Buffett came out in 2000. Nikki Ross’s Lessons from the Legends of Wall Street: How Warren Buffett, Benjamin Graham, Phil Fisher, T. Rowe Price, and John Templeton Can Help You Grow Rich also came out in 2000 as did Warren Buffett (Business Masterminds) by Robert Heller.

A book about Charles Munger called Damn Right! Behind the Scenes with Berkshire Hathaway Billionaire Charlie Munger by Janet Lowe came out in the fall of 2000.

As Berkshire’s stock began to recover in late 2000, USA Today (November 16, 2000) ran a story which began:

Eight months ago there was talk that legendary investor Warren Buffett had lost his touch. Stock of his Berkshire Hathaway holding company had fallen nearly 50% while the technology-charged NASDAQ had doubled. Halfway through his 70th year, Buffett seemed no match for money managers half his age. His phobia for tech stocks and his admission that he could not fathom the long-term prospects for their businesses cast him in the role of dinosaur. Adding to the insult, his biggest acquisition ever, the $22 billion 1998 purchase of reinsurance giant General Re, wasn’t working out.



But now it looks like Buffett was really playing the role of Aesop’s tortoise. He’s winning now because he continued picking his investments carefully from tried and true businesses while the hares of the world raced to buy one next new thing after another.



In early 2001, Lawrence Cunningham came out with a second book called How to Think Like Benjamin Graham and Invest Like Warren Buffett. Also in 2001, Omaha stockbroker George L. Morgan published Making Millions: Instructions Included about millionaires in Omaha.

Robert Wilson, one of the great stock pickers of the last 50 years, said (TheStreet.com Streetside Chat, March 2000), “Buffett, I think, is almost my age, and I think his days of being a brilliant investor are over. I think he’s too old, and in a way, is selling out. He can’t sell the stocks, but he bought General Reinsurance. He started diluting his equity, and I think he realizes this, too. He’s not exactly a dumb guy, and I think he probably knows this, too.”

The trickle of Buffett books was turning into a river.

In early 2001, The Essential Buffett: Timeless Principles for the New Economy by Robert Hagstrom was published. In that same year, Hagstrom sold almost all of the $2.8 million of Berkshire stock owned in the Legg Mason Focus Trust. Hagstrom works with renowned money manager Bill Miller who has said, “If it’s in the headlines, it’s in the stock.” Hagstrom said part of the reason for his decision to sell was that Buffett held very modest expectations for the S&P and thought that Berkshire could only modestly beat the S&P in the years ahead.

The year 2001 brought us Value Investing: From Graham to Buffett and Beyond coauthored by Columbia Professor Bruce Greenwald, and Pick Stocks Like Warren Buffett by Warren Boroson. The Warren Buffett CEO by Robert P. Miles, also published in 2001, discusses the managers of Berkshire’s business units.

Finally, in 2001, more than 50 volumes of the Dead Sea Scrolls were published. On the heels of that in late 2002, came the abridged edition of Of Permanent Value: The Story of Warren Buffett. On September 28, 2002, The Daily Telegraph of London called Of Permanent Value the “Buffett Bible—the definitive story,” in spite of the fact that the price on eBay for a 1998 version was $2.50.

The Real Warren Buffett: Managing Capital, Leading People by James O’Loughlin was published in 2002.

Currently, the Library of Congress lists dozens of books that are solely written about him or have chapters devoted to him.

As for the New Era of 2001 and beyond, BusinessWeek (September 3, 2001), citing unidentified people, claimed that Buffett thought the U.S. economy would remain in a slump. Buffett dismissed the article. Berkshire issued a statement saying, “It is a silly story. Mr. Buffett has never made an eight-week, nor an eight-month, let alone an eight-year forecast, and he doesn’t plan on doing so.”

Time (March 10, 2003) ran a story about Buffett featuring him as “Comeback Crusader,” noting his influence on corporate governance issues.

In 2003, Berkshire shareholder Peter Bevelin of Sweden self-published a thoroughly scholarly book entitled Seeking Wisdom: From Darwin to Munger. He published a second edition in 2005.

The year 2004 was another big year for Buffett books. Robert Miles (author of The Warren Buffett CEO) gave it another shot with Warren Buffett Wealth. Thomas P. Au’s A Modern Approach to Graham and Dodd Investing has many mentions of Buffett. Also in 2004, James Pardoe offered Warren Buffett Has Spoken: The Question Is, Who Is Listening? This book is mainly a compilation of quotes from Berkshire reports. In 2005, James Altucher’s Trade Like Warren Buffett was published. Also, in 2005, Pardoe came with How Buffett Does It.

In 2006, Mary Buffett and David Clark teamed up again with The Tao of Warren Buffett, writeups of Buffett’s sayings and by 2009 they had written six books about Buffett, the latest being Warren Buffett’s Management Secrets.

In 2007, Mohnish Pabrai, a Buffett fan and hedge fund manager, offered The Dhandho Investor. Dhandho is a Gujirate word which means “endeavors that create wealth.” One theme of the book is to adhere to low-risk investments.

WEEKEND

Randy Cepuch’s A Weekend with Warren Buffett is an entertaining look at Berkshire and other annual meetings. It came out in 2007. Janet Lowe’s revised Warren Buffett Speaks was also published in 2007. Roger Lowenstein’s Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist was reissued in paperback with an afterword in 2008.

A VIEW FROM NEW ZEALAND

New Zealand writer Lucas Remmerswaal, a father of six, who works in the insurance industry, published a children’s book based on the “ideas and principles” of Buffett in 2010. The Tale of Tortoise Buffett and Trader Hare is an e-book, available as an iPad app in iTunes stores.

PRESS CLIPPINGS: MIXING UP PHOTOS

The period was unusually hectic, with the Soviet Union coup and its collapse, which happened several days following Buffett’s press conference. The fast-paced events led to a photo mix-up at the Asbury Park Press (New Jersey): A photo purported to be Gorbachev’s momentary successor Gennady Yanayev was actually a photo of Buffett.

The same paper on August 7, 2009, in a story about NetJets CEO Richard Santulli and his replacement by David Sokol, ran a photo of Sokol but identified him as Buffett.

The Asbury Park Press, the third largest paper in New Jersey, suffered every newspaper’s nightmare—a photo mix-up, not once, but twice, when it came to Buffett.

In another mix-up, Boston.com reported on July 22, 2011 that Buffett was in Boston with a “burly bodyguard” and visited Boston Speed Dog, the food truck in Roxbury that sells hot dogs. The story said Buffett loved the hot dogs so much he offered to buy the truck.

The problem with the story is that Buffett wasn’t in Boston that day.

––––––––––––––––––––

In 2011, at only 14, an Indian student, Aryaman Dalmia, published a well-received book called Graham, Buffett and Me.

The Story of Warren Buffett



The Midas Touch by John Train was published in 1987.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Press Clippings

Press Clippings The Story of Warren Buffett



Robert Hagstrom’s

The Warren Buffett Way



Roger Lowenstein’s

Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist

(Photos by Mary Porter)



“Warren, What’s Wrong?”

Barron’s cover story (December 27, 1999) made sense for the next few months as Berkshire’s stock plunged, but then Berkshire gradually recovered. Buffett has had enough obituaries in the financial press to fill a cemetery.

Of Permanent Value Press Clippings



Buffett’s Last Chapter

Barron’s cover story on August 11, 2003, referred to Berkshire as a “cash-gushing conglomerate.”

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)



Fortune’s Amazing Buffett

Fortune weighed in with a story in 2002 about Buffett’s comeback.

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)



The Essays of Warren Buffett

by Larry Cunningham.

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

Press Clippings The Story of Warren Buffett





Warren Buffett Speaks

by Janet Lowe with the inside page autographed by Warren Buffett, Charles Munger, and Janet Lowe in 1998

(Photos

courtesy of

Marlin Stockwell)



(Photo courtesy of Andrew Kilpatrick)

Wardrobe Malfunction

Kilpatrick, staying in shape yesterday to run down Buffett stories

EMBEDDED REPORTERS:

A ROGUE’S GALLERY



(Photo by

Mary Porter)

Mary Porter

Mary “Half a Million Words Later” Porter and Andy Kilpatrick take 60 seconds to celebrate the 2004 edition before launching into the 2005 edition.



Robert Hagstrom

Roger

Lowenstein





Janet Lowe



Timothy

Vick



Robert Miles

James

O’Loughlin



Larry Cunningham





George Morgan



Janet Lowe’s Damn Right!

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Press Clippings



The Warren Buffett CEO

by Robert Miles

(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Page

Trying to write something of permanent value is a full-time job though only a few hours a day are spent on the actual writing” (The Paris Review Interviews, interview with George Plimpton, 1958, quoting Ernest Hemingway).



Hemingway’s Writing Pad

Hemingway wrote a big portion of his works on the typewriter at this desk in his home in Key West, Florida, and yet he wrote not one word about Buffett. The first portion of For Whom the Bell Tolls was written in Key West, perhaps some in Wyoming, and the rest of it in Cuba.

(Photo by

Andrew Kilpatrick)



(AP/Wide World Photos)

Not a Buffett Author

Ernest Hemingway is believed to be

the only author not to write a book

about Buffett.



For Whom the Bell Tolls

In this book, Hemingway makes no mention of Buffett.



(Photo by Mary Porter)

Press Clippings The Story of Warren Buffett



James Joyce Society Meeting?

The following writers, who met at the Gotham Book Mart in New York on November 9, 1948, all wrote about Buffett but failed to get anything published. They are Dame Edith and Sir Osbert Sitwell (seated, center) and clockwise from W. H. Auden (seated on ladder in upper right): Elizabeth Bishop, Marianne Moore, Delmore Schwartz, Randall Jarrell, Charles Henri Ford, William Rose Benet, Stephen Spender, Marya Zaturenska, Horace Gregory, Tennessee Williams, Richard Eberhart, Gore Vidal, and José Garcia Villa. In 1948, Buffett just didn’t sell. Over the years, the Gotham Book Mart supplied James Joyce’s works to American readers, and James Joyce Society meetings are still held at the store.



Seeking Wisdom: From Darwin to Munger author Peter Bevelin

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)



A Weekend with

Warren Buffett

by Randy Cepuch

(Photo by Mary Porter)



Seeking Wisdom

by Peter Bevelin

(Photo by Mary Porter)



How Buffett Does It

by James Pardoe

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Press Clippings



(Photo

courtesy

of Randy

Cepuch)

Randy Cepuch



A View from Japan

Buffett reached the status of financial hero when he was featured in a Japanese comic book, Warren Buffett: An Illustrated Biography of the World’s Most Successful Investor. The book was translated and released in 2004. It was not Buffett’s last appearance as a cartoon character. In 2006, he signed on to do an animated children’s TV program of 13 episodes called The Secret Millionaire’s Club produced by Andy Heyward, CEO of DIC Entertainment of Burbank, California. Buffett’s voice-over stints told children to save their money. Heyward has helped with the Berkshire annual meeting movies. Neither Buffett nor Heyward were paid for the episodes.



(Photos by Mary Porter)



(Photo by

Mary

Porter)

Warren Buffett Speaks

by Janet Lowe



Briefing.

An Abridged Edition of the 2002 edition of Of Permanent Value was published in China in 2003. The small book had only a few hundred pages and about a dozen photos. The Chinese seem to agree with Buffett: Keep It Simple. Reportedly, more than 40 books about Buffett have been translated into Chinese now.

(Photo by Caroline Summers)



Lucas Remmerswaal

Press Clippings The Story of Warren Buffett



Pilgrimage to

Warren Buffett’s Omaha

Jeff Matthews’ book was published in 2008.

Jim Ross

Hudson Booksellers’ Jim Ross of Omaha has probably sold more books about Buffett than anyone. Here he is pictured at the Dairy Queen at 114th Street on April 30, 2004, at a bookselling party where the idea was to buy a Blizzard and a book.



(Photo courtesy of the

Roland Schank collection)



Dear Mr. Buffett

Janet Tavakoli’s 2008 book addresses the subject of Berkshire’s derivatives and many other current topics.



Not Perfect

Even Buffett Isn’t Perfect by Vahan Janjigian with Forbes Investors Advisory Institute was published in 2008.

(Photos by Mary Porter)



Building the Next Berkshire Hathaway

Daniel Braem, a financial consultant who writes for the business website Seeking Alfa, wrote Building the Next Berkshire Hathaway, which was published in 2009.

Warren Buffett on Business

This book by Richard J. Connor, who has taught a class about Buffett at the Washington University at St. Louis’ Lifelong Learning Institute, was published in 2009. The chapters center on segments of Buffett’s letters to shareholders.





Behind the

Berkshire Hathaway Curtain

Ronald W. Chan has also had interviews with a number of Berkshire CEOs.



Buffett Beyond Value

Georgetown University finance professor Prem Jain published this book in 2010.



The Son Also Rises

This is Peter Buffett’s book about finding fulfillment.

Of Permanent Value Press Clippings



On August 19, 1991, the Asbury Park Press ran a photo of Buffett when it meant to run a photo of Gorbachev’s momentary successor.



On August 7, 2009, the paper ran a photo of Sokol and identified him as Buffett.



Graham, Buffett & Me

by Aryaman Dalmia



164





WATCHING CNBC’S ALEX CRIPPEN


Alex Crippen, an executive producer at CNBC, writes a column—“Warren Buffett Watch” about all things Buffett. The column is billed as an effort to keep the reader up to date on what the “Oracle of Omaha is doing by following his trades, his words, and his deeds.”

Crippen, who holds an economics degree from Wesleyan University, began his career with CNBC in 1990. Buffett now receives press coverage around the world and is the only person to merit his own personal coverage at CNBC.

Crippen’s informative articles are sometimes funny. One on June 23, 2009, told of an occasional CNBC guest Dennis Gartman, a money manager who had a short position in Berkshire, reportedly calling Buffett an “idiot.”

Crippen’s column said the incident started when a blog for The Wall Street Journal reported that Gartman was quoted by the Oregonian newspaper as calling Buffett an idiot, something Gartman had said earlier in the month at a country club in Portland. During his talk, Gartman lambasted the buy-and-hold investment strategy and called Buffett an idiot, adding, “Shame on Warren Buffett. That’ll be a good quote for your article.”

Crippen’s column said CNBC’s Melissa Lee tried to straighten out the story. He quoted the exchange between Melissa Lee and Gartman.

Melissa: There have been reports that you have been quoted as calling Warren Buffett an idiot. (Gartman laughs.) And we want to just clarify that. Did you call him an idiot?



Gartman: No … (Laughs.)



Melissa: And if so, in what context?



Gartman: I think Mr. Buffett made some terrible mistakes last year ... not enough action was taken to mitigate those losses.



Melissa: Right. OK. So maybe not an idiot but maybe some idiotic trading moves. (Laughs.)



Gartman: Not an idiot. Clearly he’s not. He’s a genius trader.



Melissa: Of course.



Gartman: A genius investor … but when you’re down 45 percent in a year, I’m sorry, I don’t know how you can defend that.



So, Gartman thinks Buffett is either an idiot or a genius. It must have been a slow news day.



Dennis Gartman



Alex Crippen

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Watching CNBC’s Alex Crippen



165





ROLAND SCHANK: SHELF LIFE


While Buffett has been collecting dollar bills, Roland Schank has been collecting books—specifically more than 400 books that are either about or mention Buffett or were written by Ben Graham or Phil Fisher.

“My interest in Buffett,” Schank said, “derives from my status as a native of Beatrice, Nebraska. I had an uncle who worked for Dempster Mill Manufacturing in Beatrice, which was purchased by Buffett in 1961 and sold in 1963.” Schank lives in Hawthorne, California, and is a procurement analyst for the Air Force Space and Missile Systems Center in El Segundo, California. Schank is not a Berkshire shareholder.

“I have always been a collector. I believe that a person is born a collector, and that those who do not have the collector gene cannot understand the mentality of those who do. As a youth, I collected stamps and coins. When I was a helicopter pilot on active duty in the Air Force, I collected Smith & Wesson handguns and Winchester long guns. As I have gotten older, books have become my passion.”

Schank began collecting books in 1990 and now has about 2,000 volumes. “Initially, I began building collections of military biography (MacArthur, Patton, Eisenhower …) because of my service academy background. … I learned that T. E. Lawrence (of Arabia) was an acclaimed author in addition to being a guerrilla warfare leader, and I became interested in collecting books about him. … During my pursuit of Lawrence books, I became acquainted with and eventually a close friend of Edwards Huntington Metcalf, the last surviving grandson of railroad baron and world-class book collector, Henry Huntington.” Schank read a eulogy for Metcalf at the Huntington Library on July 7, 2001.

Schank said, “Although I have paid some rather significant sums of money for various books in my collection, I decided that I would use the approach of a ‘value investor’ when I began building my collection of books about Buffett and Graham.

“In February of 2002, I purchased a lovely copy in a nice dust jacket of the 1973 fourth revised edition—first printing—of The Intelligent Investor for only $27, from a used bookshop in Pennsylvania. This is the third book known to mention Buffett. The second book mentioning Buffett is Supermoney by Adam Smith, published in 1972; the first known book is The Conglomerate Commotion (1970).”

Schank also bought a first edition (1958) copy of Phil Fisher’s Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits. “I found this book through the Internet in a used bookshop in Ireland for only $32.” In 2002, Schank acquired a rare copy of Fisher’s second book, Paths to Wealth Through Common Stocks (1960).

In 2000, Schank discovered a third edition (1951) copy of Security Analysis by Benjamin Graham and David Dodd in a used bookshop in Pasadena for only $20. Current Internet prices quote the book in the hundreds of dollars.

Schank’s most valuable book is a 1949 first edition (with dust jacket) of The Intelligent Investor by Benjamin Graham, a book he bought for $600 from a bookshop in Berkeley. He also has a 1951 third edition of Security Analysis, with the scarce dust jacket, which he bought for $525 from a St. Louis book dealer.

BUFFETT’S RECOMMENDATIONS IN

BERKSHIRE’S 2003 ANNUAL REPORT

In Berkshire’s 2003 Annual Report, Buffett provided a recommended reading list:

A 2003 book that investors can learn much from is Bull! by Maggie Mahar. Two other books I’d recommend are The Smartest Guys in the Room by Bethany McLean and Peter Elkind and In

an Uncertain World by Bob Rubin. All three are well-reported

and well-written. Additionally, Jason Zweig last year did a first-class job in revising The Intelligent Investor, my favorite book on investing.





(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

Read all about Buffett

Schank displays some 70 books mentioning Buffett at See’s Candies’ Carson, California, facility on May 8, 2002.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Schank with Some Remainders

Roland Schank with a partial showing of his rare OPV collection

(Photo by Prof. Paul Alkon)

Of Permanent Value Roland Schank: Shelf Life



Buffett’s favorite book about investing.

first edition (1949, March 1951

printing)



Phil Fisher’s third book,

first edition (1975)

The second book to mention Buffett (1972)



Phil Fisher’s second book

second printing, (September 1960)



(Books in the Roland Schank Collection; photos by Professor Paul Alkon)



Security Analysis

with scarce dust jacket,

third edition, first printing (1951)



Another book by Buffett’s mentor, revised edition, first printing (1975)

Bull Market edition (1955) of a book

recommended by Buffett in the foreword to Memos from the Chairman, by

A. C. Greenberg





Phil Fisher’s first book,

first edition (1958)

Roland Schank: Shelf Life The Story of Warren Buffett





Of Permanent Value Roland Schank: Shelf Life



166





THE SCHROEDER BOOK


In 2003, Buffett selected former insurance analyst Alice Schroeder to write his story. Schroeder, a Texas native with undergraduate and MBA degrees from the University of Texas at Austin, resides with her husband in Greenwich, Connecticut. She stated that the book would not be a biography of Buffett’s life so much as it would be a “biography of his ideas,” and the subject would be “his philosophy of life and business,” a topic as yet unaddressed “in a narrative style for a general audience.” She also said the book would be a “major project” that would “take a few years.” She added that the book would “most resemble the book Warren would have written himself.”

The much-anticipated book finally arrived September 29, 2008.

Ms. Schroeder’s personal connection with Buffett goes back to 1998. She was the first person from a major brokerage firm to write a report about Berkshire, and more significantly, she had Buffett’s blessing to do so.

Buffett called Schroeder to ask her to do him a favor: to be “the only analyst to have direct contact with the company,” Schroeder said. “He called this a favor because it meant more responsibility for me, but this was also characteristic of his way of dealing with people. He was really doing me a favor.”

Schroeder, already in the process of picking up coverage of Berkshire, concluded in her 54-page report of January 1999 that Berkshire’s intrinsic value (as stated in the report, a price at which the stock would be worth the same as a bond, not the price for which she expected the stock to trade) ranged from $91,000 to $97,000 a share. The stock was trading at $65,000 at the time.

Schroeder rejected the view that Berkshire is really a closed-end investment company whose value is determined by the prices of its securities. She views Berkshire as a holding company whose main business is insurance. She found that 79% of its earnings come from insurance. In addition, Berkshire owns many fast-growing, living, breathing, even high-flying businesses such as its aviation sector.

Schroeder, later named the top-ranked analyst by the 2001 and 2002 Institutional Investor All-American research poll, wrote in her 1999 report: “Today, we view the company as primarily an operating company that also has a sizable investment portfolio.” She was not eligible for the 2003 poll because she left Wall Street to write the book.

Buffett has been quoted as saying, “It was clear to me that she was a superior analyst, both in her knowledge of the insurance business and in her willingness to do the legwork to garner facts. I believe that interested investors can obtain all of the information they need about Berkshire from our published materials, but the quantity available may overwhelm them. Alice may fulfill a useful function by organizing and distilling” (The New York Times, January 31, 1999).

In Schroeder’s 1999 report, she wrote that Berkshire is “possibly the most talked-about and least understood company in the world.” She said, “For an insurer that can obtain float at a reasonable cost and hold it in perpetuity, float really is an asset, not a liability.” Buffett has said float is a blessing if you can get it in increasing quantities and get it cheap, particularly at no—or better yet, a negative—cost. Being paid to borrow money is always a blessing.

“An investor should be willing to pay up to the risk-free rate to use float for one year. The investor would, for example, be willing to pay up to $5 to borrow $100 and invest it at 5%.

“Moving on, an investor should be willing to pay up to the amount of float itself for the ability to invest the float at the risk-free rate in perpetuity. For example, an investor would pay up to $100 for the right to invest $100 at the risk-free rate forever,” Schroeder said.

In the 1999 report, Schroeder approached the calculation of intrinsic value in three ways: (1) float, (2) book value, and (3) earnings. Each time she came up with about $90,000 a share for her intrinsic value number. (Interestingly, she valued GEICO alone between $12.8 and $14.5 billion. “The other insurance operations are valued between $23 billion and $26 billion.”) The essential message of the Schroeder report was that, at least in Berkshire’s case, float is valuable.

Schroeder’s report was a literary hit with 10,000 copies printed, three times the usual run (The New York Times, February 7, 1999). (A second printing of the report was run, for which some investors paid $540 each.)

At Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1999, Buffett blessed the report but did not comment on the intrinsic value number. “She’s a first-class analyst. It’s the first comprehensive report. We got to $100 billion in market cap before anybody really published [an analyst report] about the company.”

He added, “It helps to have an analyst who thinks straight. She’s a nonpaid information officer. We want informed owners.”

Schroeder said she got to meet Buffett because she was one of the few analysts who had continued to do research on General Re after Berkshire said it would buy it. “Most analysts immediately, or very shortly thereafter, stopped focusing on this situation and we decided to pick up coverage of Berkshire and began working on a report,” she has said (Risk and Insurance, 2003).

The most significant report Schroeder wrote about Berkshire was in February 2000 when she upgraded the stock from Outperform to Strong Buy when the A stock was trading at $43,000 per share. She called Buffett’s offer at the time to buy back stock an “IQ test for investors.” That was the one time she really pounded the table and said buy the stock now, since the stock was trading at 1.1 times book value.

In the spring of 2000, Schroeder pegged Berkshire’s intrinsic value at $80,000 a share, and she put it at that price in her first report for Morgan Stanley Dean Witter on September 14, 2000. In 2003, she raised her estimate of the intrinsic value to the $103,000–$120,000 range.

In February 2002, Schroeder testified at a daylong House Financial Services Committee hearing on the lack of terrorism insurance and its effect on the economy (Risk and Insurance, April 15, 2002).

With her book project launched, her brokerage coverage of Berkshire for Morgan Stanley was suspended, although she remains an advisory director of the firm.

The New York Post (October 12, 2005) reported that the Buffett/Schroeder “investment advice” book was being shopped around to publishers with reports that the bidding from a dozen publishers had reached the $7-million range for the North American rights. That’s right up there with the $9-million advance paid to Alan Greenspan for his book.

Later reports said the book of “Buffett’s ideas” was to be published by The Bantam Dell Publishing Group, part of Random House.

The tentative title, The Snowball: How Warren Buffett Collected Friends, Wisdom and Wealth, was changed to The Snowball: Warren Buffett and the Business of Life. “The Snowball” comes from a Buffett quote: “Life is like a snowball. The really important thing is finding wet snow and a really long hill.”

The 976-page hardback book, long-billed as a mega-best-seller, was to be published in the spring of 2008, and make its debut at the Berkshire annual meeting on May 3, 2008. In an interview with the Omaha World-Herald (May 5, 2007), Schroeder said:

I will be so sad when it ends, because it has been the most wonderful thing I’ve ever done in my life.



The material that was given me by Warren’s friends, Charlie [Munger], and all his family is so amazing. Even if I were a terrible writer, with material this good it should be an enjoyable book. It’s just such a great story.



Describing scenes from Buffett’s life has been tricky because he doesn’t have a visual memory,” she said. “He can’t tell you what things look like. He just doesn’t think that way. He remembers numbers.”



The Omaha World-Herald story said Berkshire opened its files, including Buffett’s decades of correspondence, to Schroeder. She said that for a year and a half, she spent two weeks each month in Omaha, mostly staying at the Doubletree Hotel and often dining with Buffett at his favorite restaurants. “I ate steak after steak after steak,” she told the paper.

“It’s not anything like any of the other [Buffett] books,” Schroeder was quoted as saying. “It doesn’t read like a biography or a self-help. It reads like a story.”

She said she showed parts of the book to a close friend, a Texas housewife who is typical of what she hopes will be her audience. Schroeder said the woman loved it and wanted to read more.

The article quoted her as saying she had been “bombarded” by e-mails, mostly asking how the book was going. She said there were too many to answer, but she was planning a Web site that would give updates.

The publisher of the book was Bantam Dell’s Irwyn Applebaum; the executive editor was Ann Harris, who has edited works by Nobel Prize-winning physicist Stephen Hawking; and the agent was David Black. A number of people, including former Wall Street Journal reporter Devon Spurgeon, as well as researcher Lauren Esposito, helped Schroeder with the book.

Harris was quoted in the newspaper story as saying, “We know it’s going to be a great book.” Reports quoting the publisher said Schroeder spent “thousands of hours with Buffett.”

Schroeder said Buffett doesn’t have editorial control but would read it for accuracy before it was published. He did read it and made no changes before publication.

Harry Potter publisher Bloomsbury bought the rights in June 2007 to publish The Snowball in the U.K. and Australia. “Our expectation is that it could become the No. 1 best-seller in the U.K. and Australia because you get Buffett’s condensed wisdom on investing,” Nigel Newton, Bloomsbury’s chairman, told Reuters (June 28, 2007).

In early 2008, before the scheduled publication date for The Snowball, the book was delayed until June 2 and then delayed until September 29, 2008. Naturally, booksellers in Omaha who were expecting the book for the annual meeting in 2008 were upset. “To say that we’re disappointed is a big, big understatement,” said Diana Abbott, manager of The Bookworm in Omaha. The store had planned to sell 25,000 copies (Omaha World-Herald, May 2, 2008).

A Bantam Dell spokeswoman was quoted in the Star as saying, “It’s a very long book, so it’s taken longer to edit.” The story said Bantam planned a first run of one million copies.

In mid-2008, a Bantam Dell press release said advance copies of the book for reviewers would be unlikely because of the tight publishing schedule for the book.

SOMETHING AMISS?

The first hint of coming controversy over the book surfaced in The Wall Street Journal (August 23–24, 2008). In his “Books & Authors” column, Jeffrey Trachtenberg reported that the biography might not get much backing in the way of praise, appearances, and book signings by Buffett. None seemed to be in the cards.

The story quoted an e-mail from Buffett’s assistant saying he is “not doing interviews about the book at this time.” It also cited a previous e-mail that quoted Buffett as saying, “I’m fine with the book and hope it sells well. It treats me better than I deserve, but I’m willing to adjust to that.”

The story suggested that controversy could have developed over treatment of Buffett’s first wife, Susan. An e-mail from Berkshire said it was “not true” that Buffett was withholding support because of issues with the content.

The Schroeder book apparently came out without much real support from Buffett; therefore, it was hard to predict sales. It might sell more because people would buy it to find some flaw, or less, because it didn’t seem to have Buffett’s enthusiastic endorsement.

The Journal story quoted publishers as saying the book would need to sell 600,000 to 700,000 copies to make a profit in light of the large advance.

The fact is that Buffett pledged cooperation with the author, but not promotional support for the book. The story quoted Bantam Dell publisher Irwyn Applebaum as saying that Buffett’s participation in promoting the book was never guaranteed. “He gave her [Schroeder] access to his contacts, his friends, and the opportunity to get to know him better than any other writer, which is what makes the book so outstanding. Would we love to have Warren Buffett doing interviews for the book? Who wouldn’t? But we’re moving ahead as planned.”

The first person to land a copy of the book, actually a video, was Josh Funk, an Associated Press reporter in Omaha. His first article said the book indicated that although Buffett had great confidence in his business acumen, that confidence hid a self-doubt about everything else. Funk quoted the book as it addressed that issue: “In every area of life except business, Susie [Buffett’s first wife] was discovering her husband was riddled with self-doubt. He had never felt love, and she saw he did not feel lovable.”

An updated version of the Funk story quoting the book said Susie Buffett told Buffett in 1984 that her move to San Francisco was related to a relationship with another man. Buffett didn’t tell anyone, even his companion Astrid Menks. He flushed the memory of it from his mind and concentrated on his work.

The Funk story mentioned Bantam Dell’s plan to print one million copies.

Schroeder kicked off promotion of the book on NBC’s Today show on the September 29, 2008 publication date.

Time’s review of the book (September 23, 2008) said although Buffett revered his father, his mother would “verbally lash” young Buffett and his older sister for hours until they wept. Buffett filled the void of a loving mother with his marriage to Susie who knew “the main thing he needed was to feel loved and never criticized.”

Later he was crushed when Susie left him and went to California, but he built a relationship with Astrid Menks. “Susie put me together and Astrid keeps me together,” the review quoted Buffett in the book.

Other women friends who came into Buffett’s orbit have been Sharon Osberg, the bridge player; Carol Loomis, the writer for Fortune; and Katharine Graham of The Washington Post.

The book reports episodes from Buffett’s rebellious youth when he was making poor grades and even stealing golf equipment from Sears.

Further, the book goes into great detail about Susie Buffett’s battle with oral

cancer and how Buffett hates physical ailments, but spent weekend after weekend with Susie, watching nearly 100 episodes of Frasier. The book reports that when Susie had treatments and was on a liquid diet, Buffett, sympathizing, cut his own intake to 1,000 calories a day.

The Snowball offers details about Buffett’s relationship with Katharine Graham, his thoughts on his role in his first wife’s move to San Francisco, his search for “Daisy Mae” surrogate-mother female friends, and his inability to attend Susie’s funeral:

• Schroeder states that when Buffett and Graham were at their closest, “he visited her rambling shingle mansion on Martha’s Vineyard overlooking Lambert’s Cove and they traveled together often to business meetings, and went, on a lark, to Niagara Falls. … As the flirtatious, fifty-nine-year-old Kay was spotted tossing the forty-six-year-old Warren her house key at charity benefits, and the two were seen together ever more in public, by early 1977 the gossip columns had taken note, and, as Graham put it, ‘eyebrows shot up.’”

• The book said that Susie “made it plain to several friends that she was furious and humiliated. Her way of dealing with the situation was to send Graham a letter granting her leave to pursue a relationship with Warren—as if Kay had been waiting for any such permission. Kay showed the letter to people as though it let her off the hook” (pp. 445–446).

• The book quotes Buffett on his unconventional marriage and Susie’s move to San Francisco: “It was preventable. It shouldn’t have happened. It was my biggest mistake. Essentially, whatever I did in connection with Susie leaving would be the biggest mistake I ever made” (pp. 445–446).

• Also, the book said that from an early age Buffett looked for surrogate mothers in the form of Daisy Mae Scragg, the beautiful and devoted character in the Li’l Abner cartoon. Whereas Susie Buffett would be his first “Daisy Mae,” Schroeder wrote, he would continue to surround himself with other motherly women who were devoted to him so that he eventually developed a “supporting cast,” including Astrid Menks, Fortune reporter Carol Loomis, and bridge partner Sharon Osberg (p. 787).

• The book said Buffett has an extraordinary preoccupation with his own death and was nearly helpless in the face of the death of his friends. When Susie was ill, she recognized this and, thus, gave advanced directives to her daughter: “Listen, [Warren] is a wuss. You need to understand that if they get in there and there’s more cancer, don’t let them operate.” After her death, when Susie, Jr., was planning the funeral, she told her father “You don’t have to go.” According to Schroeder, Buffett was overcome with relief. “I can’t go,” he acknowledged (p. 803).

Reviews of the book ranged all over the lot as it was praised by The New York Times and panned by Barron’s. The widely held criticism was that the book focused too much on Buffett’s family and too little on his investments.

Still, the book became The New York Times No. 1 hardcover best-seller on October 19, 2008, and remained there several weeks. However, the book did not sell nearly as well as originally planned.

____________________

Since 1998, Schroeder had hosted a dinner during the Berkshire annual meeting weekend. Buffett came each year and answered questions which came from invited guests on an off-the-record basis.

But Buffett ended the dinner event in 2009. Schroeder was quoted as saying (Omaha World-Herald, January 25, 2009), “Warren has been generous with his time for more than a decade but now has decided to bring the era of sage advice dinners to an end.”

A Berkshire spokeswoman was quoted as saying, “Mr. Buffett likes Alice, likes her book, and has received a number of glowing letters from friends about it. But at some point, like the charity golf outing he once hosted, an event runs its course.”

Citing two unnamed sources, The New York Times, (February 3, 2009) said the dinner Schroeder traditionally hosted in Omaha was canceled by Buffett “apparently because of his displeasure with some aspects” of The Snowball, particularly of coverage about his first wife. The story said the relationship between Buffett and Schroeder had cooled.

An Associated Press story (February 5, 2009) quoted Buffett’s assistant Debbie Bosanek as saying cancellation of the dinner was unrelated to the book. The story also quoted Schroeder herself as saying others had told her Buffett was troubled by her portrayal of his first wife.

Schroeder said in an interview with Waco, Texas, Tribune Herald that her relationship with Buffett had deteriorated. “When he first read the book, his initial reaction was very favorable. He said it was wonderful. He thought it was a great book. Then, after it was published, things changed. It’s really very awkward between us now. Very awkward.” She said they have not talked since the book was published.

At Berkshire’s annual meeting each year, “Berky Bookseller” sells books that have been recommended by Buffett. In 2009, Schroeder’s book was included in those offered for sale, but she declined to sign books, telling The Omaha World-Herald (March 22, 2009), “I am a huge supporter of independent bookstores. Independent bookstores and publishers and authors have very special relationships. For whatever reason, we were not able to have that kind of a relationship with the Bookworm for this event.” She and her publisher, Bantam “weren’t able to work things out with the Bookworm,” Schroeder said.

In March 2009, Schroeder started writing a once-a-month column for Bloomberg. Later in the year, she updated her book to include a look at Buffett’s role in the financial crisis of 2008–2009.

In an interview with U.K. Telegraph TV, Schroeder said of her current relationship with Buffett, “In public he’s made some lukewarm-ish comments, but privately he had not had a favorable reaction with the book—our relationship is strained—and it’s understandable. Everyone has their own internal narrative of themselves that they carry around in their head. And of course, when you look at it on the page, it’s never going to match what you think” (Omaha World-Herald, September 20, 2009).

In response to a report in Schroeder’s paperback published in 2009 that he was buying American Express stock during the financial crisis, he told CNBC (November 5, 2009) that he had not bought American Express stock “in years.”

Schroeder’s Bloomberg column in May 2010, took to a heavy criticism of Berkshire’s annual meeting saying she couldn’t make the meeting because of a scheduling conflict. She went on to describe the meeting attended by 37,000 as “a circus.”

She said “the thrill is gone” from the annual meeting she described as “overvalued.”



(Photo courtesy of Alice Schroeder)

Alice Schroeder

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Schroeder Book

The Snowball: Warren Buffett and the Business of Life



The Schroeder Book The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Schroeder Book



167





RALPH NADER’S NOVEL


In 2009, the unlikeliest of authors weighed in with a 736-page book—a novel—featuring Buffett. Activist and perennial president candidate, Ralph “Unsafe at Any Speed” Nader wrote Only the Super-Rich Can Save Us!, the imagined account of what would happen if some of America’s richest people reshaped our way of life.

The book begins:

In the cozy den of the large but modest house in Omaha where he had lived since he started on his first billion, Warren Buffett watched the horrors of Hurricane Katrina unfold on television in early 2005. … On the fourth day, he beheld in disbelief the paralysis of local, state, and federal authorities unable to commence basic operations of rescue and sustenance, not just in New Orleans, but in towns and villages all along the Gulf Coast. … He knew exactly what he had to do.



In the novel, Buffett convenes a secret meeting at a Maui mountain retreat of a group of wealthy and influential people who agree to take back the country they think has been taken away. The group infiltrates corporate boards, and stages demonstrations for the environment and better wages.

Nader, known for his efforts to encourage the consumer to drive safer cars, eat healthier food, and drink cleaner water, draws on other figures in addition to Buffett to help bring about a rebirth of the country, including such “dramatis personae” as William Gates, Sr., Ross Perot, George Soros, Ted Turner, Bill Cosby, and Yoko Ono who are among the elite to “redirect” a society in which Warren Beatty runs California, Wal-Mart workers unionize, and corporate greed disappears.

After Nader’s novel was published, Buffett and Nader had lunch together.

About the time of the publication of Nader’s novel, 28 leaders representing business, government, academia, and labor, joined the Asper Institute Business Society Program’s Corporate Values Strategy Group (CVSG) to call for an end on “short-termism” in financial markets. Maybe Nader’s novel is not all fiction.

NADER AT A DAIRY QUEEN IN OMAHA

Nader signed his book at a Dairy Queen which hosted a number of authors selling their Buffett-related books during the Berkshire annual meeting weekend in 2010.



Ralph Nader



“Only the Super-Rich Can Save Us!”

(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Nader Signing Sighting

Nader signs his books at the annual meeting in 2010.

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

Of Permanent Value Ralph Nader’s Novel



168





LIBRARIES OF ALEXANDRIA AND EPHESUS




Library at Alexandria

The Library of Alexandria, named after Alexander the Great and founded in 332 BC, flourished under the Ptolemaic dynasty until its destruction in 48 BC, about the time of Rome’s conquest of Egypt. This greatest of libraries, which stemmed from Aristotle’s personal library, housed everything of its day. Scholars there accurately measured the circumference of the earth, mapped the stars, and dissected bodies discovering man’s central nervous system. The great collection of books included the only copy of The Complete Works of Aeschylus on loan at huge expense from Athens (Stuart Kelly, The Book of Lost Books, p. 32). But the library vanished, perhaps through religious wars, perhaps through fire. No one really knows. Even Aeschylus’s masterpiece The Oresteia was lost although copies were preserved from other locations. Incidentally, not a single copy of Of Permanent Value made it. Far worse, not even a single issue of a Berkshire Hathaway report survived. But the good news is that a new library, a stone’s throw away from the site of the old one, was built in recent years; it now evokes the glory of the old one with space for millions of books, and claims nearly one million visitors a year. The new Bibliotheca Alexandrina is the largest and most advanced library in the Arab world.

The Story of Warren Buffett



No Book of Prophecy

No book of prophecy from the great Library of Celsus in Ephesus, Turkey, survived antiquity except for one dusty copy of Warren Buffett: The Good Guy of Wall Street. Not even a Wesco annual report survived.



Rare Beyond Words

Good Guy has survived 1,000 financial crises. Although unimaginably rare, a fresh copy is offered on Amazon.com for $8.06 and a used copy goes for a penny.

(Photo by Mary Porter)



Books Sold Here

However, outside the old library, Parnassus on Wheels heroes Roger and Helen Mifflin, were busily selling books from their traveling book wagon. Mount Parnassus in Greece was the home of the Muses.

(AP Photo)

Of Permanent Value Libraries of Alexandria and Ephesus

“In all things we learn only

from those we love.”

—Johann Wolfgang von Goethe

“Come and take choice

Of all of my library,

And so beguile

Thy sorrow.”

—William Shakespeare

“If past history was all there was to the game,

the richest people would be librarians.”

—Warren Buffett



169





OVERSEXED MAN


Steve Forbes, who inherited the Forbes magazine publishing empire after his father’s death on February 24, 1990, says his father and Buffett were good friends. Indeed, they played bridge together the night before globe-trotter Malcolm Forbes’ fatal heart attack.

“They were playing in Britain against British Parliament members,” the younger Forbes recalled, referring to the Corporate America vs. British Parliament game. The name of the corporate America team was Corporate America’s Six Honchos (CASH).

Buffett came up with the idea for the game after a similar one between Corporate America and Congress. (U.S. Senator Bob Kerrey was on the congressional team.)

It took place at the 17th-century riverside mansion, Old Battersea House, Malcolm Forbes’s London home. The art-filled Victorian home is said to have been built by Sir Christopher Wren.

The Corporate America team was headed by former CBS chairman Laurence Tisch, Buffett, Malcolm Forbes, and Bear Stearns chairman Alan “Ace” Greenberg. (Buffett wrote a short foreword for Greenberg’s book Memos from the Chairman: “Ace Greenberg does almost everything better than I do—bridge, magic tricks, dog training, arbitrage—all the important things in life.”) The team members are James Cayne, president of Bear Stearns and a bridge national champion ranked as one of the best players in the world; George Gillespie III, partner of the Cravath, Swaine & Moore law firm; and Milton Petrie, chairman of the Petrie Stores. The British team was headed by Sir Peter Emery.

Corporate America played 16 hands against the House of Commons in the morning and 16 hands against the House of Lords in the afternoon. The House of Lords team soundly beat the Americans, and the Americans squeaked by the House of Commons team.

In those matches, Tisch was Forbes’ partner; Buffett and Gillespie played together.

Steve Forbes said: “One of the most delightful moments of my father’s life came just before his own death when he was made part of a team that included Larry Tisch and Warren Buffett who played bridge against a team from Britain’s House of Commons. The Americans won” (Forbes, December 22, 2003).

Buffett arrived in London with his wife. The Buffetts and Gillespies went to dinner and the theater the night before the bridge game. After the bridge games, Malcolm Forbes hosted a dinner for the bridge teams, friends, and press members. “My father came home [Far Hills, New Jersey] the next day and died there,” said Forbes. “Warren Buffett wrote me a nice letter about how much my father had enjoyed the bridge game and how he seemed to be in such a festive mood.

“My father was not all that great a bridge player but he felt he had played well that night. He [Buffett] is an excellent bridge player. If he had taken up bridge as a career he would have done very well. It’s math, a card sense and he just sees some extra dimension. … He has a superb mind.”

“Warren Buffett is one of the few people to make their fortunes through investing,” Forbes said in an interview in Birmingham, Alabama. Forbes sported a money green tie that read, “Capitalist Tool.”

“We know Buffett as a value investor but I think he’s a market timer, too. … We interviewed him (for Forbes) in 1969 when he was a virtual unknown, and he said the market was too high and that he was selling everything. We said, gosh, he sure called that one right. We interviewed him again in 1974 when the market had declined two-thirds in value in real terms, after inflation. He said it was a time to buy, and that he felt like a sex-starved man in a harem.”

Forbes said (July 7, 1997): “To observe the niceties of the times [1974] we had censored Buffett a bit. What he actually said was: ‘I feel like an oversexed man in a whorehouse.’”



Steve Forbes

Forbes magazine’s Steve Forbes said about Buffett: “I think he’s a market timer. ... We interviewed him in 1969... and he said the market was too high. ... We interviewed him again in 1974. ... He said it was a time to buy.”

(AP/Wide

World Photos)



George Gillespie, III

He attended the Berkshire annual meeting in 2003.

(Photo by Celia Sullivan)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Oversexed Man



170





PHIL CARRET


Phil Carret, the grandson of Napoleon’s paymaster, turned 100 years old on November 29, 1996. Carret himself was, in turn, the grandfather of value investing. He lived through more than 30 bull markets, more than 30 bear markets, 20 recessions, and the Depression. Carret (rhymes with hurray), born in Lynn, Massachusetts, died May 28, 1998, at the age of 101.

The longevity of value investors Carret (101), Phil Fisher, (96—OK, he was a growth guy, but don’t forget growth is a component of value), Irving Kahn (going strong in his late 90s), John Templeton, Munger (alive and well in his mid 80s), and Buffett (still flourishing in his later-70s) seems anecdotally, to show that value investors live longer than priests. It’s blasphemy to say, so we’ll hold off stating it as fact until some Stanford statistician gets hold of this one.

Interviewed on the Today show on his 100th birthday, Carret said his best piece of investment advice was never to go into debt, and that his greatest achievement was making his wife happy all the years of their marriage. Carret said there are six words that can lead to a happy marriage: “Please, thank you, and I love you.”

Carret wasn’t much on handing out unsolicited advice, but when his son Don joined the Navy during World War II, he offered the following fatherly advice: “I’m not going to tell you not to drink because I know you’re going to and I’m not going to tell you not to chase women because I know you’re going to. Just don’t do both at the same time” (Investor’s Business Daily, January 14, 1999).

Born in 1896, the year the Dow Jones Industrial Average was formed, Carret became friends with Buffett about a half a century later—around 1952.

Carret worked as a reporter for Barron’s after World War 1 and began investing for friends.

Carret discovered that he and Buffett both owned stock in the retailer Vornado. He called Buffett to tell him he knew Vornado’s chairman and asked Buffett if he would like to meet him the next time he was in New York. Buffett said he’d like that.

The three men had lunch, and afterwards, Buffett told Carret he wasn’t all that taken with the chairman’s discussion of the business scene. “I guess I didn’t understand retailing as well as I thought,” Buffett told Carret. “He sold the stock,” Carret laughed.

Carret, who put in—without pay—a 40-hour week until near the end of his life, said in an interview in the mid-1990s that Buffett was one of the two great investors he’d seen. The other was Fred Abbe, three years ahead of Carret at Harvard where Carret graduated in 1917. “There are no reunions for me,” Carret cracked shortly before attending the Berkshire annual meeting in 1997.

“Abbe was a registered representative who never made more than $10,000 a year as a broker. His strategy was to buy and hold. He’d buy for himself some of the stocks he bought for his customers. He would hold on. He was worth millions later. … Among his greatest coups was buying $1,400 worth of stock when he was 25 or thereabouts. Sixty years later he still had it, and it was worth $2 million,” Carret said.

Carret said Abbe was often needled for holding so long and was told he should keep a closer eye on his stocks rather than just let them sit. According to Carret, Abbe’s reply was: “If you buy them cheap enough, they watch themselves.”

Later Abbe asked Carret if he’d be the executor of his will, and Carret said he’d be honored. Abbe picked five people to back up Carret; but when one of them who was about Abbe’s own age died, Abbe feared that they might all predecease him and tossed out the whole first team for a younger one. “So I never did handle his estate,” laughed Carret. This reminds one of a joke about a couple in their late 90s who were asked why they hadn’t made estate plans. The 99-year-old husband replied, “Well, we’re waiting for the children to die.”

Carret, of course, was a great investor himself. He owned Greif Brothers, maker of fiberboard containers, for more than 50 years. It was a steady winner. It so happens Carret bought the stock in 1946 on the recommendation of Buffett’s father.

The mutual fund pioneer spotted one of his best investments of the 1970s during a business trip. During his stay at a Boston hotel, Carret was impressed by a glycerine soap he used. It rinsed easily, smelled good, and didn’t irritate his skin. He tracked down the soap maker, studied the company, and bought stock in Neutrogena Corp., which became a 30-bagger before it was sold to Johnson & Johnson in 1994 (Investor’s Business Daily, January 14, 1999).

In later years, Carret tried to get Buffett to make a contribution to Harvard,

taking the approach that Buffett likes to invest in businesses that are No. 1 in their field, run by a management he “likes, trusts, and admires.” “I told him Harvard was No. 1 and that I could introduce him to folks at Harvard that I knew he would like, trust, and admire.” Nice try, but no luck.

Carret, full of anecdotes, sitting in his unpretentious office in New York City, quoted a plaque that reads, “A cluttered desk is a mark of genius.” When Carret looked through his desk for the plaque, he quipped, “Well, I can’t find it. My desk is too cluttered.”

In curmudgeonly fashion, Carret has told reporters, in talking about government securities, “I don’t like to invest in the operations of insolvent organizations,” and, “trading in and out of the market is the pinnacle of stupidity” (The New York Times, November 19, 1995).

Like Buffett, Carret worked without a computer. Asked why, Carret replied, “It’s up here,” he said, pointing to his head. “It works fairly well.”

Carret, at the time of his death, was well into writing his fourth book, in longhand on yellow legal pads, to be called The Patient Investor. Among his earlier books are The Art of Speculation, a business classic published in 1930, and Buying a Bond, originally published in 1924.

Except for a stint as an Air Force pilot in World War I in France and one as a reporter in Boston for Clarence Barron, founder of Barron’s, Carret spent his time in investments, “seduced by Wall Street.”

On February 13, 1928, he started the successful Pioneer Fund (the fourth oldest mutual fund in the U.S.) with seed capital of $25,000. For years, he ran Carret & Company, which is now run by David Olderman and a group of associates, including Carret’s son Donald Carret.

In planning his 100th birthday, Carret said he hoped to have about 150 friends over for dinner, which he did. “Of course, I’ve already celebrated it a few times in case I don’t make it,” said Carret.

Carret & Company’s Frank Betz explained that Carret started celebrating his centennial when he was 93. A mock newspaper headline in Carret’s office read, “Phil Carret celebrates his 100th birthday again!”

As Carret, Betz, and a visitor headed out for a lunch in the early 1990s, Carret, instead of waiting for a revolving door, skipped quickly to beat it through, leaving Betz and the visitor in stitches.

In talking about Carret’s age, Betz has said, “Phil remembers when T-shirts didn’t say anything and bicycles had one speed.”

Carret used to take the subway to work, but later had a driver who brought him from his home in Scarsdale. Although he accepted that luxury in his old age, he still refused to fly first class, an issue mentioned in connection with a planned trip to England and France.

Carret could often be seen leaving his office building at a quarter past noon, crossing the street, and making his way to the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. There he would lunch in the Marco Polo Club, which was started by Carret’s friend Lowell Thomas, the explorer.

During one particular lunch, Carret related stories about an early investment in H&R Block. He said someone told him not to buy the stock because taxpayers could have the returns done by the IRS instead. Carret countered that argument with: “Are taxpayers going to get their worst enemy to fill out their returns?” Carret made a killing in the stock.

He talked about the Detroit International Bridge Co. in which Berkshire once had a stake. “It was for the toll-bridge concept. … Of course it had auxiliary businesses, such as a liquor store on the American side and some souvenir shops.”

Carret became a Berkshire shareholder in 1968 by way of owning Blue Chip stock. He converted that stock into Berkshire at about $400 a share. Merck, reinsurer Exel, and municipal bond insurer MBIA were huge winners for Carret.

When talking about his book, Carret said there would be a chapter about arrogance—a fatal flaw among many executives. “IBM was a classic example,” he said. Carret noted that former IBM Chairman John Akers demonstrated arrogance in 1991 when he told shareholders the $4.20 dividend was “very safe.” It was cut to $1.00. Akers also said earnings were in good shape. IBM had losses the next year. “When Lou Gerstner took over IBM, he talked about the prospects of a comeback at IBM: I think that we can do it.” That’s the reverse of arrogance. Carret had bought some IBM stock because it was so cheap, but he also interpreted Gerstner’s statement as a signal to buy.

He said Buffett is self confident but not arrogant. “That there’s no arrogance is the remarkable thing about him,” Carret said.

After lunch a visitor said, “Just one more question. What’s your secret for longevity?” Carret’s answered, “Pick your parents well, don’t smoke, and never worry.”

Buffett once wrote Carret:

Dear Phil,



Although I know you are still investing for long-term growth, here is the annual dividend on Berkshire Hathaway [enclosed a box of See’s Candies].



It was good to have you at the annual meeting last year and I hope you can make it next April. The group is upgraded by your presence.



Happy Holidays and all the best in 1992.

Warren



In the spring of 1995, Carret, during an appearance on Wall $treet Week with Louis Rukeyser, said his favorite stock was Berkshire.

COSMIC EVENTS

For decades Carret was interested in such cosmic wonders as solar eclipses and traveled worldwide to view many of them. Buffett referred to that interest in another letter he sent to Carret:

Dear Phil,



You are the Lou Gehrig of investing; and, like him, your record will never be forgotten.



Come out to the annual meeting: I’ll try to arrange an eclipse. Happy Holidays.



Warren



On Wall $treet Week with Louis Rukeyser on April 28, 1995, Rukeyser asked Carret, “What is the single most important thing that you learned about investing over the past three-quarters of a century?”

Carret replied, “Patience.”

The Story of Warren Buffett



Grandfather of Value Investing

At left, the young Grandfather of Value Investing Carret is pictured with his books in his office in New York in 1995. At right is cub reporter with AKPE.

(Photo by Frank Betz)

Of Permanent Value Phil Carret



The Art of Speculation

by Philip Carret

(Photo by Mary Porter)



Buying a Bond

by Philip Carret

(Photo by Mary Porter)



The floor of the New York Stock Exchange in 1930 as shown in this opening photo of The Art of Speculation.

Phil Carret The Story of Warren Buffett



Evidence that Value Investors

Live Longer

Phil Carret loved the markets and parties and celebrating his 100th birthday. Here he stands with Buffett the day

of Berkshire’s annual meeting in

May 1996.

(Photo by Frank Betz)



Legends and Headlines

Phil Carret and Washington Post’s Katharine Graham at Berkshire’s annual meeting festivities in the mid-90s.

(Photo by Bob Sullivan)

Of Permanent Value Phil Carret



171





SEQUOIA FUND’S BILL RUANE


Buffett’s longtime friend Bill Ruane attended Harvard Business School, Class of 1949. This class produced a remarkable number of business leaders. It was the very same class for which Buffett applied. “To its eternal embarrassment, Harvard Business School rejected Buffett as too young to join its Class of 1949” (Forbes, October 18, 1999).

The Forbes story caught up with a few of the graduates during their 50th anniversary year. Among those in the class were: Tom Murphy, also Buffett’s longtime friend and creator of ABC/Capital Cities; former Johnson & Johnson CEO Jim Burke; Xerox’s Peter McCullough; and Bloomingdale’s Marvin Traub. No women were in the class. Of the 648 students, 292 ended up as a president, CEO, or chairman. One in seven became a majority owner of a business.

Kindred Spirits, a 2002 book about the remarkable class, starts out focusing on Ruane, who has since passed on:

Nineteen ninety-nine was a bad year in the stock market for Bill Ruane. It was worse, in fact, than any year he’d ever had except 1973, during the depths of a bear market. As 1999 closed, along with the century and the millennium, Ruane tallied up investment losses of an almost unfathomable scale. His legendary Sequoia Fund, which had almost consistently outperformed Standard & Poor’s 500 Index over its 29-year history, had taken a staggering hit. The fund, valued at nearly $5 billion in 1998, had lost nearly a quarter of its value during 1999—lagging behind the S&P by 35 percentage points. Shareholders in the Sequoia Fund, which had long ago been closed to new investors, lost nearly a billion dollars in wealth. Among these shareholders were some of Ruane’s oldest and closest friends, including buddies he had bonded with 50 years earlier at Harvard Business School.



Bill Ruane liked his privacy more than most people. Around Wall Street he had a reputation for being reclusive. Silver-haired and soft-spoken, with a youthful vitality, he maintained a remarkably low profile for a man who had built one of the most successful private investment funds in financial history and was worth tens of millions of dollars. In an industry filled with outsized egos and downright loudmouths, Ruane was unusual in his modesty and he was content with the quiet life. He lived on upper Fifth Avenue, in an apartment facing the park, and enjoyed long weekends in western Connecticut, where he and his wife, Joy, owned a farmhouse. Every weekday morning, Ruane dressed in a crisp, pressed shirt and an expensive suit before he headed down Fifth Avenue to his firm on the forty-fourth floor of the GM building, across from the Plaza Hotel. The firm, Ruane & Cunniff, was housed in offices with wood-paneled walls and polished antiques. It boasted soaring power views north over the green expanse of Central Park and, farther, to the George Washington Bridge.



Built up over three immensely profitable decades, the firm stood as an enduring monument to Ruane’s vision and investing savvy. Several years earlier, Ruane had turned over the operational details of the business to younger people. Now, on most days, Ruane didn’t spend much time in his spacious office at the firm. Instead, in a somewhat curious manner, he liked to hide out across the street, in a second office that he kept in the Sherry-Netherland Hotel. There, alone and unbothered, Ruane would do what he liked to do most, the thing that had won him his immense fortune: study companies and pick stocks. Noting his reclusive style, along with his brilliance in picking stocks, one Wall Street analyst had dubbed Ruane an “oracle” (David Callahan, Kindred Spirits, pp. 1–2).



Ruane mustered through the Navy until 1947; then he worked in a General Electric training program for $49 a week, where he discovered he was a “mechanical idiot.”

He was, however, good at math and attended Harvard and afterwards worked at Kidder, Peabody for $300 a month at a time when trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange was 500,000 shares a day. Ruane was charging clients 3%. He later quoted Munger as asking him, “Why don’t you just have them tithe to you?” (Talk to Columbia University, April 10, 2003).

On June 6, 1969, he and Richard Cunniff set up their business, which was a small operation and remained as such. Today it has only 40 employees and about $10 billion under management (Forbes, October 18, 1999).

Ruane, longtime chairman of Ruane, Cunniff & Goldfarb Co. in New York City, managed the top-ranked Sequoia Mutual Fund, which closed in 1982 to new money from investors. Ruane often recalled the time when no one showed up at Sequoia’s annual meetings, although the fund now has such cachet that one Berkshire shareholder paid $500 for a share, which he bought through eBay.

Ruane’s partner, Richard Cunniff, said at the 1997 Sequoia annual meeting that while preparing for one of their early meetings, he asked Ruane if he thought anyone would show up. The two men kicked around the question and finally decided to rent 12 chairs just in case. “So we rented 12 chairs and nobody showed up,” Cunniff said. Shareholders should have come because from 1971 through 1997, Sequoia outstripped the S&P 500 with average annual returns of 19.6% compared to 14.5%.

The no-show story is reminiscent of Berkshire’s early annual meetings held in a cafeteria.

Ruane used to describe his relationship with Buffett as being like “the caddy for Tiger Woods.” Over the years, Ruane, who called Ben Graham the Old Testament and Buffett the New Testament, made many of the same investments as Berkshire and his observations about the market are similar to Buffett’s.

At Sequoia’s annual meeting in 1997, Ruane was asked how he would value Berkshire. Ruane, relying on the Beemer method (see Intrinsic Value chapter), replied:

Well, how much time do you have? This discussion can expand to fill any amount of time available, but to keep it simple, we look at the company a number of different ways, but we focus primarily on earnings. In the latest annual report, Warren Buffett provides a rough estimate of $1.5 billion for the company’s 1996 “see-through”—or real economic as opposed to accounting—earning power. Remember this is a bottoms up earnings estimate constructed by “looking through” to Berkshire’s economic earnings interests in its many individual holdings, which arguably eliminates the need to decide whether the P/E [price earning] multiple for Coke common is appropriate. On earnings, I think you’re not far from the market multiple level and certainly Berkshire’s earnings quality and earnings growth prospects are superior to that of the market. Then you just have to take a look at the sources of the earnings. How much do you think the earnings from the banks it owns or its wholly-owned businesses are worth? If you attribute your own multiples, you will come up with your own figure. It’s really not as complicated as some people make it out to be. I think if you start off with the simple idea that it’s selling on an earning power basis at around a 5% earnings yield, and then consider the really brilliant management that’s in place at both headquarters and most of the operating companies, you will understand why we’re very comfortable with our investment.



And then you can go at it from an asset standpoint, and add up the market value of the portfolio and then try to evaluate the privately owned operations. In doing that, I think you will come up with a number that’s not dramatically different from that derived from the earnings power method. On an asset basis, you’ll find that there’s a premium for Buffett’s ability, but it’s my feeling that the premium is deserved. When Warren wrote the shareholder’s letter in the annual report last month, he said that he and Charlie Munger thought that Berkshire’s price, relative to the company’s business value, was much more appropriate than it had been a year ago.



I think it’s really amazing when you just look at what Buffett’s done. If you read the annual report carefully, it’s there. If you were to evaluate his money management ability or results—these numbers are somewhat inaccurate but they’re not far off—the portfolio that he ran in 1995 reported on a comparable basis to the reporting of Sequoia Fund and the S&P 500 was up over 60%, versus the S&P, which was up about 38% and Sequoia, up 41%. And last year the S&P was up about 23% and we did 22%. It gets a little complicated because most of Berkshire’s Disney holding was not owned for the whole year, but on a comparable basis, Buffett was up well over 30%. Over a long period of time he’s been the Tiger Woods or Michael Jordan of the investment field, and he still is. That mind is still whirring. And I think, also, there’s something going on there that I think is interesting. In the past, if you were to take the last 20 annual reports and analyze them, you would find that this is a master portfolio manager at work, creating enormous leaps of value. With the addition of GEICO, FlightSafety, catastrophe insurance, etc., you now have very significant, well run, wholly owned operations. I personally think that the umbrella of Berkshire Hathaway and its substantial resources permits GEICO to be far more aggressive than it was able to be as a stand alone operation. If you take GEICO and compare it to other great businesses, it would rank very high among them. Maybe it’s not an “Inevitable,” but—what’s that second rank—“Highly Probable”? It’s a beautiful business. And Lou Simpson and Tony Nicely are just doing a great job. And that wholly owned business is now a very significant part of Berkshire Hathaway.



One would think Ruane had a real interest in money, right? Apparently not so. Forbes (October 12, 1998) quotes Buffett as saying quite the opposite: “Ruane just isn’t interested in money. And he’s the most generous guy I know.”

The following is an anecdote about Buffett that Ruane told at the Sequoia Fund’s 1999 annual meeting:

Warren was asked to testify by Cravath, Swaine & Moore who was defending IBM in the government’s antitrust suit. He was on the stand for two days before a very tough judge who clearly felt no warmth for IBM and was pretty outspoken about it. And this one prosecutor said, “Mr. Buffett, you believe that everything Ben Graham said is accurate, don’t you?” Warren said, “Absolutely.” And the lawyer said, “Well, let me read you this definition of depreciation. …” And he read from Graham and Dodd this definition of depreciation, which was pertinent to the business issue that was being raised at the time.



The lawyer then looked at Warren and said, “Do you agree with that definition?” And Warren said, “No.” “Well it’s straight from Graham and Dodd.” And Warren said, “What edition was that?” The prosecutor paused and said, “May I have an adjournment for a few minutes?”



And the lawyers came back the next day; and they still didn’t have an answer. Finally, Warren said, “I think you’ll find that it was from the fifth edition—and that particular chapter on depreciation wasn’t written by Ben Graham. It was cited as having been written by an expert on utility companies. And that happens to be the definition of this other gentleman, not Ben Graham. And I don’t agree with it.”



And I can still remember the judge, a hardhearted guy, just looked over the bench at Warren, “Hmmm.” And then, “Mr. Buffett, thank you.” I thought he was going to ask Warren for a tip on the stock market. And you know, sometime thereafter, IBM was exonerated. I’m not saying it was due to Warren. But it was a great courtroom scene—right out of Perry Mason.



RUANE PASSES ON

Bill Ruane died October 4, 2005, of complications from lung cancer. He was 79. In addition to being a noted investor, he was quietly a generous philanthropist.

Ruane and Richard T. Cunniff, who both studied under Ben Graham at Columbia in 1951, founded their firm, today called Ruane, Cunniff & Goldfarb, in 1969, after raising $20 million from investors. The company’s Sequoia Fund became so successful it was closed to new business in 1982.

Born in Chicago, Ruane graduated cum laude from the University of Minnesota in 1945, with a degree in electrical engineering. He enlisted in the Navy and later joined General Electric. It was at Harvard Business School where he read Ben Graham’s Security Analysis. In 1950, Ruane and Buffett sat in on a seminar given by Ben Graham at Columbia.

In 1989, when Buffett gave his partners the choice of buying Berkshire stock or taking cash, he recommended only one money manager to those who chose cash: Ruane. Either choice paid off hugely.

Long interested in urban education, Ruane “adopted” a block in Harlem in 1992, resolving to make the block better in every way. He also funded an accelerated reader program for 26 New York public schools and for a group of schools in Monroe, Louisiana. He also created Teen Screen which tests teenagers for symptoms of depression and suicide risk factors.

For Ruane’s memorial services, Buffett wrote to their mutual friend, former Cap Cities Chairman Tom Murphy:

I first met Bill in Ben Graham’s class more than 54 years ago. There were 25 to 30 people in the class, and we met only once a week. So almost all of the names of my fellow students have faded from memory, but Bill stood out as an exceptional mind and an exceptional human being.



We hit it off immediately, and began a friendship that grew stronger every year. One of the great joys of our friendship is the ripple effect. Many of Bill’s best friends became mine, as well. The reverse was also true. This ever-enlarging group of shared friends enhanced the lives of both of us in a wide variety of ways – trips together, laughs together, and mind-blowing experiences together.



All of us had one common experience – [that] it was futile to try to do as much for Bill as he did for us. He simply had no desire for the books to be balanced. Instead, he delighted in thinking of a new way to help or entertain me, my family, or his other friends before we had a chance to reciprocate for his last act of generosity.



SEQUOIA SELLS A BIG PORTION OF ITS BERKSHIRE

Sequoia’s 2006 Annual Report revealed that the company had sold a large portion of its Berkshire stock in 2006. The management letter said, “Based on Berkshire’s 2006 performance our decision to reduce our ownership position during the year could be second guessed. It remains our single largest investment; but given Mr. Buffett’s age and our level of concentration, we felt it prudent to reduce our exposure. We expect Mr. Buffett will continue to do a masterful job deploying Berkshire’s vast capital and we intend to benefit from that performance over many years.”

REOPENING THE FUND; CLOSING THE FUND

After being closed for 25 years, Sequoia decided to reopen its fund in 2008, saying it was a good time to seek new shareholders. The fund had been closed to new investors for the past 25 years. Assets over the years had declined from a decade ago even though returns were up as shareholders had either aged or sold, the fund’s first quarter of 2008 report noted.

Sequoia’s comanager Bob Goldfarb told The Wall Street Journal (April 24, 2008) that if assets continued to fall it could “cause us to have to sell stocks that we didn’t want to.” But in 2012, with money pouring in making it more difficult to fine good investments, the fund was closed again.

Sequoia’s position in Berkshire has steadily dwindled in recent years. Goldfarb has repeated his reasons for selling a big stake in Berkshire over the past five years. He has said he can find stocks which are cheaper than Berkshire, that Buffett’s successor is unlikely to be as good as Berkshire and that he wants a “flatter, more diversified” portfolio.

SELLING MORE BERKSHIRE

The Sequoia Fund’s Annual Report said, “A lot happened at Sequoia in 2010. Most notably, we sold nearly half the Fund’s holding in Berkshire Hathaway. After comprising more than 30% of Sequoia’s assets as recently as 2006, Berkshire amounted to 10.6% of assets at the end of 2010.”

In late 2011, Sequoia held 3,204 Class A shares and 1,168,533 Class B shares.

Berkshire is a fine company, the Sequoia managers said but they noted that in recent years, “Buffett has announced loudly and clearly that the law of large numbers is working against Berkshire.”

Although the sale of Berkshire stock is a debatable strategy, it’s also true that Berkshire’s performance in recent years has flatlined. Of course, so has the rest of the world.

The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Bob Sullivan)

The Class of

Harvard Business School

Bill Ruane, right, and Phil Carret, chat at festivities before Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1997.

Of Permanent Value Sequoia Fund’s Bill Ruane

Sequoia Fund’s Bill Ruane The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Sequoia Fund’s Bill Ruane



172





THE PAUL LOUNTZIS STORY


Paul Lountzis, president of Lountzis Asset Management in Wyomissing, Pennsylvania, and a respected money manager, worked for Bill Ruane as a partner in the Ruane, Cunniff & Goldfarb Investment firm from 1990 to 1999.

Lountzis, 49, who graduated from Albright College in Reading, Pennsylvania, with a degree in Finance/Management, did research into the concentrated holdings that the firm is known for. Yet Lountzis’ first impression of Bill Ruane had little to do with finance, but concern for a health issue facing Lountzis’ young son.

As I began evaluating job opportunities with value oriented money managers a West Coast value investor who was friendly with Bob Goldfarb suggested that given my investment philosophy and approach that I should call Bob at Ruane, Cunniff & Goldfarb. I met with Bob as well as some of the other members of the firm and was asked to return a week later to meet Bill Ruane.



I had followed the firm over the years, primarily through the Sequoia Fund Letters and was both excited and nervous to meet Bill Ruane, one of the best investors in the country. Bill’s soft touch was evident the moment I met him and he immediately made me feel comfortable as I visited with him in his office. On his desk were two large reports on companies which I had done work on and which the firm owned in the Sequoia Fund. I was eager to discuss my investment research at length, hoping that Bill would hire me.



However, Bill’s primary focus throughout the interview had nothing to do with my investment research or hiring me, but rather the health of our newborn son, Tyler. Tyler was born in Greenwich Hospital and was diagnosed with an atrial-septal defect——a hole in the upper chambers of his heart. Congenital heart defects are prevalent in about 1 in 115 newborns and Tyler’s specific defect would require surgery which is typically performed when the child is older and stronger (3 or 4 years of age). Tyler, however, had a moderate size hole and would need open heart surgery much sooner. Bill asked numerous questions about Tyler’s diagnosis, prognosis, surgeon, hospital, etc. and then asked how much an open heart operation on an infant would cost. Before I could even respond Bill said, “Whatever Tyler’s heart surgery costs I/the firm will pay for everything.”



Needless to say, I was quite flabbergasted and surprised to be at a job interview, spending the great majority of the interview with one of the country’s best investors whose singular focus was on our family and in particular on my son’s open heart surgery.



Bill and the firm did pay for everything regarding Tyler’s open heart surgery; one would expect no less——Bill lived by his word. Tyler’s surgery at the tender age of 10 months was a complete success. Tyler is now approaching his 20th birthday and is currently in the United States Army serving in Korea.



At a talk to the University of Arizona on April 21, 2009, Lountzis said:

Many of you have had the wonderful opportunity to visit with Mr. Warren Buffett in Omaha in November of 2007 as well as just recently this spring of 2009 and many of you have also met Mr. Eller for whom the Business School here at the University of Arizona is named.





So much has been written about Mr. Buffett over the years that provide insights not only into business and investing but on how to live your life. Mr. Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway Annual Reports are wonderfully written and one can gain a solid business education just reading those. In addition, we have in our database hundreds of transcripts from speeches at universities, interviews, etc., that further communicate his special words of wisdom not only on business, but also life, ethics, etc. A few of Mr. Buffett’s lectures are broken into segments and are available on YouTube including the University of North Carolina and University of Florida sessions.





I would like to ask this group when I say Warren Buffett-what do you think of?





Invariably, whenever I ask this the same responses come up: richest man in America, richest man in the world, Forbes 400 List, Friend of Bill Gates, etc.





When I think of Mr. Buffett, many things come to mind——but surprisingly none of those above do. My thoughts are:





1. Integrity as a way of life

2. Do what you love to do with people you trust and admire

3. Make a difference in the lives of others

a. Clients/shareholders

b. Students

c. Others

4. Charitable——give away a large portion of your wealth back to society





Paul Lountzis

(Courtesy of Paul Lountzis)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Paul Lountzis Story



173





A WHO’S WHO SHAREHOLDER LIST


“Be fruitful and multiply” (Genesis 1:28)

Few things make Buffett prouder than knowing the names of the shareholders he has drawn to his unusual enterprise. Berkshire shareholders are a wide-ranging lot, including persons from most every vocation and from all over the country, including yuppies, investment bankers, money managers of all stripes, corporate executives, plus sports and media stars.

Franklin Otis Booth, Jr., cousin of the Los Angeles Chandler family and great-grandson of Times Mirror Co. founder Harrison Gray Otis, was a longtime shareholder. Booth, who died of Lou Gehrig’s disease in 2008 at age 84, had 18,000 A shares (Forbes, October 22, 1998). Booth entered CalTech at 16 and left with an engineering degree before earning a Stanford MBA. He had a home in Santa Barbara, California, near Charles Munger’s. (Booth almost had as much Berkshire stock as Munger.) Both homes overlook the Pacific Ocean. The two men met in the 1960s during a small real estate deal and remained friends until Booth’s death (Forbes, October 11, 1999). Booth married Lynn Hirsch, widow of equestrian Clement Hirsch. Her wedding ring was bought at a Borsheims jewelry store in Omaha (Forbes, September 30, 2002).

In 1963, Munger told Booth about Buffett. Booth (whose Bel Air home was next to Disney’s Michael Eisner’s) flew to Omaha to meet the largely unknown Buffett. They stayed up until midnight talking about investments (Forbes, October 12, 1998). Shortly afterwards, Booth invested $1 million. That stake has blossomed into a $2 billion fortune, even after Booth sold off a bit for living expenses, other investments, and charity. He flew his own Lear jet and owned Otis Orchards, one of the biggest independent orange growers in California. His 9,000 acres produce about 2.4 million cartons with about 211 million oranges a year. Otis Orchards also owns two citrus packing houses and a cattle farm.

In 1977, Booth gave the Museum of Natural History in Los Angeles about 6,000 shares of Diversified Retailing, then worth $350,000. He told the museum not to sell the stock. Later, Diversified was bought by Berkshire. The Booth endowment, downsized only by small sales for the museum’s budget, is now worth $80 million (Forbes, October 12, 1998). Booth had served on the board of the well-regarded Clipper Fund since 1984.

Archie MacAllaster, the chairman of the New York investment firm of MacAllaster Pitfield Mackay, who died at 82 on September 24, 2011, was a Berkshire shareholder and Buffett fan and known for his commentary in Barron’s roundtables of notable investors. Bloomberg News (September 30, 2011) reported that MacAllaster’s son David said his father was so impressed on meeting Buffett in about 1960 that he immediately bought 12,000 shares of Berkshire for a fund he was running, a stake that today would be worth more than $1 billion. But about a year later the elder MacAllaster concluded that running a mutual fund and a brokerage firm created conflicts so he turned his fund over to a new manager who promptly sold the 12,000 shares of Berkshire.

To continue name dropping the following biggies have Berkshire in their portfolios: The Washington Post Company; former U.S. Senator Bob Kerrey, (D-NE); Coca-Cola’s former president Don Keough; former General Re CEO Ron Ferguson; former Cap Cities’ executives Tom Murphy and Daniel Burke; GEICO’s William Snyder, Tony Nicely, and Lou Simpson; USAir’s former chairman Ed Colodny; Sequoia Fund’s late Bill Ruane; First Manhattan’s Sandy Gottesman; Wells Fargo’s Paul Hazen; PS Group’s Rick Guerin; Wall Street’s Mario Gabelli; children’s author Martha Tolles, wife of the late Roy Tolles of the Munger, Tolles & Olson law firm in Los Angeles; the late Ann Landers; and investment banker John Loomis and his wife, Fortune’s Carol Loomis.

Stewart Horejsi of Paradise Valley, Arizona, is a major shareholder with 5,800 A shares. Edwin Pope, the longtime sports editor of the Miami Herald, is also a shareholder. Ted Koppel, ABC’s retired Nightline host, is a shareholder, as is actress Debbie Reynolds.

Other shareholders include Dr. and Mrs. John Houbolt. John Houbolt was a NASA engineer who helped do the math that allowed the U.S. to land on the moon in the 1969 Apollo mission. A friend of the Houbolts, Berkshire shareholder Marlin Stockwell of New Port Richey, Florida, says, “I was in computer simulation years ago. I used to program missiles by computer. We also did simulations of the Apollo spacecraft so I know something of what he [John Houbolt] was doing.”

Former Dallas Cowboys quarterback Roger Staubach is a Berkshire shareholder who says, “I am one of the lucky ones who has been able to participate in Warren Buffett’s golf outings.” Staubach, chairman and CEO of The Staubach Company, a real estate firm headquartered in Dallas, shared his admiration of Buffett in this recollection: “Buffett’s success with Berkshire is unmatched and his style is unique which provokes the curiosity of many.

“John Parks in my office is one of the curious. When he heard that I would be traveling to Omaha for one of the golf outings, he said he would die if he could just get to shake hands with Mr. Buffett. I made arrangements for an introduction, but to get there in time, John had to fly to Kansas City and drive a car on up to Omaha to meet Buffett at a lunch.

“He did get to shake Warren’s hand and even got to have his picture taken with him. It was the thrill of John’s life, and topped all the opportunities he has had to meet the various athletes who have been in my office over the years.”

Bill Gates, Sr., the father of Microsoft’s Bill Gates, is a shareholder. Microsoft’s Gates had about a $10 million stake himself in Berkshire as of 1997 (Time, January 13, 1997). Former General Dynamics Chairman William Anders and Outstanding Investor Digest Publisher Henry Emerson are also shareholders.

Frank Kurtz, the Olympic diving medalist, aviation pioneer, and World War II combat hero, was a Berkshire shareholder when he died at 85 in 1996. His daughter, actress Swoosie, is named after The Swoose, a jury-rigged aircraft Kurtz fashioned out of parts salvaged from planes destroyed in the Philippines in World War II. The plane became a symbol of American determination in the war.

Bridge champion Sharon Osberg is a Berkshire shareholder. “In November 1993, when I met Warren, he invited me to the annual meeting. I was very excited, but didn’t feel like I would belong without being a shareholder so I bought a share at $16,000.”

Benjamin Graham, Jr., is also a shareholder, as is Gifford Combs, a noted money manager in Los Angeles. Tom Russo, a partner in Gardner Investments in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, is another shareholder. Teenager Sarah Park, of Tulsa, Oklahoma, who scored a perfect 1600 on her SATs, has one share of Berkshire’s Class A stock.

Bruce Wilhelm, a 1976 Olympics silver medalist weightlifter known for Wide World of Sports appearances, has been a shareholder since 1992. In his competitive days, Wilhelm weighed 357 pounds. Maybe he’s really Berkshire’s largest shareholder.

Former Federal Communications Commission Chairman Newton “Television-Is-a-Vast-Wasteland” Minow and Voice of America’s Geoffrey Cowan, author of The People v. Clarence Darrow, are shareholders. Chicago billionaire Lester Crown is another.

Noted investment expert and writer Charles D. Ellis, managing director of Greenwich Associates, and Paul Samuelson, an MIT 1970 Nobel Prize–winning professor and author, are significant shareholders. Richard Russell, author of Dow Theory Letters, has been a shareholder since the 1960s. Louis Lowenstein, a professor of law at Columbia University, who wrote What’s Wrong with Wall Street, is a shareholder, as is his son, Roger Lowenstein, the former reporter for The Wall Street Journal who wrote Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist. Another is Morgan Stanley’s Byron Wien.

Also on the list is Agnes Nixon, creator of All My Children, the ABC-TV soap opera on which Buffett made a guest appearance.

William Orr, husband of former governor of Nebraska Kay Orr and author of First Gentleman’s Cookbook (Buffett supplied his Dusty Sundae recipe), is a Berkshire shareholder. As is Ruth Owades, founder of Calyx & Corolla, which sells fresh flowers by catalog. Her company’s biggest investor is Cap Cities, now Disney, which made it indirectly a Berkshire business until the Disney stake was sold.

Investor Fred Stanback is a longtime Berkshire shareholder, as was his nephew George W. Brumley III. Brumley and his family were killed in a plane crash in Kenya in 2003. (See the George Brumley chapter.) Brumley and David Carr were the founders of Oak Value Capital Management Inc. of Durham, North Carolina, which holds Berkshire shares as a core investment.

Rita Ricardo-Campbell, the first woman board member of Gillette and author of Resisting Hostile Takeovers: The Case of Gillette, says in her book that she owns stock in Berkshire.

Another Berkshire shareholder is former Miami Dolphins head coach Don Shula. “Yes, I’m a shareholder,” Shula said in the early 1990s. “I had heard about Warren Buffett, and a couple of years ago, John Loomis of First Manhattan, who handles my finances, arranged for me to meet him. I was on my way to a league meeting in Dallas, and I stopped off in Omaha,” recalled Shula.

“We were supposed to have dinner, but my plane was late so we had breakfast the next morning,” he said. “It was at the Red Lion.” Over shared eggs, Shula recalled that Buffett interspersed much of his conversation with sports references.

“I mostly enjoyed his anecdotes. He knows a lot about football. He knew even more about baseball. He was interested in our accomplishments. Of course, he’s a big University of Nebraska fan,” the coach said.

“After breakfast he took us over and showed us his office [Shula agreed that the description of throw rugs and linoleum is not far off the mark] and to the Nebraska Furniture Mart.

“I enjoyed it. I came away from meeting him thinking that his message is simplicity. What he says helps you in your own profession, in your own life. You can take what he says and apply it to your own profession,” he said, agreeing that blocking and tackling—the kind of message Buffett delivers, should always be kept in mind, even at the Miami Dolphins level.

“I think Berkshire is as solid as ever. It’s been down lately, but I remain a shareholder. … I’m pleased with the investment.”

Shula, a savvy investor, admits to keeping a pretty close eye on the stock market. “I don’t live or die over it,” he said with the tone of voice of a man who might say the same thing about the outcome of a Super Bowl involving the Miami Dolphins.

Oakland A’s baseball general manager Billy Beane, a key figure in Michael Lewis’ Moneyball, came across as a value investor for buying one of the cheap baseball players who then wound up delivering real value to the team. Beane often took less expensive players who lacked the pure athleticism of higher paid players but often added value with such skills as drawing walks more and striking out less than other players. Beane has said the person who has influenced him the most is Buffett: “I read Buffett books not for investing, but for my own business” (The Wall Street Journal, November 10, 2003).

Another shareholder, a book in himself, is Patrick Byrne, son of Jack Byrne, the former head of GEICO. After a year’s stay in a hospital and three years battling cancer, Patrick Byrne recovered to become a prize fighter. He also earned a doctorate from Stanford University and wrote a 700-page thesis about the lot human beings are born into, whether rich or poor, black or white. (Harvard’s John Rawls has written in more academic terms of “original position.” At extensive annual meeting discussions, Buffett called this the “ovarian lottery.”)

Another Berkshire shareholder, Rabbi Myer Kripke of Omaha, became one of the richest men of the cloth in history. He and his wife, Dorothy—who he met at the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York City—moved to Omaha in 1946 to take over the pulpit of Beth El Synagogue. A chance meeting in the 1950s led to a friendship with Buffett. It turns out Susie Buffett liked the books that Mrs. Kripke wrote. The two couples often played bridge and celebrated Thanksgiving together. Mrs. Kripke encouraged her husband to invest with Buffett, but Kripke resisted: “Look, I’ll be silly to go up there. He doesn’t want the kind of money we have.” In 1966, however, Kripke showed up at Buffett’s office. Buffett said, “I’ll take whatever you have, and I’ll make money on you!” Kripke said. “And he did. And we did.” The Kripkes invested in the partnership and then kept stock in Berkshire. In 1997, the Kripkes wrote a check for $7 million to the NYC Jewish Theological Seminary (Omaha World-Herald, February 27, 1997).

A possible Berkshire shareholder is Dirk Ziff, who oversees a family publishing fortune of about $4 billion, according to The Wall Street Journal (March 3, 1997). The story said Buffett is Ziff’s role model and that Ziff keeps a collection of Berkshire’s annual reports.

Texas billionaire Sid Bass came to Omaha during the annual meeting weekend in 1999 and had dinner at Gorat’s with Michael Eisner. The table got a 10-minute visit from Warren and Susan Buffett.

Holiday decor impressario Christopher Radko, who has decorated the White House foyer and former Vice President Al Gore’s home, is a friend of Buffett’s daughter, Susie. They met when Radko made an appearance at Borsheims and stayed in touch. Though not a shareholder, he was a guest of Buffett’s at the 1999 annual meeting festivities.

Buffett’s friend and former world bridge champion Bob Hamman attends Berkshire’s annual meeting festivities, sometimes slipping in a game of bridge with Buffett and his pals.

Joe Mansueto, founder of Morningstar, which tracks mutual funds, credits Buffett’s business principles with helping him run his business. Mansueto has been to a Berkshire annual meeting and met Buffett once. He became a Buffett devotee after reading a chapter about Buffett in The Money Masters by John Train.

Soros Fund Management, the investment advisory business founded by billionaire George Soros, said in a report for the second quarter of 1999 that it owned some Berkshire shares. A Bloomberg story (August 18, 1999) said new holdings included about $300 million in insurers, including Aetna, AIG, Cigna, Chubb, and Berkshire.

Guess who was at the 1993 Berkshire annual meeting? Forrest Mars, Jr., of the candy company Mars, Inc. (M&M’s, Snickers, Milky Way, etc.), then the sixth-largest, privately held company in the U.S. Mars had sales of nearly $21 billion in 2006—nearly twice Hershey’s sales. Berkshire shareholder Mark Holloway of Portland, Oregon, recalls: “The second half of the meeting had only a few hundred people. I was standing at the edge of the stage after the meeting. Forrest Mars Jr., walked by. They exchanged niceties. … Buffett called him Forrest. I believe Mars had others with him.” It turned out that it was Munger who recognized Mars. Buffett and Mars had not met but did exchange pleasantries at that point. Mars then went on to Borsheims.

Mars Jr., left the company in 1999, and Forrest Mars Sr., died in 1999 at the age of 95.

Mark Holloway was featured in a story by The Guardian (May 10, 1999) about Berkshire’s 1999 annual meeting. The feature reads:

Mark Holloway, a burly, gregarious character from Portland, Oregon, is doing very nicely as a result of his interest in Buffett. An investment adviser, Holloway first became fascinated with Buffett in 1970, when he was still an unknown. Most investment advisers would have steered clear because of the unconventional nature of a company which paid no dividends and was run by a bunch of unknowns from Omaha. But the young Holloway was fascinated and, over the years, has acquired more than 20 A shares now worth $1.6 million, as well as hundreds of cheaper B shares.



Just as important, however, he created a cluster of wealth in Portland by advising up to 300 of his clients to buy into Buffett over the last three decades. Holloway tells me privately of one of his clients who had come to him in the 1970s after selling his compressed gas business for $2 million. “I told him to invest most of it in Berkshire Hathaway,” he says. He bought 6,250 shares at between $300 and $500 each. That portfolio would now be worth $450 million.



That client was Stewart Horejsi. (See Stewart Horejsi chapter.)

One foreign shareholder is Prem Watsa, head of Fairfax Financial—sometimes dubbed “Berkshire North”—an insurance company listed on the Toronto Exchange. The company is known as a mini-Berkshire in Canada. Historically, it has had a fast growth rate, lots of float per share, and a literate annual report. Watsa has attended a number of Berkshire annual meetings.

Among Berkshire’s youngest shareholders are Emily and Alison Tilson, daughters of Susan and Whitney Tilson. He is president of Tilson Capital Partners in New York City.

Scott Servais, a catcher for the San Francisco Giants, was reported by Fortune (October 11, 1999) to be a Berkshire shareholder. Former Chicago Cubs slugger Ernie Banks is a Berkshire shareholder and, for extra measure, insures his car with GEICO. Professional golfer Joe Ogilvie is also a shareholder.

Harvey Eisen, chief equity strategist for Travelers Group, is a Berkshire shareholder as is former Morgan Stanley analyst Alice Schroeder.

Was former President Ronald Reagan a Berkshire shareholder? It’s difficult to say but not impossible to believe. Money magazine (July 1999) quotes Donald Regan, the former Merrill Lynch Chairman and Treasury Secretary under Reagan, as saying that in their retirement years Ronald and Nancy Reagan received “some [investment] advice from Warren Buffett.”

Newsweek’s Wall Street Editor Allan Sloan, a Washington Post Co. employee, owns Berkshire in his 401(k) plan.

Former Nebraska Governor Bob Nelson, a Berkshire stockholder, sold $1 million and $5 million positions of his Berkshire stock in early 1999 to help finance his family foundation (Omaha World-Herald, July 19, 2000).

Ben Stein, the Yale lawyer, economist, writer, actor, and game-show host, apparently is a Berkshire shareholder. When he was a columnist for The Wall Street Journal he spent afternoons by the pool in his West Hollywood apartment building which was populated by call girls. A Newsweek (December 6, 1999) profile of the former Nixon speechwriter quotes him as saying: “Aside from a few practicing pimps, nobody knows as many call girls as I do ... I think I put a couple of them in Berkshire Hathaway and they made a lot of money.”

Senator Jay Rockefeller is a Berkshire shareholder, although considering his large net worth, not in a big way. Rockefeller’s 1999 financial disclosure, filed with the Federal Election Commission, shows that he bought between $15,001 and $50,000 worth of Berkshire Class B shares January 8-12, 1999.

A number of the top folks at The Motley Fool are Berkshire shareholders.

Marsha Tate, a teacher in Los Angeles, wrote to Buffett in 1998 before she was a shareholder and received a letter from him inviting her to the annual meeting. “It was the most incredible time of my life,” she said, having bought some stock right after the meeting.

Jim Halperin, head of Heritage Numismatic Auctions in Dallas, the world’s largest coin dealer, has been a Berkshire shareholder since 1995.

Len Rohde, who played football for the San Francisco 49ers and now works for Applebee’s in Mt. View, California, is a Berkshire shareholder.

John Pinto, president of Sintra Capital Corp. in New York City, is a Berkshire shareholder. He is married to Donna de Varona, swimming phenom of the 1960 and 1964 Olympics.

Baseball legend Stan Musial, known to keep his eye on the stock market, is a longtime friend of Buffett’s. He played at the golf tournaments Buffett once hosted. Is he a Berkshire shareholder? Don’t know, but the betting here is he may well be.

Musial has a photo of himself and Buffett taken in Omaha, where Musial has played in Buffett’s golf tournament. Their hands are on a billfold that belongs to Buffett. At the top of the picture, Buffett wrote: “To Stan ‘The Man.’ A hero of mine 50 years ago and still a hero.” Down at the bottom, Buffett added a postscript: “P.S. Help. Send back my wallet” (Rocky Mountain News, June 30, 2003).

When Arnold Schwarzenegger declared he would run for governor of California, he revealed holdings described as “resembling” those of his billionaire friend Warren Buffett (The Washington Post, August 13, 2003). Former Nebraska football coach Tom Osborne was once a Berkshire shareholder, but as a Congressman, his investments are handled by a third party (Sioux City Journal, March 9, 2004).

Buffett’s unofficial distant cousin, singer Jimmy Buffett, has been a shareholder since the early 1980s. In the company movie made for the annual meeting in 2003, Jimmy Buffett sang a ditty: “I bought my Berkshire way back when it was cheap, And now I do nothing but keep it.”

Billionaire Eddie Lampert, head of Greenwich-based ESL Investments Inc., a large shareholder in Kmart and Sears, is a longtime student and admirer of Buffett. Lampert once worked for former Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin while Rubin was still at Goldman Sachs.

ASIA CARRERA—PORN STAR SHAREHOLDER

At least one Berkshire shareholder is a full-fledged porn star. It’s Asia Carrera who operates a Web site, http://www.asiacarrera.com, where her bio includes such achievements as National Merit Scholar and a score of 1440 on her SATs. She adds, “Yes, I am a member of Mensa, the society for high I.Q. nerds.”

Born in New York City and raised in New Jersey, the former state spelling champ played classical piano at Carnegie Hall as a teenager.

What does this gifted woman have to say about Buffett?

My Idol—Warren Buffett! (sigh). … Warren is the legendary financial genius behind the most expensive stock in the world, Berkshire Hathaway. He was the richest man in America before Bill What’s-His-Name and the Silicon Valley geeks took over, yet he’s always remained a modest and down-to-earth kinda guy. For years, I invested only in mutual funds, but finally I gathered the courage to buy some baby Berkshire shares—just in time for the lousiest returns in their 30-year history. Luckily my other idol, ace fund manager Garrett VanWagoner, posted some stellar returns that more than made up for it!



David L. King, a former professional jazz guitarist who went to Harvard Business School and now runs Putnam’s New Value Fund, holds a stake in Berkshire for his fund.

Disney CEO Robert Iger was at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2006.

Media mogul Barry Diller was at the annual meeting in 2007. He and his wife, Diane von Furstenberg, are shareholders.

Reva and David Logan of Chicago are longtime Berkshire shareholders. They gave $35 million for the Reva and David Logan Center for Creative and Performing Arts at the University of Chicago in 2007.

One future shareholder may be Patrick Bailey, 11, of Chicago, who attends Pleasandale Elementary School in LaGrange, Illinois. Patrick picked Buffett for a school report about a famous person. He is a big fan and complained when he had to go to bed on a school night before CNBC’s The Billionaire Next Door ended. Patrick hopes to become a shareholder.

Senator Dick Durbin of Illinois is a small Berkshire shareholder. Reports show that in September 2008, as the financial crisis took hold, he sold $115,000 in mutual funds and used some of that money to buy Berkshire shares. He bought $43,562 worth of Berkshire on the same day he sold the mutual funds. Durbin is the Senate’s No. 2 Democrat.

Among the celebrities, and apparent shareholders, who showed up for the annual meeting in 2010 were Glenn Close (Fatal Attraction), George Lucas (Star Wars) and Billie Jean King (tennis).

Candy Spelling, widow of television producer Aaron Spelling (Charlie’s Angels) is a Berkshire shareholder who has met Buffett (CNBC, April 25, 2010). She has been trying to sell her Holmby Hills 5,600-square-foot mansion for $150 million, the most expensive house on the market in the world.

Composer Marvin “The Way We Were” Hamlish has attended Berkshire annual meetings.

Another Berkshire shareholder is Bruce Greenwald, a value maven and a professor at Columbia Business School. Greenwald, who earned a Ph.D. in economics from MIT, is the Robert Heilbrunn professor of asset management at Columbia where Buffett went to business school.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Archie MacAllaster



Roger Staubach in the Good Old Days

(Courtesy of

Roger Staubach)



Ted Koppel

(AP/Wide

World Photos)

Of Permanent Value A Who’s Who Shareholder List



Old Men and the Sea

Billionaire Berkshire shareholder buddies Otis Booth and Charles Munger are decked out in fly fishing gear in mid-August 2000 at a lake retreat in western Colorado. They look like models for cardboard cutouts, such as the famous one used by Buffett at a special Berkshire meeting in 1998.

(Photo by Paul Chesley)



Big Bruce: Buffett’s Would-Be Physical Fitness Advisor

Berkshire shareholder Bruce Wilhelm, Olympic silver medalist in weightlifting in 1976, kids about Buffett: “I believe he’s a genius. The only thing that bothers me is he drinks too many Cokes and he needs to start lifting weights and hitting the treadmill.” Recently Buffett has been hitting the treadmill.

(Photo courtesy of

Bruce Wilhelm)

A Who’s Who Shareholder List The Story of Warren Buffett



17-0 in 1972

Former Miami Dolphins Coach Don Shula says, “You can take what Buffett says and apply it to your own profession.” In Alabama, Shula is known as the father of former Alabama Coach Mike Shula.

(AP/Wide

World Photos)



Billy Beane is a

Buffett Fan

Of Permanent Value A Who’s Who Shareholder List



Therefore …

Billionaire investor George Soros makes Greenspan’s explanations sound simple.

A Who’s Who Shareholder List The Story of Warren Buffett



Harvey Eisen

(Photo courtesy of Sharon Sommerhalder)



Senator Jay Rockefeller

Ronald Reagan’s Autobiography



(Photo by Mary Porter)



Just Say Yes, Ronnie.

Nancy Reagan watches as her husband Ronald Reagan takes the oath of office on January 20, 1981.

(AP Photo)



Marsha Tate

(Photo by

Lisa Nichols)

An Above Average Family

John Pinto and Donna deVarona are pictured with their children, John-David and Joanna. The big, old turtle is not a shareholder.



(Photo courtesy of John Pinto)

Stan Musial

by Stan Musial



(Photo by Mary Porter)



(AP/World

Wide Photo))

Stan the Man

Stan Musial, outfielder for the St. Louis Cardinals, is seen in this March 6, 1948 photo, during spring training in St. Petersburg, Florida.



Len Rohde

(Photo by

Arlene Pettise)

Of Permanent Value A Who’s Who Shareholder List



(AP/Wide

World Photos)

Warren in Disguise

Jimmy “I-Bought-My-Berkshire-Way-Back” Buffett specializes in entertainment rather than in investments.



Buffett’s Bridge Student

U.S. Rep. Tom Petri of Wisconsin owns between $1 million and $5 million worth of Berkshire stock. Petri got to know Buffett through a bridge game years ago on Capitol Hill when four businessmen squared off against four members of Congress.Petri recalled, “He kept leaning over and saying, ‘I don’t want to be impolite, but maybe you should do this’” (Green Bay Press-Gazette, June 17, 2004).



Disney CEO

Robert Iger



Patrick Bailey

(Photo by Julie Bailey)



Women of the Internet

Asia Carrera stands tall in the center.



Barry Diller

A Who’s Who Shareholder List The Story of Warren Buffett



Senator Dick Durbin



Bruce Greenwald



Marvin Hamlish



Whitney Tilson and His Family

Whitney Tilson manages money for T2 Partners in New York. He is a long-time Berkshire shareholder and a frequent commentator for CNBC about Berkshire. This picture near Lake Sunapee, New Hampshire, is Whitney, his wife Susan, his three daughters (from oldest to youngest, Alison, Emily, and Katharine—“spelled like Katharine Graham,” Whitney notes), and “Rosie the wonder dog.”

(Photo courtesy of Whitney Tilson)

Of Permanent Value A Who’s Who Shareholder List



174





CAROL LOOMIS


Carol Loomis is a “long-termer.” For more than 50 years, the award-winning journalist has worked for Fortune magazine. A longtime friend of Buffett, she also happens to have many years under her belt as a Berkshire shareholder.

Loomis, a native of Cole Camp, Missouri, attended Drury College and the University of Missouri; the latter is where she received a Bachelor of Journalism. After school, Loomis worked for Maytag, writing for its magazine. It was a good job but not her dream job. She realized her ambition was to write for a national magazine in New York, although, at that time, women journalists were rare.

Loomis started at Fortune in 1954 as a researcher and eventually became a reporter known for in-depth stories. One such story entitled “Lies, Damned Lies, and Managed Earnings” (August 2, 1999) is now standard reading for accounting students. She has written extensively about accounting, insurance, and derivatives.

Loomis is also known for her profiles of some prominent businesspersons, including Buffett, Sandy Weill, and Robert Rubin, former Secretary of Treasury. One of her most outstanding stories for Fortune was “Everything in History Was Against Them” (April 13, 1998), an account of five Holocaust survivors who came to America and became successful businessmen.

In 1976, U.S. Secretary of the Treasury William Simon appointed Loomis to the Advisory Committee on Federal Consolidated Financial Statements. In 1980, she served as one of six panelists who questioned presidential candidates Ronald Reagan and John Anderson in a televised debate sponsored by the League of Women Voters.

Loomis has won four lifetime achievement awards: the Gerald M. Loeb Lifetime Achievement Award in 1993, a Women’s Economic Round Table award in 2000, Time Inc.’s Henry R. Luce Award in 2001, and the Society of American Business Editors and Writers Distinguished Achievement Award in 2006.

The Loomis connection with Buffett and Berkshire began in 1965, when Carol Loomis’ husband, John (currently a Wall Street money manager with First Manhattan Co. in New York, but back then an institutional salesman for Faulkner, Dawkins, and Sullivan), heard about a curious investor in Omaha. “I read his name in Business Week,” recalled John Loomis.

John Loomis wrote Buffett a letter and then had lunch with him in Omaha. Loomis reported back to his wife: “I think I just met the smartest investor in the country.”

John Loomis has said, “I would never sell a share of Berkshire.”

Carol Loomis, who bought her Berkshire shares for under $200 in the 1960s, met Buffett in 1966 in New York.

Loomis began helping Buffett edit the Berkshire Annual Report in 1977. The story is that Loomis and Buffett have about one fuss a year over the editing. Loomis recalled a time when in Buffett’s writing of the annual report, he referred to Mark Twain as Mark, in “If Mark were alive today.” Nobody would have realized he was talking about Mark Twain. After several edits, Buffett still would not take to heart Loomis’ comment that no one refers to that writer as Mark. Finally, Loomis got a call from Buffett’s assistant saying, “Warren says he still prefers Mark but he’s afraid you’d throw up on the page so he changed it.”

Each year that Loomis has helped with the editing of Berkshire’s annual report, Buffett has shown his appreciation by giving her a charm for a bracelet—a bracelet that is getting quite heavy these days.

The friendship has grown and endured through the years with sharing of life stories, friends, and professional respect.

According to stories by Loomis, now of Larchmont, New York, Buffett as a youngster virtually memorized a book called A Thousand Ways to Make $1,000, fantasizing in particular about penny-weighing machines. He pictured himself starting with a single machine pyramiding his take into thousands more.

Through John and Carol Loomis, Buffett met their friend actress Glenn Close. Close attended some activities of the 2009 Berkshire annual meeting weekend.

In a demonstration of trust and respect, Buffett turned to Loomis to make his dramatic announcement that he planned to give the bulk of his fortune to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. The move was such a surprise that he told Carol to “brace yourself,” before telling her the details on June 23, 2006, for publication in Fortune.

Again Loomis got Buffett’s nod when she was one of three reporters allowed to ask questions at the annual meeting in 2009. She, CNBC’s Becky Quick, and Andrew Ross Sorkin of The New York Times compiled questions from shareholders—questions that related directly to Berkshire’s businesses.



Carol and John Loomis

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Buffett and Carol Loomis in Early 1993



Weighed Down

Carol Loomis at the Berkshire annual meeting in 2009 is weighed down by the charms on her bracelet.

(Photos by LaVerne Ramsey)

Of Permanent Value Carol Loomis



175





RICHARD HOE


Berkshire shareholder Richard Hoe of Tulsa, Oklahoma, is the great-grandson of famed collector Robert Hoe III, who formed a famous book collection.

The elder Hoe loved books and art and was instrumental in starting the Grolier Club of New York (having hosted its initial organizational meeting and having been its first president), which promotes bookmaking as an art. The Metropolitan Museum of Art was founded by him and a handful of other arts-minded New Yorkers at a meeting in Hoe’s Fifth Avenue home.

He also produced newspaper printing press equipment known for a variety of innovative printing methods. One such device was the Hoe letterpress ink pump, a patented automated ink flow computer that could make finite adjustments in the metering of ink. He succeeded Richard March Hoe (the current Richard Hoe’s namesake) as head of the Hoe firm which continued its prominence among printing-press makers.

Although he also collected silver, miniatures, and art objects, Robert gathered a literary collection worth millions. The Hoe collection, regarded as the finest private book collection of the time, was auctioned off in 1911 and 1912. Former railroad magnate Henry Huntington bought more than a fourth of the Hoe collection, including Caxton’s first edition of Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales (1477). But no sale caused more publicity than Hoe’s Gutenberg Bible that Huntington bought for an unprecedented $50,000. People thought Huntington was nuts to pay such a high price. “‘Absurd’ Prices at the Hoe Sale,” a headline in The New York Times read. The sale was reported in newspapers around the world. Huntington went on to found the Huntington Library in San Marino, California, which has long displayed the Gutenberg Bible. Only 48 copies of the Gutenberg Bible survive, and the estimated worth of each book averages around $50 million.

A newspaper reporter covering the event wrote:

When No. 229, the Gutenberg Bible, finally was announced, the crowd of men and women, many of them in evening dress and decollete gowns, sat silent as if in church, nervously fingering their catalogs or the arms of their chairs. Gasps of hysterical laughter came from several of the women collectors as they caught their first glimpse of the most wonderful book in the world.



“How much am I offered for this, the first Bible printed?” came from auctioneer {Daniel R.} Kennedy.



Back in the rear of the gallery a voice murmured, “One hundred dollars.”



The auctioneer frowned and repeated his question. Then came ten thousand dollars. … “Sold for fifty thousand dollars!” he finally said (Chronicles of Genius and Folly, pp. 671–672, Frank E. Comparato, quoting “Old Books That Brought a Million Dollars,” American Printer, June 1911, pp. 444–445).



Hoe should have kept his Gutenberg Bible and left it to the family. If his heirs had sold the bible in the 1960s to invest with Buffett, they would be billionaires.

Richard Hoe of modern times says, “My brothers and sisters and I inherited a few books from the collection when our father, Arthur James ‘Jim’ Hoe, passed away in 2002. I believe the few remaining books have now been sold to collectors. I think I may have a photocopy of the original sales catalog.”

Hoe’s father also was multitalented. He restored Duesenbergs, luxury cars, and high-quality roadsters; taught blind people to ski; and raced sports cars. He retired from restoring Duesenbergs when he was 85. He lived to be 89.

Richard Hoe, a Berkshire stockholder since 2001, wrote the foreword for Chronicles of Genius and Folly by Frank Comparato, a book about the Hoe family and the R. Hoe & Company printing press firm. His foreword begins: “During my brief years at R. Hoe & Company—like many of the workforce of almost two thousand who were sons and daughters of past employees—I had numerous occasions to ponder the history of the company. Its greatest captain of industry (my great grandfather, Robert Hoe III) literally revolutionalized the world of printing, but for all his genius he was not particularly democratic. When two workers had proudly painted his private apartment at the shop, they approached him to ask how he liked the job; they were fired for daring to address him.” Richard Hoe says he was told by a nephew of one of the men that ultimately they were rehired, with or without Robert Hoe’s knowledge. Another employee was dismissed for sharing a ride with him in the company elevator.

Today Richard Hoe says: “I have been writing since I was a kid. I ran away from home at 17 and joined the Navy, where I became—you guessed it—a journalist. While I’ve been active at financial planning including pensions and benefits since 1968, I’ve been writing for pay for even more years, and have been scribbling “The Investment Edge,” a column for investment professionals in a national magazine for about 10 years. … I do a little teaching about investing, too, and am a part-time adjunct professor at the California Institute of Finance, a graduate school at California Lutheran University offering an MBA in financial planning. As you may guess, I love investing. My customers mostly have shorter time frames than Buffett, requiring a variety of securities. Nonetheless, Berkshire stock often makes up about 4% of customer portfolios, and a higher percentage of my wife Lynne’s and my own.

“In the 1980s, I was no better nor worse than any other financial advisor. In about 1991, I engaged my brain and asked myself this question: ‘What if you really focused on becoming good at designing portfolios?’ It changed my life, since I discovered that I really like portfolio work. Why couldn’t I have figured that out when I was 30?”



Robert Hoe III

Famous Book Collector

(Courtesy of the Grolier Club)



Richard Hoe

The great-grandson of Robert Hoe III, Richard is a writer rather than a book collector.

(Photo by S. Brooke Hoe)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Chronicles of Genius and Folly

tells of the Hoe family printing press business. This photo is of the back cover of the book.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Richard Hoe



A Duesenberg

This Duesenberg displayed at the Berkshire annual meeting in 2009 was made especially for Mae West, who at the last minute could not take the delivery. Instead, it went to Mrs. Forrest Mars, maven of the M&M candy family. Berkshire investee M&M owns Wrigley. This car is now owned by auto collector Paul Andrews, CEO of Berkshire’s TTI electronic parts firm. Andrews bought the car in an auction several years ago. Jim Hoe worked on Duesenbergs made for Gary Cooper, Clark Gable, and IBM’s Tom Watson.

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)



176





THE BILL TILLEY STORY


Fifth-generation Californian Bill Tilley has been a Berkshire shareholder for more than 25 years and is chairman and CEO of Jacmar Companies, a string of food distributors based in Alhambra, California.

Tilley recently embarked on a bold new venture, one in which employees, managers, franchises, and executives share ownership of one of America’s favorite restaurant groups. Tilley and Jacmar Cos. recently acquired the 50-year-old Shakey’s pizza parlor chain, and Tilley now heads the exciting revitalization of the well-known brand “Shakey’s USA.”

Tilley recruited a group of talented men and women to oversee Shakey’s business development in which employee ownership is an essential component. Tilley’s advisory board is made up of some of the most respected business leaders and restaurateurs in the country. The Board of Legends, as the company calls this distinguished team, holds the highest industry standards and provides strategic direction. It also includes experienced investment bankers from Stephens Inc., the Little Rock, Arkansas, company that raised initial capital for Sam Walton when he founded Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.

They’re now part of a proud legacy that dates back to 1954, when Sherwood “Shakey” Johnson pooled $3,400 with his college friend Ed Plummer to open a pizza parlor in a remodeled grocery store near the university campus in Sacramento, California. The parlor opened on a Friday evening with $1.85 in the till and the two owners and their friends waiting tables. As the ovens were not complete, only beer was sold the first weekend. Plummer served while Johnson played the piano.

The partners took their beer money on Monday and bought pizza products. By the afternoon, they were selling pizzas. Ten days later they had 14 employees, and a month later they added Dixieland jazz performances, which became a hallmark of the Shakey’s experience for decades.

Two years later Johnson and Plummer opened a second restaurant in Portland, Oregon. In 1957, Shakey’s became one of the first food service companies to franchise. By the time both founders retired in 1968, there were 325 stores in the chain. Ownership changed a few times through the years. Then in 1989, Inno-Pacific took over. The Singapore-based company was not able to provide adequate leadership at a time of rapid growth in the quick-service restaurant business and a number of Shakey’s franchises failed.

Now Tilley and his partners have taken the lead at the storied chain, which still enjoys its strong heritage, a loyal customer base, and considerable opportunity for growth. There are more than 250 Shakey’s restaurants worldwide, including 64 in the United States.

Shakey’s USA officially started business on January 1, 2005, and can deservedly boast that it is a debt-free company. It is owned by its employees and investors who work together to create a strong national brand. Some have been closely associated with Shakey’s from the beginning, others are new to the company.

All possess the same goal of developing a successful enterprise serving a growing customer base throughout the country. The Shakey’s brand is universally recognized. During its 50-year history more than $500 million has been spent on advertising and marketing. The company plans to expand and improve the Shakey’s concept, to capitalize on its name, revitalizing the brand within the family dining segment. The new Shakey’s USA will provide a commitment to quality, introducing healthier food such as fire-baked rotisserie chicken.

Shakey’s enjoys double-digit growth in same-store sales. One Shakey’s, which opened in the second quarter of 2008 in Auburn, Alabama, posted the highest opening volume for a restaurant in the company’s history. Tilley credits the turnaround in part to Shakey’s return to using the original pizza dough recipe developed in the 1950s.

The Shakey’s venture is the latest chapter in Tilley’s long career as a successful entrepreneur, one which led him to the conclusion that education is critical. Tilley believes that our education system doesn’t do nearly enough to teach young people how to understand and accumulate wealth.

“I can’t think of any problems that have been solved by poverty,” said Tilley. “Wealth has brought many advances.” He wonders why there is no American college or university that has a dedicated curriculum to study the history of our nation’s wealth.

“Our nation’s form of democracy is a one-of-a-kind experiment now

more than 220 years old. Where else in the world is free enterprise and the entrepreneurial spirit so integrated in the foundation of society? Our Founding Fathers left us a great legacy that others have built on through the years. What will our young people do to make their legacy even greater for future generations?”

Tilley is in discussions about how to create a curriculum to study the history and principles of America’s wealth at his alma mater, the University of Southern California. He has arranged for 300 stereographs by famed sports artist LeRoy Neiman and signed artists proofs by 45 other artists to be donated with the intent of raising millions of dollars for such a program. Part of the curriculum would be analysis of the principles so successfully employed by Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger.

“Unlike John D. Rockefeller, Henry Ford, or Bill Gates, these two men never invented anything or discovered anything,” Tilley said. “But they have inspired others who are their partners to achievements of extraordinary results.”

Tilley studied accounting at USC as an undergraduate and went on to earn master’s degrees in accounting and business administration. He considers education the key to his success, but his business career started long before college. At the age of five, Tilley would awake before dawn and, dragging a gunny sack behind him, hunt for soda pop bottles in the sand near his grandfather’s home in Seal Beach.

On the day he collected enough bottles to earn $1, he knew he had found his calling as an entrepreneur. In high school Tilley formed a business to wash and polish cars. Soon he was supervising 15 other teenagers who cleaned police, fire, and other government-agency vehicles. With his earnings Tilley bought his first rental property at age 15.

While a student at USC in 1959, Tilley distributed stereo systems and televisions to fraternity houses and to fraternity members who were establishing their own residences.

After completing his graduate studies in 1963, Tilley began teaching accounting at USC. During that time he founded a successful accounting firm, Tilley & Roth, which eventually became part of KPMG. He moved into the restaurant supply business when he formed Jacmar Enterprises and opened a Shakey’s Pizza franchise in Hollywood in 1964. He later expanded to other locations. In 1967, Tilley founded Jacmar Builders, the real estate arm of Jacmar which is an expansion of a company left to him by his father, Jack, and his godfather, Mark Boyar. The pair built housing in the Los Angeles area after World War II for returning GIs. At the 1960 Democratic convention in Los Angeles, Boyar had the privilege of ceremonially nominating John F. Kennedy for president.

Today, Tilley’s Jacmar Companies employs more than 5,000 people and owns several restaurants and other interests. Jacmar’s operating units include restaurants, wholesale food services distributions, equity investments, and real estate management. Tilley’s line of successes includes investments in such brands as Good Earth, Sizzler, Long John Silver’s, Taco Bell, Lone Star Steakhouse, and BJ’s Restaurants Inc. Since Jacmar’s early 2000 investment in BJ’s, based in Huntington Beach, California, the value of that young company has multiplied 45 times. BJ’s is evolving into a national chain, with restaurants in 13 states. Plans call for about 15 restaurants to open each year in an additional three or four states.

During the past 32 years, the Jacmar Companies have earned an average annual return on after-tax equity of 22%. Between 1980 and 2007, Jacmar returned an additional 14.5% compounded annual return on company-managed real estate partnerships.

Jacmar’s majority-owned sister company, Pacific Ventures Ltd., formed in 1973, developed restaurant and food service distribution companies in partnership with San Miguel Corporation of the Philippines, Kirin Brewery Ltd., and Mitsubishi Cos. of Japan. Tilley was president and CEO of International Family Food Service Inc. (IFFSI), which developed more than 200 restaurants overseas in the Philippines, Malaysia, Singapore, Japan, and Taiwan. Operating such restaurants as Taco Bell, Shakey’s, and Sizzler, the business allowed Jacmar to extend its food service distribution channel throughout Southeast Asia.

Tilley had been an early investor in Taco Bell, and IFFSI built the first Taco Bell outside the U.S. in Guam. By the late 1970s, Tilley was the third-largest shareholder of Taco Bell Inc., and he was instrumental in the Taco Bell sale to Pepsico Inc. in 1978.

Tilley has shared his knowledge with business students as a lecturer at Stanford University’s Graduate School of Business and Harvard Business School. For the past 40 years, he has also continued to teach classes at USC and the University of California at Los Angeles. The Tilley Family Foundation provides tuition grants to deserving students who wish to study entrepreneurship.

When Tilley was 15, he read The Age of the Moguls by Stewart Holbrook which tells of wealth accumulated by some of the most famous tycoons in American history: Vanderbilt, Carnegie, Rockefeller, Ford, Harrison, Du Pont, Morgan and Hearst, men in the tradition of Horatio Alger.

That book, said Tilley, really set him to thinking about wealth accumulation and how it is done, fantazing about their successes and his.

And he says he’s been very lucky to live in modern America, more so than in the age of the moguls, because even more wealth is being created in the U.S. now.

Tilley, a large shareholder of PepsiCo, owns 200 Berkshire Class A shares and more than 450 B shares in personal, company, and charity accounts, which gives him an interest in Coca-Cola’s success also. His service on the board of the Doheny Eye Institute in Los Angeles introduced Tilley to fellow trustee Nancy Munger. Through his 35-year friendship with the Mungers, Tilley got to know Warren Buffett.

Tilley and his wife, Nadine, have two children. Daughter Nicole works in marketing for a new gourmet restaurant in downtown Los Angeles. Their son, John, a recent USC graduate with a degree in global business, is now attending USC Marshall School for a master’s degree in Real Estate Development.



Stamp Out Poverty

Jacmar’s Bill Tilley hopes to see a university program dedicated to the study of wealth.

(Photo courtesy of Bill Tilley)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Bill Tilley Story



The Age of the Moguls

(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Bill Tilley Story The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Bill Tilley Story



177





STEWART HOREJSI–RAGS-TO-RICHES


Stewart Horejsi (pronounced Horish), a welding supplier who grew up in Salina, Kansas, bought his first batch of Berkshire stock—40 shares at $265 each—in 1980. He continued buying and now owns more than $600 million of Berkshire stock. He has 4,300 class A shares at an average cost of $1,879.21.

Horejsi’s journey of success was launched from his Berkshire springboard. During the past eight years, using Buffett’s teachings, Horejsi has guided the closed-end funds he manages to outperform the S&P 500 and continues to compound his wealth.

In January 2008, Horejsi, always looking for new business opportunities, bought the Alaska Trust Company, a wealth management company based in Anchorage. Alaska Trust is trustee for more than 1,000 trusts with more than $5 billion in trust.

“After extensive research, we became very impressed with the favorable trust and tax laws in Alaska. Given the unprecedented support of the Alaskan legislature and state officials for policies that emphasize asset protection and estate planning, I moved our personal and family trusts from off-shore to Alaska. I thought to myself, this is like a dream come true. Convinced that others can benefit from Alaska’s progressive laws, I acquired the oldest trust company in Alaska,” Horejsi said.

By purchasing the Alaska Trust Company at the age of 70, Horejsi shows that he has no intention of slowing down or retiring. He has achieved his success through setting goals and surpassing expectations. Right now, if you ask Horejsi why he keeps going at the speed he does, he would simply say with a smile on his face, “The funds, and now the Alaska Trust Company, are just too much fun to quit.”

Horejsi’s affinity for Berkshire stock was more than personal. It was his choice for the funds he manages, also.

When he became manager of the Preferred Income Management Fund, he began buying shares that were traded at a double-digit discount to its net asset value. Over a three-year period, he bought his 42% block of the fund. When he took control of that fund, he changed its name to Boulder Total Return Fund (BTF) and pushed the fund to buy more common stocks.

A story in The Wall Street Journal (August 23,1999) asked about his plans and provided the answer to their own question: “Where does Mr. Horejsi plan to invest once he gains control of Preferred [BTF]? You guessed it, right where he started out: in Berkshire Hathaway. ‘Other than that, I’m not sure,’ he said.” The fund owns 690 A shares and 9,200 B shares. Its second biggest position is in Yum brands.

In a letter to shareholders dated April 1, 2000, Horejsi said: “As you may know, I took over as the adviser to a closed-end fund, Boulder Total Return Fund (BTF) August 29. The IRS limits to 25% how much a fund can own in one stock. Fortunately, this dip in Berkshire’s price has allowed us to achieve that 25% level at an average cost of about $56,000.”

The fund occasionally holds its annual meeting in Omaha the day before the Berkshire annual meeting. Boulder’s 2000 Annual Report said, “Because Berkshire is such a large part of our assets, we want our directors to attend the Berkshire meeting so we will be in Omaha anyway.”

BTF rang up the highest total market return of all closed-end funds in 2000, and was almost 10 percentage points higher than the second best, according to Barron’s.

Horejsi’s family is also the largest shareholder of three other closed-end mutual funds. He owns 34% of First Financial Fund and 17% of USLife Income Fund—now Boulder Growth and Income Fund (BIF)—which also invested the legal maximum of 25% in Berkshire. Because Berkshire has grown at a faster rate than the rest of the BTF portfolio, it is now 39% of the funds’ total and 30% of the total BIF portfolio. He gained control of the DNY fund in September of 2007, and is accumulating Berkshire for it on dips in price so he can bring DNY up to the 25% limit.

With his 39% stake in First Financial worth $146 million, he took control of the fund (August 9, 2002). In 2005, First Financial was named by Lipper as the top performing of all closed-end equity funds for the past 5 and 10 years.

Because of the outstanding long-term performance of FF under the guidance of Nick Adams at Wellington Management, Horejsi left the advisory contract with Wellington. “I started to buy FF with the idea of replacing the adviser. But Nick has done such a good job, we wanted to retain him. Its been my experience that most surprises in the investment world are to the down side. But FF was a surprise on the upside. The more I learned about it, the better I liked it, and its been a huge success for us,” Horejsi said.

In 2001, he took over USLife from the Variable Annuity Life Insurance Company (VALIC) and renamed it Boulder Growth & Income (BIF). His dissident movement to take over USLife was an attack on the adviser and on the fund’s trustees. “We are rebuffing not only VALIC, but the people who have been harboring them for all these years.” Horejsi said the fund’s performance had been subpar, while the fund’s management said performance had not been so poor.

What do you think was one of Horejsi’s first acts after the USLife/BIF shareholders approved buying common stock? You guessed it: He put 25% of the fund into Berkshire class A shares.

“The acquisition of all four funds was made possible by borrowing against our Berkshire. So even though Berkshire pays no dividends, it has enabled us to build a fund management business that does pay dividends,” Horejsi said. “Berkshire’s AAA credit rating has allowed us to finance our acquisitions at a very modest premium to the Federal Funds Rate.”

Horejsi’s management contribution to these funds brought about impressive results. At one point in 2001, First Financial was the best-performing of 650 closed-end mutual funds and Boulder Total Return Fund (BTF) was the second; First Financial was up 57%, BTF was up 55%, and the third-place fund was up 42%.

Richard Barr serves on the boards of all funds—First Financial, BTF, BIF, and now DNY—having replaced former Gannett CEO Douglas H. McCorkindale on the First Financial board.

____________________

Horejsi, of Czech descent, grew up in a poor family. Brown Welding Supply in Salina, Kansas, his father’s welding supply business, was sold to Airgas in 1999 for $20 million. Horejsi delivered groceries and later made his way through school, earning a bachelor’s degree in business at the University of Kansas in 1959 and a master’s in money and banking at Indiana University (paid for by a Woodrow Wilson Fellowship) in 1961. He also taught industrial management for a year at the University of Kansas. He then served a short stint in the Army as an enlisted man doing KP duty before returning to the family business as a salesman.

Horejsi took a sabbatical during which time his interests broadened. Something must have happened to him during this time that began to transform his life. “I had worked in the family business, then took a year off and studied. I began with Adam Smith’s Supermoney; then I read The Intelligent Investor, which was the most interesting thing I ever read.” He noted that Buffett has said you either get value investing right away or you never get it. Horejsi said:

I probably owned the smallest of the major independent welding supply businesses, but I ended up the richest of all welding supply distributors in America. I saw a secular, almost linear decline in the profitability of what was a very profitable industry when I got in it. Year after year, the profit margins shrank as the competition increased. Everyone in the industry saw this, but everyone else I know used their ample cash flow to buy more trucks, inventories, stores, etc., which just increased the problem.



Seeing this, I took my cash flow and put it largely in Berkshire. Warren points out over and over that there is nothing wrong with a stagnant profitable business, just don’t put more money in it. One of the big values he brings to the Berkshire portfolio companies is that he routes where the cash flow will go. Few small businessmen have the discipline to do it, but it is a huge decision as to whether to reinvest in the business you know or to find a better one. I found a better one and was very happy I did.”



[In 1980, when 43 years old] I began buying Berkshire. I bought 40 shares at $265 and then 60 shares at $295 and several hundred shares at $330. I’ve bought Berkshire 54 times in my life, and in 15 of 19 years, I calculate the lowest return was 24%. It really didn’t make much difference when I bought, just that I bought. I always bought on dips.



A Coke drinker and See’s candy eater with a fondness for jokes, Horejsi continued buying Berkshire in the 1980s and 1990s. He never sold a single share or used margin in his personal account. He followed Phil Carret’s wisdom about not using margin because it has to be paid back and that can force you to sell at an inconvenient time. A majorly inconvenient time was during the 1999–2000 drop in the stock. Although at the worst point in early 2000, Horejsi had a paper loss of about $250 million, he didn’t sell. Instead, he just hung on for the rebound. Horejsi says he has no intention of selling Berkshire in any event. Paying taxes and finding a better use of his money make it totally out of the question. Even when Buffett is no longer painting the canvas, Horejsi plans to hold his stock.

He thought early on that Blue Chip Stamps was better investment than Berkshire and started buying Blue Chip. Horejsi said once, “Someone asked Warren [at the 1982 meeting] whether Berkshire or Blue Chip was a better investment, and he said Berkshire. But I thought Blue Chip was and kept buying Blue Chip [which merged into Berkshire], and it came out slightly better than Berkshire.”

Guiding all the investment decisions for the mutual funds he controls, Horejsi often starts his study of a stock by looking at a Value Line sheet. “It’s a good first step,” he said.

Horejsi, who has attended most of the Berkshire annual meetings, says his funds can no longer buy Berkshire because 25% of the money is in the stock. But he still buys Berkshire for his own account on occasion. Whatever the stock, he sticks to value precepts, staying wary when Mr. Market gets too excited. “Japan’s stock market is worth 65% less today than it was 10 years ago. There could be a similar chart for NASDAQ 10 years from now. I would not be surprised if it took 10 years for the NASDAQ to make a new high,” he said.

Besides running the Boulder Total Return Fund, and loading up on Berkshire shares personally, Horejsi heads a foundation aimed at helping minorities. Horejsi often flies NetJets to Barbados where he owns a house that once belonged to Claudette Colbert (1935 Academy Award winner for It Happened One Night with Clark Gable). Claudette Colbert bought the lush plantation home after concluding a career of 62 movies. She dubbed her home Bellerive, French for beautiful shore.

During Colbert’s ownership, the house hosted renowned visitors such as Frank Sinatra and Mia Farrow, who honeymooned there in the 1960s, and Ronald and Nancy Reagan, who visited in 1982. Other celebrities visiting were the Averell Harrimans, the William Paleys, and Princess Margaret. Colbert died in 1996 at age 92 after living in the house for 36 years. Since Horejsi bought it, guests have included Wal-Mart chairman Rob Walton; Campbell Soup’s founding family, Bennett Dorrance; Coke CEO Neville Isdell; Simon Cowell from American Idol; composer Andrew Lloyd Weber; British rock star Sir Cliff Richard; and British TV celebrities Cilla Black and Gloria Hunniford.

Hollywood mogul David Geffen considered buying the Colbert house but eventually lost interest. Horejsi picked up Geffen’s offer for $3.7 million and now lives there about half the year. Following a $16-million renovation, Bellerive has been turned into a sort of Taj Mahal of Barbados, featuring a teakwood gazebo, swimming pool, and a long white, coral-stoned terrace along the Caribbean.

“Thanks to the Internet, there’s no disadvantage to being here,” said Horejsi, who spends a good portion of his time in his office at Bellerive. He can also be found out on his Chris Craft launch named HI-ROA. Horejsi said, “HI-ROA is high return on assets, which is the most important thing I’ve learned from Warren. HI-ROE (high return on equity) can be manipulated by the amount of debt. Buffett says you can’t get a higher return on your investment than the underlying business over the long-term.”

In 2005, Horejsi bought the home of hotel heiress Leona “The Queen of Mean” Helmsley in Paradise Valley, Arizona. He tore it down, then replaced it with a new home. He and wife, Ellen, also have a summer home in the mountains of Oregon. Throughout his life, Horejsi has continually set goals; once he reaches a goal, new ones are set. So what is his goal now? “It’s living a happy, stress-free life.”



(Photo by

Celia Sullivan)

Stewart Horejsi

Horejsi, at six-foot-four, is one of Berkshire’s largest shareholders. He bought early on dips and has never sold a share.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Stewart Horejsi–Rags-to-Riches



Two Dancers; One Baseball Player

Lisa Murphy, Michael Flatley, and Buffett made up a rare combination of looks, athletic ability, and brains at Berkshire Annual Meeting festivities in 2002.

(Photo by Frank Booker)



Flatley

Irish-American folk dancer Michael Flatley performs tap dance steps during a performance of Lord of the Dance.

(AP/Wide World Photos)

Stewart Horejsi–Rags-to-Riches The Story of Warren Buffett



Bellerive

Horejsi purchased Bellerive, a mansion in Barbados that was once owned by actress Claudette Colbert.

(Photo courtesy of Glade Christensen)



The View

Bellerive’s pool, teakwood gazebo, and coral stone terrace offer a

closeup view of the Caribbean.

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

Of Permanent Value Stewart Horejsi–Rags-to-Riches



Horejsi’s Chris Craft—the HI-ROA



178





OVARIAN LOTTERY WINNERS


The members of the Lawrence Teder family of Lafayette, Indiana, are winners of what Buffett has called the “ovarian lottery” in life.

Lawrence “Admiral” Teder—not actually an admiral, but an officer aboard submarines in the U.S. Navy in World War II—has owned Berkshire stock for more than 20 years.

For many years, Lawrence Teder was a broker with Thurston, Springer, Miller, Herd & Titak in Indianapolis.

Newborns into the Teder family receive Berkshire stock 10 days after their births and more later in life. Thus, all children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren are Berkshire shareholders and ovarian lottery winners.

The two standards in the Teder family are (1) Berkshire stock and (2) attendance at Purdue University. Any family member of college age, including spouses, attends that university.

One adult granddaughter, Amanda Teder wrote a tribute to her grandfather’s Navy service in World War II. She recounts how Pearl Harbor was a defining moment not only for the country but also for her grandfather. Lawrence Teder served on the USS Guardfish, a submarine responsible for sinking 52 Japanese ships. It was credited with the longest successful torpedo shot of the war. It traveled 7,500 yards over seven minutes and 20 seconds and blew up a Japanese ship hiding in port. Teder earned a silver star as an enlisted man and later was promoted to a commissioned officer. He died in 2008.



(Photos by Fred Buts)

Teder Family Photo

On the back row, grandchildren standing left to right are Elizabeth Lambeck, Claire Thompson, and Rachael Regich, who is holding great-grandson Thomas Regich. On the middle row, on both sides of Lawrence Teder, great-grandchildren standing left to right are Luke Lambeck, Peter Regich, Isaac Lambeck, and Joseph Regich. Front row on floor are great-grandchildren Ella Thompson and Aaron Lambeck.



“The Admiral”

Lawrence Teder holds Berkshire stock.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Bull’s-Eye

These photos were taken in the conning tower as Teder looked through the periscope with the captain. The pictures show two large enemy freighters breaking up after being torpedoed by the USS Guardfish in 1943.





Cover of

Lawrence Teder Book

The World War II photo is of the USS Guardfish.

(Photo by Mary Porter)



Ovarian Lottery Winner

Granddaughter and author Amanda Teder is a Berkshire shareholder and a Purdue

graduate.

(Photos from the

Amanda Teder write-up)

Of Permanent Value Ovarian Lottery Winners



179





OIL CHECK


Along the way, a number of people have sold or been forced to sell Berkshire. Many have given to charity; others have helped their children. Even so, selling Berkshire usually turns out to be a big mistake.

Forbes (October 12, 1998) reported on some sellers and some regretters:

Marshall Weinberg, a Columbia classmate of Buffett’s who became a stockbroker at Gruntal & Co., sold some stock to make contributions to various causes. William (Buddy) Fox left Wall Street and cashed in his Berkshire stock to move to Australia.



Buffett’s close associate Tom Knapp was prohibited from building a major position in Berkshire shares because his firm Tweedy Browne was Buffett’s broker during the early stage of Buffett’s accumulation.



Laurence Tisch sold his position to avoid, he has said, being criticized for being a Buffett investor when both men might be interested in the same stocks.



At least one member of the Berkshire Bunch was forced out [of some of his Berkshire holdings] by circumstances. He is J.P. (Rick) Guerin, vice chairman of PS Group Holdings, an aircraft-leasing and oil-and-gas-production outfit. His PS Group had to sell 5,700 shares of Berkshire at a relatively low price to pay off bank debts.



The Omaha World-Herald had a story (August 16, 1998) telling of some early investors, a few of whom sold:

Investing with Warren Buffett in the late 1950s and early ’60s proved to be a highly profitable move for his early partners.



These investors now are scattered across the country. Some held on with Buffett and got rich. Some died. Others sold their investment after just a few years, to their regret.



Here’s how some of the investors have fared:



Ethel Bjornsen and her husband, Olaf, of Colome, South Dakota, invested $10,000 with Buffett in 1962. They acted on a tip from a daughter, who worked as a secretary to one of Buffett’s friends.



By 1970 when Buffett dissolved the investment partnership, the Bjornsens’ stake totaled about $50,000.



They could have held on to stock in Berkshire Hathaway, Buffett’s successor investment vehicle, but they sold it, missing out on eventual millions as Berkshire shares soared.



Olaf Bjornsen died in 1991. Ethel Bjornsen, now 83, says she can only laugh now about passing up a fortune.



“I wish to heck I would have had the sense to stay with him,” she says of Buffett. “We were young. We thought, shoot, maybe we could do better with it ourselves.”



They spent some of the $50,000 and invested the rest. Today Bjornsen says she has about $100,000 invested, including the recent purchase of three Class B shares of Berkshire Hathaway.



John Dobson, an Ann Arbor, Michigan lawyer, heard about Buffett’s investing skill from a client. He and three siblings invested in Buffett’s partnership. Records show they invested $65,000 with him in 1962.



Dobson has stayed with Buffett. He said he has about $17 million in Berkshire stock. “The whole thing is so unreal,” he says of the investment’s growth.



He said he has given some money away to family and has made substantial gifts to colleges and universities.



He had a second home in Florida but sold it. “I didn’t get down there enough,” he said. “I don’t have an airplane. I don’t have a boat or a second home. I drive a Buick Riviera. I don’t need a BMW. My wife drives an Olds Cutlass.”



Dobson, 79, still does estate planning for clients and serves as a trustee of some charitable foundations.



Don Danly and Buffett were high school buddies at Woodrow Wilson High School in Washington, D.C. when Buffett’s father was serving in Congress.



While in high school, Buffett and Danly bought used pinball machines and placed them in barber shops. Eventually, they were making $50 a week from the venture.



They moved on to bigger things, Buffett to his financial career and Danly to engineering. In 1962, after Danly’s family sold a farm in Nebraska, he put $25,000 of the proceeds in Buffett’s partnership.



When the partnership was dissolved in 1970 he kept some stock in Berkshire. [Actually he kept all his stock in Berkshire, but not all his stock in Blue Chip Stamps and Diversified Retailing.]



“I’ve still never sold any,” said Danly, who retired from Monsanto Co. in Pensacola, Fla., in 1989. “I’ve given some away to kids.” (Danly died on August 27, 2002)



At that time, he declined to say how much Berkshire stock he owned. “It’s given me the financial confidence to do whatever I want, buy a vacation home or a boat,” he said.



William A. Milanese Jr.’s father, of Long Island, New York, invested with Buffett after hearing about him through a business partner. The elder Milanese sold most of his 2,000 shares of Berkshire Hathaway in 1970. It proved a costly decision but one that he liked to joke about over the years.



He died a few years ago as a successful businessman. His family is more secure financially because of the investment with Buffett, his son said. The family still owns most of the more than 200 shares of Berkshire that his dad kept—more than $14 million worth.



“It added to my estate, but my children will be mostly the beneficiaries of it,” said William Milanese Jr., who lives on Long Island.



Richard Kimmel, an orchard owner in Nebraska City, Nebraska, was a client of Buffett’s stockbroker father, Howard Buffett. He later invested with Warren Buffett’s partnership.



In 1961, he had $32,000 with Buffett. By 1969, his investment had grown to $371,000.



By the time he died in 1996 at the age of 98, Kimmel had amassed a fortune in the tens of millions, said Bill Carroll, a retired pharmacist who is on the board of the charitable foundation established by Kimmel and his wife, Laurine, who died in 1993.



The foundation has given millions in grants to a range of Nebraska charities since Richard Kimmel’s death. Among $1.3 million in grants announced last November were gifts of $500,000 each to Midland Lutheran College in Fremont, Nebraska, and the Homestead Girl Scout Council, as well as $100,000 for restoration of the Nebraska Governor’s Mansion.



Like many of Buffett’s partners who became wealthy, the Kimmels showed few signs of being rich, Carroll said. They lived in “a very modest home in the middle of the orchard.”



Richard Kimmel drove a Chevrolet S-10 pickup. They also owned a Buick LeSabre. Their wealth enabled them to travel extensively, Carroll said.



Casper Offutt was a close friend of Truman Wood, who married Buffett’s older sister, Doris.



When Buffett was selling stocks for his father’s Omaha brokerage in the early ’50s, Offutt became a client. In 1959, the Carpenter Paper Co. salesman invested $10,000 in one of Buffett’s investment partnerships.



Offutt, the nephew of the World War I flier for whom Offutt Air Force Base is named, moved to California in 1963 and later started his own paper company.



Now a resident of Atherton, California, he said he still owns Berkshire stock. “I’ve sold off a little here and there. I’ve given some to charity. It’s been a wonderful cushion.”



The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Oil Check



180





GEORGE OR WARREN BUFFETT?


Warren Buffett’s first cousin, George Buffett of Albuquerque, New Mexico, is the son of Clarence Buffett. Early in the 20th century, Ernest and Henrietta Buffett had five children: Clarence, George, Howard, Fred, and Alice. Clarence Buffett, a petroleum engineer and the eldest son of Ernest Buffett, was in the oil business. He died in a car wreck in Alvin, Texas, in 1937 when George had just finished second grade.

Despite this tragedy, George Buffett’s future was bright. He was encouraged to start his own business by his mother, Irma, who died at 95 in 1993.

“I had always wanted to be in the candy business,” he said. His desire was to begin at the bottom, learn the business, and work with his hands. In 1951, George went to California and found a candy business to approach, “I went to California and told them when I applied I had finished the 11th grade, which was true.”

It turned out the company was See’s. This was long before Warren Buffett bought the company.

“In 1952, I went into a concession business with $250. My partner had $200, and four years later, I bought him out for $4,000 because he thought we’d never get anywhere,” he recalls.

In 1956, George Buffett opened a candy store, Buffett’s Candies (“Our Candy Is Made to Eat—Not to Keep!”) in Albuquerque, a one-store business he has run while also serving as a conservative Republican in the New Mexico legislature since the late 1970s.

Over the years, Buffett’s candy and other businesses flourished, but something was not quite right.

“I had a 58-year-old chocolate dipper who liked to party, but I often had to go get her out of jail for partying too much. It would be $40 a pop. And then once I had to get her out three times in one week before one Easter, but I needed her so bad, I did it.

“Then I heard about a machine chocolate dipper in Kansas City and drove there a month after Easter,” he said. After seeing the dipper, George Buffett decided on the spot to drive to Omaha to see his uncle, Howard Buffett, Warren’s father.

“Howard Buffett always had me on his mailing list when he was in Congress. He couldn’t let me be a liberal, so he sent me all his stuff. And he would advise me to save money also. I drove to Omaha and went to his office and told him how I was putting a third of my money in stocks, a third in property, and a third in the business. He said that was great. Then he said, ‘Why not let Warren take care of your money in stocks. He’s honest, and he’s as good as anybody else.’ ”

George Buffett said, “That was the understatement of the century. So I invested $3,000 in the partnership in 1958 and $5,000 in 1960, and I later bought some more in Berkshire. I put some cash in Sequoia when he closed the partnership. I guess you could say I got in because of a partying chocolate dipper,” he said.

George Buffett demurred when asked what his investment in Berkshire is worth, saying, “Well, you can say it’s more than a half million.” That’s another understatement since the original $3,000 would be worth millions today.

In the 1960s, Jeanette Franzen came to work at the candy store and the two continued dating after she got a job as a geophycicist with Shell Oil (Omaha World-Herald, September 18, 2011). George Buffett was quoted in the story as saying, “She was 24 and a 6-foot-1 blonde with a degree in math and physics. I kind of call that a trophy wife.” Their daughter Betty now runs the family candy store.

Buffett confessed to selling Berkshire shares on two occasions. “My wife wanted a condo, and I sold some to buy it. And I once sold some to buy her a ring from Borsheims. I figured that was much cheaper than a divorce.”

George Buffett had no idea in the early days that Warren Buffett’s investing would amount to what it has. “I knew he was honest and I knew he was good, but I didn’t know he’d turn out to be the best.” He says it dawned on him many years ago that he was the best.

“Some people have said we look alike. He’s smarter than I am, but my wife says I’m the better looking, and I feel like I’m the lucky one.”

After the annual meeting in 1995, George wrote Warren: “Do you remember the night at the ball game when they were taking our picture? I think you said that you would have our pictures in the next annual report to show that you’re better looking. I take it that this means that if there are no pictures, you’ve conceded?”

After the picture was developed, Warren Buffett said, “No contest.”

After seeing Warren Buffett at the Berkshire annual meeting in 2002, George Buffett’s latest volley in the battle for beauty was, “He has less hair than I do.”

Pressing his point home, George sent Warren a different photo saying, “I

wouldn’t want you to think the outcome was the fault of your photographers. ... I know it’s tough coming in second twice in one year [Gates], but keep trying. Considering my investment, I’ll be rooting for you in the Gates contest.”

Buffett asked his cousin how he prices his candy. “I told him I price it 10 to 20 cents below See’s. I let them do all the figuring and then underprice them because I can make it cheaper. There’s a See’s store in Albuquerque, but I know too many people to go in,” he laughed.

In addition to his candy store, George Buffett has kept busy on such ventures as Speedway Park, the convention center, the civic auditorium, the zoo, the baseball stadium, the state fair, and the Santa Fe Rodeo (Albuquerque Journal, August 25, 2000).

George Buffett sent me two boxes of candy for Christmas in 1994 with a note: “Here’s one for home and one for the office with the name ‘Buffett’ on it. From: The Good Looking Buffett.”

During the weekend of Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1995, George Buffett told an interesting story about himself. He writes a conservative newsletter called Buffett’s Bullets. Because of its popularity, folks began sending in donations to support the letter. Buffett wanted to thank those who did and settled on sending a key chain with a bullet. He located a distributor of such items in Montana. The distributor asked George Buffett if he were related to Warren. The distributor then said he had bought Berkshire at $17 a share and sold at $35. George Buffett told the distributor he had bought at about $18, but had not sold. “Why the hell are you working?” the distributor replied.

George Buffett recounted on his way home from the Berkshire annual meeting in 2008: “I sat in the back of the plane with a college student from the University of Texas-Austin. He had been to Warren’s show for the first time. I filled him in on some more Buffett lore. Just before we landed, I told him I was a first cousin of Warren’s. Then he asked why I was not sitting in first class. I said, ‘most Buffetts start out cheap!—That’s why they get rich!’”



“What? Me Worry?”

Candy man George Buffett at Buffett’s Candies store in Albuquerque, New Mexico. When he is not in the state legislature, he’s generally at the store supervising the making of such goodies as Assorted Bear Crunch.

(Photo by Albuquerque Journal/Mike Stewart)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value George or Warren Buffett?



Gentleman’s Quarterly

Cousins George Buffett and Warren Buffett enjoy an Omaha Royals game in 1995. Buffett quipped, “Mirror, mirror, on the wall, who’s the fairest of them all?” This beauty pageant ended with Warren’s “No contest!” plea.

(Photo courtesy of Warren Buffett)

George or Warren Buffett? The Story of Warren Buffett





(Photos by Charles Gass)

Buffett’s Candies

Buffett’s candy store in Albuquerque is not likely to be confused with a textile mill.



“Where’s My Help?”

George Buffett dresses in his version of business casual at Buffett’s Candies.

(Photo by Albuquerque Journal/Mike Stewart)



An All-Cosmos Treat

The other Buffett dips into a dessert at Gorat’s on August 28, 2000.

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

VOTE NOW!

WHICH BUFFETT IS MORE HANDSOME?

Of Permanent Value George or Warren Buffett?

AND THE WINNER IS...NEITHER BUFFETT,

BUT THE YOUNG ELVIS PRESLEY



(Photo courtesy

of Richard

Koenen)

“If life were fair, Elvis would be alive and all the impersonators would be dead.” —Johnny Carson



181





ANN LANDERS HAS A DATE WITH BUFFETT


Ann Landers (Eppie Lederer) used to leave Sioux City, Iowa, to visit her sister, Helen Brodkey, in Omaha to date the Nebraska boys.

“No. I didn’t date Warren Buffett,” she laughed during a telephone interview: but in the mid-1980s when the advice columnist went to Omaha, she did indeed have a date with him.

For decades, Landers delivered snappy, blunt advice about broken hearts, loneliness, financial woes, and sexuality: “A father who diapers his daughter at the age of 12 has a geranium in his cranium,” she quipped.

Landers began her column with the Chicago Sun-Times in 1955 and switched to the Chicago Tribune in 1987. At her peak, she was the world’s most widely syndicated columnist, being carried in more than 1,200 newspapers with 90 million readers worldwide. She enjoyed a 16-room apartment in Chicago.

Landers—who answered thousands of letters from such people as Anxious in Akron, Fed Up in Fresno, and Lonely in Laredo—was invited to a function that involved skits at the Omaha Press Club Gridiron. “I was asked to perform and wrote a little skit, which had me doing the shimmy in a fringed evening gown. I think Warren was struck by the incongruity of it all—an advice columnist doing the shimmy.

“He came up afterwards and asked if he could take me to lunch the next day. When I told him I already had a luncheon date, he asked, ‘Do you think you can get me included?’

“I told him I was sure that I could since I was having lunch with people from the Omaha World-Herald.”

The host was Harold Andersen, the publisher, who was one of Buffett’s old friends. “Of course, they were thrilled to include Warren Buffett.

“We went to the lunch and sat next to each other and behaved shamelessly. We hardly spoke to anyone else. Warren is a fascinating man and has a marvelous sense of humor. He said, ‘Let’s stay in touch,’ and we have. One of the fringe benefits is See’s Candies, which is not available in Chicago. He owns the company, you know.

“I bought Berkshire Hathaway stock immediately after I met Warren. I’m not a plunger in the market, but I do buy when I know the management. I thought if Warren is running a company, then I want to be in on it. When I saw the price, I almost flipped.

“I’ve been in his home and met Astrid Menks, who is a very warm and winning person. I also know his delightful daughter, Susie, and the grandchildren. I attended a formal party in Lincoln given by Kay Orr, who was then the governor, and we all went in our formal attire on a bus. I sat with Warren’s wife, who is totally captivating and a real stunner. He wanted me to get to know her. He’s very proud of Susie and well he might be. Not only is she a knockout, she has all the right values. They have a remarkably warm and pleasant relationship for a married couple who live apart.

“I’ve talked to Warren about his immense wealth and asked the logical question: ‘What are you going to do with all that money?’ He told me it’s going into the Buffett Foundation and when he dies, he’s going to leave the largest foundation in the world. I suggested that perhaps he ought to give some of it away while he’s alive, but I don’t think I made a dent.”

Her words may not have made a dent then, but in light of Buffett’s 2006 pledge to the Gates Foundation, they may have had a delayed impact.

In her column of April 25, 1999, Landers mentioned that some readers thought it outrageous for dentists to charge folks with just a few teeth the same amount as they would charge patients with all their teeth. Here is a response that came from Laguna Hills, California: “This is for your reader with only six of his original teeth. I am 79 years old and have had less than 20 percent of my original hair since I was 39. That’s 40 years. I get a haircut every two weeks, or 26 times a year. In 40 years, I have had 1,040 haircuts and have yet to have a barber offer me a discount. If a haircut costs $8 plus a $2 tip, that’s $10 a cut. Had I received an 80 percent discount based on the amount of hair I had, I could have saved $8 a cut, or $8,320. If I had invested that savings with Warren Buffett, I would have about $23 million today. So let’s not hear any more complaints.”

After Landers’ death in 2002, many of her keepsakes were auctioned. The sale, which brought in $250,000, included letters from Buffett and former Presidents including: Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan, George Bush, and John F. Kennedy.

The Story of Warren Buffett

No Dent, but Maybe a Delayed Impact

Buffett’s daughter, Susan, and Ann Landers at Borsheims in 1994. Landers said, “I suggested that perhaps he ought to give some of his money away while he’s alive, but I don’t think I made a dent.” The seed Landers planted in 1994 took 12 years to bear fruit. Buffett’s huge pledge to the Gates Foundation in 2006 is evidence of a delayed impact.



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Ann Landers Has a Date with Buffett



182





MARY AND JOHN HOUBOLT


NASA engineer Dr. John Houbolt of Scarborough, Maine, helped the U.S. lunar module land on the moon in 1969, through his math calculations about rocket trajectory. Dr. Houbolt is a Berkshire shareholder. James Michener, in his book Space, talks about Houbolt, as does the first NASA flight director, Chris Kraft, in his book Flight. Life magazine (March 14, 1969) also ran a piece about Houbolt.

Houbolt’s wife, Mary, got her husband interested in Berkshire. She was a member of a women’s investment club for years. She makes postings to the AOL Berkshire message board as “Nanaondnet.” (Her grandkids call her Nana, therefore, she’s known as “Nana on the net.”)

“Around 1991, I found Berkshire and began to follow it, but only to study what kind of companies Buffett invested in,” Mary said. “It never occurred to me to buy it! … at that price? Of course not! How outlandish a price could there be??!! Then two or three years ago, the computer came into my life. I discovered the Berkshire board and the Yellow BRKers, soon became addicted, studied like crazy, and realized Berkshire should be bought—by then, of course, at an even higher price!

“John still does some consulting work, which he loves, and learning about stocks is not his favorite thing to do, but since he’s the brains of the family, he was force-fed a lot of what I was learning because I kept taking questions to him when I didn’t understand things. I jumped in first, but he was not far behind. The pity is that we didn’t buy when I first found it. I still have the Value Line sheet that I printed at the time. I look at the price on it and cry!

“Oh, well, I’m grateful for having found the Berkshire board and getting in when I did. And now it really is an all-consuming hobby,” she said. “The women ‘collected’ other female posters for a while and wrote quietly amongst themselves. We were all timid about posting on the board, which was, and still is, largely male.”

Susan Warnock (Mommalion) of Windsor, California, whom Mary contacted in her search for women interested in Berkshire, shares a memory, “Our e-mail conversations had the feel of ‘the girls sneaking around the boys’ club to me. I pictured a boys’ clubhouse with us girls spying on them without them being aware of us.”

“The men never did anything to make us feel unwelcome. I doubt they were even aware of us,” she stated. “And certainly they weren’t aware of our behind-the-scenes discussions. In my early lurking days on the board, the intrinsic value discussions were like Greek to me, but I continued reading and study led me to a better understanding of intrinsic value.

“Who would ever have thought this senior citizen, who just took up the computer two years before, would ever fly all the way to Omaha, Nebraska, lugging 10 pounds of decorated bricks (gifts for Doshoes) to meet about 40 cyber friends, Yellow BRKers (see Yellow BRKer chapter), for the first time, along with the second richest man in the country, chairman of the company about which we read and write all the time, and then sit through a whole day’s shareholders meeting thoroughly enjoying it? Or, Finnigan1 (username), who lugged two leis all the way from Hawaii for Marlinls’ wife and for Doshoes?

“And how many John Gartmanns do you find walking around in 2-foot-high yellow hats? Or semi-amateurs financially analyzing Berkshire Hathaway in a way that even Buffett himself is impressed?

Mary went on to say, “Or the story of when the one ‘bad egg’ started posting with bad manners and insults, and the whole group temporarily fled to the unused Zond board to get rid of him. But ultimately all came back, the nuisance left, and peace reigned once again. This kind of rude behavior is typical on most boards, but so conspicuously absent on this one. It really is a unique group.”

Dr. Houbolt, who studied at the University of Illinois, originally joined the old National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics at Langley Field, Virginia, where he worked on research and development of aircraft. Around 1957, a group began to look into space flight.

Mrs. Houbolt said her husband didn’t exactly get us to the moon, but he played an important role. He convinced the government that of the three proposed ways of going to the moon—direct from earth to moon, earth orbit and then to moon (German rocket pioneer Wernher von Braun’s proposal) and earth to moon with lunar orbit (Houbolt’s proposal). He proved lunar-orbit rendezvous (LOR) was the fastest, cheapest, and most practical way. Convincing the government, of course, was done with a lot of engineering research and mathematical proof, not just verbal arguments.

The Life magazine story (March 14, 1969) began like this:

Its official designation is an unpronounceable, vowel-less LM—for Lunar Module—but it is known to nearly everyone as the Bug or Spider or LEM. It was hatched in controversy from a handful of rough sketches, and for a while it was nothing more than a wooden body with paper-clip legs that looked like a half brother to a yo-yo. Even now, fully grown, its paper-thin aluminum flanks could never survive high-speed exposure to the earth’s atmosphere, and its landing ladder, designed for the one-sixth gravity of the moon, is so fragile it would break if used on earth. Last week this most complex and daring of man-made flying machines rode through space with Apollo 9, a mission that would determine if it was ready to perform the task it was built for—to land two U.S. astronauts on the moon, then send them safely homeward.



The concept that produced the LM is even more audacious than the machine itself. It calls for a descent to the lunar surface from the orbiting mother ship, then a launch from the moon to a dangerous rendezvous before the trip home. Eight years ago the scheme seemed so bizarre that the obscure engineer who first suggested it was ridiculed. His lonely and courageous battle saved the U.S. billions of dollars, prevented years of delay and, if all goes well, will make a moon landing possible this summer.



In that same Life story, Houbolt described the hatching of his LOR idea:

“It occurred to me then that rendezvous around the moon was like being in a living room,” Houbolt said. “Why take the whole darn living room down to the surface when it is easier to go down in a little tiny craft. As soon as I saw it in that broad context, the concept looked very appealing.” Houbolt scribbled some quick back-of-the-envelope calculations. “Almost spontaneously,” he says, “it became clear that LOR offered a chain reaction of simplifications: development, testing, manufacturing, launch and flight operations—all would be simplified.” I said, “Oh my God, this is it. This is fantastic! If there is any idea we must push, it is this one.



Chris Kraft, in Flight (p. 190), wrote: “Houbolt became the archetypal madman with a mission. When this lunar-orbit rendezvous (LOR) scheme was shown around NASA, it was universally met with disdain. But Houbolt wouldn’t give up.”

Even before President John Kennedy set the goal of landing a man on the moon, NASA scientists and others were in a debate over the most practical way to achieve a manned landing on the moon. Most agreed on a direct approach.

Sputnik had jolted Congress into action, and NASA had come into being.

Johnson Space Center’s original concept for going to the moon was to fly the entire spaceship to the moon, but Houbolt realized that lunar-orbit rendezvous was a far better way to succeed than flying directly all the way to the moon

or taking the earth-orbit approach. “By my pushing, we began to give more attention to lunar-orbit rendezvous.” In the end, it has been said that Houbolt’s plan saved the government $20 to $25 billion [the government should have invested the savings in Berkshire] and enabled the U.S. to accomplish the mission within President Kennedy’s time frame.

From 1959 to 1962, Houbolt, “somewhat as a voice from the wilderness,” fought for his idea, finally convincing Wernher von Braun, whose backing was crucial. “My notion was that the descent to the moon should be in a small lander.”

Houbolt was at Cape Canaveral the day the moon shot was launched. “I watched the liftoff at Cape Canaveral, then went to Mission Control in Houston.”

As Neil Armstrong landed on the moon July 20, 1969 [the summer of Woodstock], Houbolt was both worried and thrilled. “They waited a little too long to land. The public didn’t know it. Finally, man landed. There was clapping, then shushing to keep everyone quiet. We didn’t want to miss history. Von Braun turned to me and gave me an A-OK sign and said, ‘Thanks, John.’”

(Exactly 27 years later to the day, Munger gave his famous Coke speech. Maybe Buffett said, “Thanks, Charlie.” Shareholders certainly would.)

In a ceremony on October 9, 2003, Houbolt gave his papers, manuscripts, models, designs, and books to the Grainger Engineering Library at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.



Mary and John Houbolt

(Photo courtesy of Mary and John Houbolt)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Mary and John Houbolt



Top Secret

NASA engineer John Houbolt was an unsung hero of the U.S. space program.

(Photo courtesy of Mary Houbolt)

r



Soaring Achievements

This pamphlet outlines Houbolt’s role in the moon landing.

(Photo by Mary Porter)



183





PAUL HARVEY


“Stand by for news.” (Paul Harvey)

Radioman extraordinaire Paul Harvey got to know Buffett because of his work at ABC Radio. “I met him at Cap Cities’ meetings. It was actually my wife [Angel] who invested with him first at about $6,000 or $7,000 a share,” Harvey said.

“She invested with him because of his sense of humor,” said Harvey with a laugh in an August 26, 1998, telephone interview, adding that he was not sure that was the best way to make an investment decision.

According to a story in Fortune (December 18, 2000), Harvey said, “He was so funny that I didn’t think about investing in the company.” It took Harvey a while but he did become a Berkshire shareholder and a Buffett fan.

Harvey, the most-listened-to personality on all radio, grew up in radio newsrooms. Born in Tulsa, Oklahoma, he made his own radio sets as a boy. In high school, he frequented KVOO radio until the station manager hired him.

In St. Louis, Harvey became special events director and newsman at KXOK, but the most special event was his meeting a girl he calls Angel. She had visited the station for a school news program. He invited her to dinner and proposed to her that evening.

After their wedding, they lived in Chicago, combining their talents in a news career. Angel produced many of his radio shows and later his television series, Paul Harvey Comments, which ran for 20 years.

Called “the voice of middle America,” Harvey was syndicated on more than 1,200 radio stations nationally and 400 Armed Services Radio stations around the world.

Every week 24 million people would “stand by” for Paul Harvey’s distinctive radio voice and his blend of news and views.

In 2000, octogenarian Harvey inked a 10-year, $100-million radio contract. For a period of some months he lost his voice, but said on Larry King Live (January 30, 2003), he hoped to honor his 10-year contract.

And now, as Paul Harvey would say, here’s “the rest of the story.”

Harvey died at 90 on March 1, 2009. He had been recovering from pneumonia after his wife died in May 2008.

“Paul Harvey (long pause). Good Day.”

“Good day.”

“The Voice”—Paul Harvey



(Courtesy of Paul Harvey)

The Story of Warren Buffett



“The Rest of the Story”

Harvey and Buffett in Omaha in 2008

(Courtesy of Berkshire Hathaway)

Of Permanent Value Paul Harvey



184





EDWIN POPE


Edwin Pope, the sports editor of the Miami Herald, has been a Berkshire shareholder since 1994. Called “the best writer of sports in America,” Pope was born in 1928, and raised in Athens, Georgia. In 1943, at 15, he became the youngest sports editor of any daily newspaper. He later worked for the United Press and the Atlanta Journal Constitution. In 1956, he joined the Miami Herald. In 1967 he became the sports editor and has covered every Super Bowl game.

Pope probably became a sportswriter because writing is what he does best. After all, he jokes, his father once told him: “Edwin, put down that wheelbarrow. You know you don’t understand machinery.”

Pope, entering his 80s, has been a working journalist for more than 60 years. Pope described in The Wall Street Journal (January 28, 2000) how he got started as a reporter: “My daddy had an Underwood typewriter in the office of the cotton warehouse he ran, and I taught myself to use it. I loved to type anything. When I was 11, I listened to the Orange Bowl game on the radio and banged out a verbatim copy of the broadcast, commercials included. Then I got on my bike and took it down to the Athens Banner-Herald and asked the editor if he could use it as a story. He said no but asked me if I wanted a job as a reporter. I said sure, and he had me—at no pay—cover the local high school and YMCA.” It was there, at 15, that Pope began his career as sports editor of the Banner-Herald.

In an interview in 1999, Pope said: “I’m sitting in Don Shula’s Miami Dolphins head coaching office one day in 1987, and we start talking stocks. I was always trying to tout him on my own company, Knight Ridder; Shula had had some Knight Ridder stock, but I believe he gave it to his kids. Anyway, that day, he says he has bought shares in a company that has big media holdings. He mentioned Berkshire, and I didn’t know what he was talking about. I checked around and found out it cost $3,300 (I don’t remember precisely, but I would surmise I probably didn’t want to show my ignorance by asking Shula what he paid for it). The next time I saw him I said, ‘That’s too rich for my blood.’

“I started following it, though, and up and up it went, until I finally said to myself, ‘Hey, the boat’s pulling out, jump for it.’ I bought one share around $18,000 in 1994. Then I kept adding little by little.

“Funny thing, I think it was around the college draft before his last season, 1995, I was talking to Don in the lobby of the Dolphins general headquarters in Davie, Florida. He had remarried by then (his first wife, Dorothy, died of breast cancer a few years earlier). He said, ‘Say, Mary Anne (his second wife) is asking me if I think SHE ought to buy some Berkshire. What do you think?’

“It was still in the low [$20Ks], and I said, ‘I think it’s just digging in for a long run.’

“I’m not sure whether she bought any, but Don had a nice chunk of shares he bought at $3,300. I believe Don’s financial advisor is (or was, anyhow) one John Loomis, who is married to Carol. That’s how he got onto it. And he really got me into it, so I’m grateful for that.

“A few years later, when a grandson was born, I took a picture of him on the floor posed with Of Permanent Value just as though he were reading it. I sent the picture to Buffett and said, ‘I am trying to teach my grandson to be rich.’

“To my great surprise, Buffett responded by return mail. He wrote, ‘Your letter and the picture made my day. Tell the kid I am going to give a quiz on the book when he finishes reading it.’”

Pope has been inducted into both the College Football Hall of Fame and the Pro Football Hall of Fame. Only one other writer, Murray Olderman of Newspaper Enterprises Association, holds both honors.



Money Quiets the Nerves.

Edwin Pope, a veteran sportswriter at an early age, interviews Joe Louis for the Atlanta Constitution in 1950. Though not in this interview, Louis once said, “I don’t like money, but it quiets my nerves.” In a similar vein, Buffett has said, “$35 billion calms the nerves.”

(Photo courtesy of

Edwin Pope)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Miami Herald Sports Editor

Edwin Pope

(Courtesy of

Edwin Pope)

Of Permanent Value Edwin Pope



185





HANK GREENBERG’S STATISTICS


I met him [Buffett] at a Columbia Business School forum in 1986 in a hotel in New York. There were a bunch of ... [financial speakers], and I went along because he’s my hero,” said Glenn Hank Greenberg, managing director of Chieftain Capital Management in New York, who earned an MBA degree from Columbia in 1973.

“He was surrounded by people, and I felt toward him the way some people felt toward my father. There’s some human instinct to reach out and make some connection with someone you admire, and often it doesn’t amount to much,” Greenberg said.

“I knew he liked baseball, and I asked him if he knew of my father, Hank Greenberg, and he said, ‘1938, hit 58 home runs; had 183 RBIs in 1937’. … Heck, I didn’t even know them [father’s stats], and he repeated three or four statistics. I thought he was trying to show off his memory. As far as I knew, they were correct. He has a photographic memory. He was reeling off the statistics. … He wasn’t telling me [the statistics] because he thought he was coming close.

“My father [Detroit Tigers slugger Hank Greenberg] did hit 58 homers in 1938, 11 years after Babe Ruth hit 60. It was not as big a deal as when Roger Maris hit 61, years later ... and my father was always humble about it and would say [to fans] how much he appreciated that they remembered or that the pitchers were hoping he’d break Ruth’s record anyway.

“Meeting him [Buffett] was somewhat disappointing from a personal standpoint. There was a crowd around him … but he is, without a doubt, the best in the investment world. He’s done it with no leverage, no cheating. … He is my hero.”

Greenberg and his partner, John Shapiro, founded the Chieftain firm in 1984 and have rung up gains of about 22% annually, before fees, compared with 15% for the S&P.

Greenberg is married to Linda Vester with Fox News. On their first date she thought, “Here is a Renaissance man—a successful investment man who can even play [on a guitar] love songs he has written himself” (The New York Times, May 6, 2001).

The Story of Warren Buffett



Hank Greenberg in 1939

The Detroit Tigers slugger slammed 58 home runs in 1938.

(Photo by The New York Times)

Of Permanent Value Hank Greenberg Statistics



186





THE DIFFERENCE IN BILL SCARGLE’S LIFE


Bill Scargle, a retired PaineWebber broker in San Francisco, California, started his career as a margin clerk and wound up a millionaire. How? By discovering Warren Buffett. “It started with a $2,000 investment in Blue Chip in 1969 because it looked like a growth company.”

As Berkshire bought up Blue Chip and Scargle heard more about Buffett, it was off to the races. “In 1974 and 1975, I poured another $10,000 into Blue Chip, which was all the money I had at the time,” said Scargle, who was making about $12,000 a year in those days. Scargle, a big Gators football fan and graduate of the University of Florida, continued:

Then in 1978 and 1979, I purchased about $4,000 worth of Berkshire at $165 to $175 a share. At that point, my entire life savings was invested in Buffett companies. [Blue Chip merged into Berkshire in 1983.]



As any investor with all his eggs in one basket, I wanted to meet, in person, the man who held the basket. I attended the Blue Chip annual meetings during the 1970s because Buffett was a director, but he was never there. In the late 1970s.... I went to the Berkshire annual meeting. It was held in the cafeteria of the National Indemnity building. It was attended by a half a dozen shareholders, several employees, and a couple of Buffett’s relatives. It lasted a few minutes. Buffett said he had about an hour if anyone would like to stick around to talk about investing. That hour changed my life. I knew at once this guy was one very smart investor. Nothing has ever changed my mind since.



After the meeting, I introduced myself to Buffett, and he said, “You came all the way from San Francisco for this?”



I also fly to the Wesco annual meeting to hear Charlie Munger talk.



I always thought they [Buffett and Munger] knew what they were doing. I’ve thought about it [Berkshire] every day. I’ve collected almost everything written about it.



I never sold a share until Berkshire was about $7,000 or $8,000. I sold some then because I decided I should pay off my mortgage and all my debts and invest in some 10% Treasuries for my retirement. Sure, I made a mistake. As it turns out, I’d have done better holding on to the stock.



I’ve given to charities. I even asked Buffett if I could give to the Buffett Foundation and he said not to, that the foundation has plenty of money.



I guess you could say I was a margin clerk who became a millionaire. It’s been a fantastic ride and I don’t think it’s over yet.



One of Scargle’s greatest charitable acts has been steering many of his clients to Berkshire. Bill would be too modest to say so, but a close friend says his book of Berkshire stock over the years has created about $300 million in wealth. Pointedly pressed for the actual figure, Scargle finally said, “Well, not quite that much,” at a time when Berkshire was trading at about $73,000.

At his 60th birthday party on August 17, 1998, Scargle received a note from Buffett: “Bill, congratulations on your 60th. May you live until Berkshire A splits.”

The Story of Warren Buffett



Pudd’nhead Wilson and Yogi

Early investor Bill Scargle is pictured with Buffett at the Berkshire annual meeting weekend in 2000.

(Courtesy of Bill Scargle)

Of Permanent Value The Difference in Bill Scargle’s Life



187





RECOLLECTIONS FROM ED PRENDEVILLE


I first learned of Warren Buffett in Adam Smith’s book, Supermoney, in the late 1970s,” said Berkshire shareholder Ed Prendeville of New Vernon, New Jersey. “Unfortunately, I did not invest in Berkshire at that time because I had a young business buying and selling old toy trains, and all my money was invested there,” added Prendeville, owner of Train Collectors Warehouse Inc. in Parsippany, New Jersey.

“Because Warren’s approach to business and investing was rational and most others’ were not, it made a lasting impression on me. Then in December 1981, I bought a toy train collection in Salt Lake City, Utah, for $280,000, virtually my entire life’s savings plus a lot more.

“The collection was all packed in a U-Haul truck, and I was driving home through Omaha. It was 3 a.m., and I remembered that Warren Buffett, the man I had read about, lived there. I remember thinking then I had better look into buying some shares of Berkshire when the train business produced some profits.

“A couple of years later when I had some money, I bought some shares of Berkshire and have held them and added more ever since. It has been a hell of a nice ride.

“The longer I own Berkshire, the more I realize what terrific businesses it owns and invests in. Of course, you have probably the best business and security analyst and capital allocator in a generation, possibly of all time, as your partner. You would have to be a fool not to go into business with Warren and can do so any day the New York Stock Exchange is open.

“Fortunately, the most important investment decision I will ever have to make is when to sell Berkshire, and I may never have to make that decision.”

Prendeville says he’s lucky to be among early shareholders, many of whom have had their lives improved by an investment in Berkshire. Two sons of his, Doug and Andrew, have been able to pursue dreams of becoming racecar drivers because of Berkshire. Racing is an expensive proposition under any circumstances.

For Prendeville himself, who is battling cancer, Berkshire has allowed him to be treated at one of the best hospitals (Sloan-Kettering) and has made it easier to pay bills even though he has health insurance. “If you have a disease and

are facing great bills, it’s not good for your illness. For me, it’s made a big difference.”



Train Collector

Ed Prendeville

(Photo by

Lisa Nichols)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Recollections from Ed Prendeville



188





ARTHUR ROWSELL


I started trading for Warren Buffett in about 1963. I got to know him through Rick Guerin,” says Arthur Rowsell of Encinitas, California, “the flower capital of the world,” known especially for its poinsettias. Rowsell continues:

I really didn’t know who he was, and he [Buffett] was putting in big orders saying he’d pay for them with funds at Illinois National Bank.



He called one day and said he was going to Europe but that he wanted to keep buying Blue Chip at under $16 a share.



At that point, my boss asked me who the hell Warren Buffett was and told me to check him out. I called Illinois National to ask if he had an account there and the fellow said, “Well, you’re putting me in an embarrassing position. He owns the bank.”



Most people buy stocks as they are going up. As they go down, people get fearful. Buffett, Munger, and Guerin come alive in a bad market when they are the only bid in the world.



Warren is so different from anyone else. Some people, if they want to buy 100,000 shares, just put in an order, and they get the right amount. They buy it going up. Buffett wants the market to come to him. He’s very patient. … He’s always buying a stock that’s going down.



Buffett wants to participate in the market, not move the market. Buffett puts in orders a bit below the market and doesn’t say how much he wants, meaning he wants all he can get at that price or better.



I once asked Rick Guerin how much stock he wanted and he said, “Look, Art, I want to get enough to get on the board and make a whole lot of money.”



That’s the last time I asked that question of any of those guys.



Rowsell said Buffett is the same way. You buy all you can, and you are not finished buying until the last share has been bought. “If you told Buffett he could buy all the stock of a company at his price, he’d say send it in. If he could buy all of a Salomon or Wells Fargo at his price, he’d take it.” Rowsell added:

He’s highly ethical. Buffett never buys near a news announcement or on either side of a quarterly earnings report.



I ran trading departments. Mind you, I was a market maker in these stocks and the lead market maker in Berkshire. The way Buffett buys goes something like this: I’d say something was trading 30 to 301/4. He would say do the best you can but that did not mean paying 301/4 or supporting the stock. If it wanted to go lower, then I was to buy it cheaper.



Over the years, Rowsell worked at Hayden Stone, Doyle O’Connor, and Cantor Fitzgerald. Before becoming a private investor, he bought for Buffett such investments as American Express, California Water, Source Capital, Blue Chip, Doyle Dane, Interpublic Group, General Foods, Affiliated Publications, and many others. Roswell said:

Affiliated was interesting. First Boston did an IPO of 500,000 shares in the depths of the down market in the early 1970s, I believe at $13 per share. The selling shareholders were the founding families of the Boston Globe. By the time they listed the stock on the American Stock Exchange a couple of months later, Warren had bought 350,000 to 400,000 of the 500,000-share issue. You will recall that some years later, he sold the stock near $100 after a 2-for-1 split. The stock subsequently sold down to $8 after his sale.



One of the founders of Intel, Robert Noyce, was a graduate of Grinnell College. Buffett was running the Grinnell endowment fund—gratis, by the way. Noyce came to Grinnell and asked if they could invest $100,000 in Intel’s original venture deal. Buffett told Noyce that if he could get his classmates to contribute $100,000 to their college, the fund would match the $100,000, thereby getting a $200,000 participation. This was accomplished and Grinnell some years later sold the stock in a decision not made by Buffett, for about $18 million, a tiny fraction of its value in 1997.



At Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1997, Buffett commentted on Grinnell’s Intel experience: “We did buy 10% of the original [Intel] issue [for Grinnell]. But the genius who ran Grinnell’s investment committee managed to sell those shares a few years later—although I won’t give you his name. And there’s no prize for anybody who calculates the value of those shares today.”

Rowsell executed a lot of over-the-counter and arbitrage trading for Buffett. “He does a lot of trading,” Rowsell said.

Over the years, it was Rowsell’s practice to call Gladys Kaiser, Buffett’s personal assistant back then, at the end of the day with a record of the day’s trades.

“I’ve talked with Buffett thousands of times over the years. When he was really buying something, we’d talk five to eight times a day,” Rowsell said.

It was while playing tennis with Buffett at the compound near Buffett’s Laguna Beach home that Rowsell realized Buffett was the greatest investor ever.

Four of us were sitting around afterwards having a Pepsi and someone mentioned Dunkin’ Donuts. I thought I knew Dunkin’ Donuts. I mean I worked hard at these things. … He said, “You know, I’ve looked at that a few times.” And he started talking about how the company would be more valuable if it split off its real estate into a REIT [Real Estate Investment Trust], that it was only making 80 cents a share. I mean he had all the facts and figures. He knew Dunkin’ Donuts up one side and down the other. That was when I sold my Dunkin’ Donuts and bought Berkshire at $300 and $500 a share.



Warren’s intellectual capacity and his memory are better than anyone’s I’ve ever known. He has the ability to absorb a large number of facts and come out with simple, but very effective, decisions.



The only person Rowsell has ever met in Buffett’s league intellectually was Teledyne’s Henry Singleton. “The difference between the two is interesting. Singleton is just raw daunting brain power, but Buffett is just as comfortable as an old shoe. Buffett is equally intelligent, but he just presents himself so smoothly.” Rowsell got to know Singleton when they were pitching Teledyne stock to brokers.

“Because I was a market maker in Berkshire, Buffett was kind enough to steer business my way, including the liquidation of Ben Graham’s estate,” Rowsell remarked. Rowsell said Buffett, on occasion, read the entire S&P sheets and the 2,500-page Walker’s Manual (which was a sort of Moody’s of West Coast securities). The publication, based in Lafayette, California, still exists in a reformed way.

“He once told me he reads the Walker’s Manual by starting at the back. He knows about stocks you’ve never heard of. … You could think the earnings of a company were $1.85, and he could tell you they were $1.82. Believe me, they’d be $1.82.”

Marc Perkins, a former Salomon trader, recalled Buffett’s iron-willed discipline in trading:

I used to trade with him [Buffett] when I was at Salomon. He was a customer of Salomon back in the early ’70s, and I can remember when he was buying bank stocks in 1971, the doggy banks, not the growth stock banks. He was buying Harris Trust. And the Manufacturer’s Hanover Trust department called up and said they had a big block of stock in Harris Trust for sale. Buffett had a trader, a fellow by the name of Bill Scott in his office in Omaha. And we called Bill Scott and said, “We got a block of Harris Trust for sale.” The stock was around $49, and he said, “I’ll pay $47.” And so we called Manny Hanny back and told them he said he’d pay $47, and they said, “That’s ridiculous, down 2 points. That’s crazy.” Of course, Harris Trust didn’t trade very much, so Buffett was the only buyer around.



So we called Scott back and said, “The seller won’t go below the market. They’ll sell it for 48.5,” and Buffett’s response was, “Tell them we’re not interested.” So, we call Manny Hanny back and say, “There are no bids.” “What do you mean no bids?” they say. “Tell ’em I’ll sell ’em at $47.” So Buffett’s guy says, “Forty-seven is no good any more. We’ve gone on to something else and we’re just not interested.” So the Manny Hanny guy couldn’t believe somebody just walked away. So now he starts calling everybody on the Street trying to sell and the next thing you know the stock is around 44. And he’d call us back and ask, “Can you buy it now?’ And I would call Buffett back and he would say, “I’ll pay 42.”



That’s his whole deal. Iron-willed discipline. People who know what they know and know what they’re good at survive over time (TheStreet.com, September 9, 2000).



Rowsell enjoys telling old Buffett stories. He recalls that it’s not quite true that the Buffetts have never sold a share of Berkshire. “When Susie went to San Francisco, Warren called one day with a request: ‘Would you sell a few hundred shares of Berkshire and do the insider work for Susie. She wants to buy a house.’ A couple weeks later he called with another request: ‘Would you sell a few more hundred shares for Susie. Looks like she wants to buy a real house.’”

Rowsell also remembers when Buffett bought his house in Emerald Bay: “Since I lived up the road, I would send him stuff from the local paper that talked about Laguna and Emerald Bay. One day I said to him, ‘Those prices have been rapidly going up in your neighborhood.’ Warren said, ‘Yeah, when I bought that place, there were a number of them for sale, and I thought about buying several of them, but why fool around with real estate when the stock market is so much easier.’ Of course, I thought, maybe for you pal, but not easy for the rest of the world.”

In 2011, Rowsell shared his appreciation for what Buffett has indirectly contributed to his family: “I think of all the good and happiness Warren has brought to his stockholders, none more than my own family. I think of when my two boys were going to college. At tuition time, I would say, ‘Don’t forget to write Uncle Warren a thank-you note.’ Several weeks ago we celebrated 21 years of me not being gainfully employed. In spite of this, we manage to give to charities where I volunteer six figures each year—all thanks to Warren.”

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value 080111 198 Arthur Rowsell

Arthur Rowsell 198 080111 The Story of Warren Buffett



Berkshire Beneficiaries

The lucky Art Rowsell family, Berkshire beneficiaries, enjoy a vacation.

(Photo

courtesy of

Art Rowsell)

Of Permanent Value Arthur Rowsell



189





HEY JERRY, DRIVE SLOW


Omaha World-Herald newsman Jim Rasmussen requested an interview with Buffett shortly before a Forbes article (October 1993) was to proclaim Berkshire’s chairman as the richest person in the country.

Buffett told Rasmussen he was amenable to it but said, “Let’s see what Forbes has to say.” After the story ran, Rasmussen got back in touch with Buffett, who demurred a bit: “I don’t see what else there is to write.” Buffett finally agreed and suggested they get together before he gave a talk to Columbia University business students on October 27.

“I met him outside Salomon’s headquarters [Buffett was there for a board meeting] at the World Trade Center. I was to meet him at 5 p.m. and I was outside 10 minutes early because I didn’t want to miss my shot at the interview,” Rasmussen said. “He walked out the door at five p.m. and we had to be at Columbia before six. We got into a Lincoln Town Car—I think it was a Salomon car—and he introduced me to the driver, Jerry. I said, ‘Hey, Jerry, drive slow,’ because I wanted to interview him as long as possible.

“I asked him how he felt about the Forbes ranking, and he said he was glad about it for Berkshire, that if he’d gotten it and Berkshire had done only so-so, it wouldn’t have meant as much.” As a result of the story, Buffett said that Berkshire was getting a lot more mail, much of it asking for money. “One guy wrote this long letter asking for $10,000. And then at the end, he said, ‘Well, why don’t you make it a million?’”

“I asked him about the polar bears on his tie in the Forbes piece—if that was any subliminal message [in regard to the market] and he said no that the folks at Coca-Cola gave him the tie as a memento of its ad campaign. But he seemed nervous about the question. I don’t think he likes questions about his views of the market,” Rasmussen said.

Buffett said he needed to be at Columbia 17 minutes before his six o’clock appointment. “He had it down to the minute. We got there a little early and he had the car pull around and park and we continued to talk,” Rasmussen said.

“I asked him about his personal worth [besides Berkshire], and he said rankings aren’t perfect and don’t go into other worth—or debt.”

Rasmussen pressed, putting out a figure as an estimate of Buffett’s net worth beyond his Berkshire holdings. However, Rasmussen said he didn’t get the slightest hint about whether the figure was high or low. “He didn’t even touch the question... It was as if he said, ‘Nice try, Jim.’ ”

Then Buffett got out and met Carol Loomis of Fortune and talked to the students for two-and-a-half hours, devoting his first remarks to the subject of integrity.

Buffett has said of his preference to talk to students, rather than adults who are unlikely to be as impressionable as students: “I mean, I can go hear a speech and I know whether I’m entertained or not, but I probably won’t change anything I do.”

“He was swamped by the students and signed annual reports,” Rasmussen added. The 80 students gave Buffett a 40-second ovation. Afterwards, Buffett left with Carol Loomis but asked Rasmussen if he needed a ride. Rasmussen declined, saying he’d get a cab back to his hotel to write his story.

“I was pretty pumped up the whole time,” he added.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Hey Jerry, Drive Slow



190





ARTHUR CLARKE’S COMMENTARY


Arthur Clarke first became interested in Buffett because he wanted money from him, not for himself but for the University of Chicago where he was director of corporate giving in the 1970s.

When Buffett asked him what he liked about fund-raising, Clarke replied it is easy enough to figure out who has money; the challenge is to figure out how to approach that person. “Warren’s eyes brightened and he said, ‘I can see how that could be fun.’” Clarke shared, “I should add also, however, that he realized one had to be deeply committed to the cause for it to be lasting fun.”

Ed Anderson, a Chicago alumnus, who at the time was managing partner of Tweedy, Browne & Knapp, put Clarke onto Buffett’s trail. “Ed recommended I read the chapter on Warren in Adam Smith’s book. I did straightaway and was hooked. Here was a man who had his life put together in a remarkable way. It may sound strange, but I put Warren, Milton Friedman, and Socrates in the same class: Each lets reason be his guide. Emotion leads to false expectations and, therefore, disappointment and mean-spiritedness.”

Buffett became Clarke’s role model, which only intensified his drive to find a way to interest Buffett in the University of Chicago.

One day while doing detective work, Clarke spotted an item in Official Summary of Security Transactions and Holdings, the SEC’s monthly publication of insider transactions. “At the time, we were probably the only development office subscribing to it,” Clarke said. Lightning flashed when he saw that Berkshire had made an investment in The Washington Post Co.

“The Berkshire purchase of Washington Post stock was the key I was looking for. Most people would have passed right by this item, but I knew that Warren was behind Berkshire and Katharine Graham was behind The Washington Post.

“Katharine Graham is an alumna and was, at the time, a trustee of the University of Chicago.” This connection gave Clarke the lead he was looking for. “The next day, I called Ed to ask him what was going on between Warren and Kay. ‘How did you find out about that?’ was his surprised response.”

The story continued from there, but before long, Clarke left the University to raise money for the Urban Institute, a think tank in Washington, D.C. “I had never heard of the place, but Warren was a director (as was Kay Graham), and that piqued my interest. That’s how I finally met him.”

When Clarke finally did meet Buffett, he told him the University of Chicago story. “I told him the experience brought home to me his oft-made comment that arithmetic is not the hard part in life. We learn 2+2=4 early. The hard part is that the 2s rarely come together in the real world. Unless you are paying attention, you miss those few times when you have four.

“Of course, everybody’s looking for 5,” continued Clarke, “and that’s why they end up disappointed. Like Socrates, Warren is very wise because he is rational. Therein lies his happiness.”

____________________

Clarke is an astute investor himself. Running his eponymous investment firm of Arthur D. Clarke & Co. in Boston, Clarke had a 13.7% compound annual return from 1985 through 2008. Clarke started his 2008 Annual Report by writing, “In 2007 our composite average lost 34.6%, net of expenses, while the S&P 500 Index, including dividends, lost 37% but bonds gained 50%. Inflation, as measured by the Consumer Price index, has no effect.”

In his 2003 report, Clarke had this to say about Berkshire, his largest holding:

Buffett has been warning shareholders for years that success forges its own anchor. Although his warning was premature, Berkshire is now a $170-plus billion enterprise with over $72 billion in shareholder equity. But more than the weight of size is at work. For the entire 25 years I’ve owned the stock, I have been regularly asked what happens if a truck hits Buffett. Well, he will be 74 this summer, and one day. … So the market seems to be discounting more and more this eventuality. In recent years, I think the business value of Berkshire has grown faster than the price. Better that than the reverse. This discounting may penalize us, as shareholders, in the short run, as it has from time to time over our years of ownership. It has also benefited us by enabling periodically lower purchase prices. But growth of business value determines the long run. Ben Graham captured this well with the memorable phrase: In the short run, the market is a beauty contest; in the long run, it is a weighing machine.



So what is likely to happen when Buffett departs? Buffett brings two skills to Berkshire unmatched by anyone else: An ability to allocate capital and an ability to motivate an unusually large number of managers who report directly to him. It is the first that enabled him to take a mediocre textile business located in New Bedford, Massachusetts, and compound it at a rate of over 20% a year, and it is the latter that has enabled him to extend this compounding to the company’s current size, far beyond what he and Charlie Munger thought possible. When Warren dies, these abilities will go with him. Berkshire’s culture will live on for some time, however, and I think this is what Warren is implying when he jokes that he plans on running Berkshire for a couple years through séances from the grave “if the directors will let me.” Warren says that there is a plan in place where his son Howard will become non-executive chairman. Howard, incidentally, last year published a handsome volume of photographs that show a person of remarkable empathy. The capital allocation responsibility would be taken by Lou Simpson, who for years has run GEICO’s portfolio with distinction out of an office in Rancho Santa Fe, CA. The operations side of the business would be handled by an unannounced person. Of course, if Buffett lives another ten years, the individuals would likely change. This plan of splitting capital allocation and operations has been used successfully for the past ten years or so at GEICO. It neatly separates the cash-investment side from the cash-generation side of the business, and Berkshire is a huge generator of cash.



With this change, my guess is that Berkshire will shift into a runoff mode. Rather than continuing to reinvest the huge cash flow—$6 billion in the first nine months of 2003—Berkshire will begin paying out substantial amounts in cash dividends, something it hasn’t done since the mid-sixties. It could easily handle dividends of several thousand dollars a year per A share. And it could decide to spin off to shareholders the large marketable securities positions (Coke, Gillette, etc.).



The changeover could come with some short-term turbulence, and you should be prepared for it. I would expect that, as time goes on, the market will increasingly discount Buffett’s death and, even, overcompensate. At some point, the market should recognize the cash-generating machine that Berkshire is. I assume also that the directors have a plan in place to buy back shares if the share price drops unduly. But restrictions on when a company can buy back stock around significant news may produce the market equivalent of an air pocket where those who are determined to sell will accept a price that would make a savvy buyer salivate. I read something recently that suggested that wise buyers may be waiting for this to happen. Indeed, we could be buyers, too. I think you should be prepared for a 10% to 20% or more short-term decline depending on how much the market has previously discounted the news. I would be surprised if that lasted for long.



This eventual certainty keeps me from owning more than around 20%-25% in most accounts. (Some of us, indeed Susan and I, own a lot more.) Berkshire is a remarkably diversified business; it throws off a ton of cash year after year; it is now one of only two AAA-rated insurance companies (The other is AIG, which we also own); it currently is sitting on some 30 billion in cash; and it is run by a man who thinks like an owner and has motivated the managers of the numerous units to operate like owners. I wish I could find another Berkshire, particularly one that is a fraction of its current size.” (With permission of Arthur Clarke)





Arthur Clarke

(Photo by

Nancy Line

Jacobs)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Arthur Clarke’s Commentary



191





NOTES FROM CHRIS STAVROU


Chris Stavrou of New York, a large Berkshire shareholder since the mid 1980s, has had brief conversations with Buffett over the years. He shares these thoughts:

[Background] I went to Wharton and from there straight to Wall Street to work as a brokerage house security analyst servicing the more aggressive institutional money managers, such as Fidelity, the Acorn Fund, Robert Wilson, and George Soros. … Later I founded a Buffett-style partnership, Stavrou Partners, in 1983 and, among other things, built up a massive position in Berkshire Hathaway. I have to pinch myself when I think how well it has all worked out. A great turning point for me as an analyst was studying Warren’s methodology; and I was so impressed with his character, honesty, and intellect that I christened my son Alexander Warren, although I named him after Leonard Warren, the opera singer, as well.



[How I First Heard About Warren] One day in the early 1970s, Lou Vincenti, president of Wesco Financial, started talking about Warren and became very enthusiastic. I’ll never forget what he said: “Warren Buffett is the greatest financial genius I’ve ever met. A new book has just come out called Supermoney by Adam Smith. Chris, don’t walk, run to the bookstore and get it. There’s a chapter in it on Warren. It will be the greatest lesson on investing that you can get.



[Conversations with Warren] “Finally I met Warren in the mid-1980s. … Warren has this way of lightheartedly answering questions, almost seeming to deflect the questioner at times, but really getting to the heart of the question and its relevance to investing. I had heard he had a photographic memory and that he never used a computer or even a calculator, so I asked him whether it was true he never used a calculator, and he said: “I never owned one and wouldn’t know how to use one if I did.”



“Really? Well, then, say, could you give me an example of how you do division?”



“Ten percent is real easy.”



“Seriously, how do you do more complicated calculations? Are you gifted?”



“No, no. It’s just that I’ve been working with numbers for a long time. It’s numbers sense.”



“Is there a trick? The great mental calculators like von Neumann and Feynman used to do some math operations like addition from left to right instead of right to left. Is there some way like that that you make the math easier?”



“Yeah. You don’t have to go four places beyond the decimal point.”



“No, seriously give me an example. Like what’s 99 times 99?”



“9,801.”



“How do you know that?”



“I read it in Feynman’s autobiography.”



(Sure enough, if you read Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman! you will see the exact same question asked and answered in the middle of the book.)



“If you have the price of a painting go from $250 to $50 million in 100 years, what’s the annual rate of return?”



“13.0%”



“How did you do that?”



“The Union Carbide compound interest tables. They only go out 50 years. You’ll do somewhat better in stocks, and a lot better if you live long enough.” Needless to say, those tables were nowhere in sight.



“I’m astounded you remember that. (The Union Carbide tables were the first computer-generated compounding tables and haven’t been published since the mid 1960s.) If they only go out 50 years, how do you do a 100-year calculation?” (Here he went through a calculation that I couldn’t quite follow. But the point is he didn’t just splice two tables together mathematically as you normally would using square roots. He used other simple algorithms I’d never heard of before or since.) “But let’s say you don’t know the compound interest tables or algorithms for using them.”



“Then you just go by the number of times it doubles.” ($250 doubles about 17.6 times to get $50 million, a double every 5.7 years, or about 13% a year.)”



“Do you use any of this stuff when calculating present values of cash flows?”



“No, no. Forget all the complicated formulas. Just go through Value Line and when you find a company you really like and understand and selling for half what it’s worth, buy it. And if you can’t find it, wait. You’ll get your chance.”



“You were a supporter of the Pugwash group.” (It is an anti-nuclear war association founded by Bertrand Russell. Its efforts led to the first nuclear nonproliferation treaty between the superpowers and the ban on atmospheric testing in 1963.) “Did you know Bertrand Russell?”



“No, I never actually met him. I saw him on TV and read a number of his books.”



“Like Principia Mathematica?”



“No, no. Not that sort of thing. The philosophical ones. Like Has Man a Future?”



“Why?”



“Because he thought like Graham.”



“I had an occasion to visit Warren’s office once when he wasn’t there. Sure enough, there were no Quotrons or computers. What stood out for me was the file room. There were 188 file drawers. When I subsequently saw him, I said, ‘What’s in all those files?’”



“Annual reports.”



“How about 13Ds?”



“No. It’s mostly annual reports and quarterly reports (filed by industry).”



“Do you have them going back, say, 15 years?”



“No. We cull them regularly, although I have some, like Coca-Cola, going back more than 15 years. But you don’t have to read 15 years of Coca-Cola annual reports to conclude it’s a wonderful company.”



“How do you wind up with so many?”



“If I’m interested in a company, I’ll buy 100 shares of all its competitors to get their annual reports.”



“How do you find time to read them all?”



“I skim a lot. But if I’m really interested, I’ll read every single word cover to cover.”



[Intrinsic Value] Intrinsic value is the discounted value today of all future distributable cash generated by an entity less the additional capital, including retained earnings, that the owners must put in to generate that cash. A simple way to get at how much a company is worth is to ask how much you would get for it if you sold it today …



If your discount rate is 10%, you are saying you have the low-risk alternative of putting $10 in, say, government bonds that pay you $1 of interest, which never grows. But if you have a company that has $1 in distributable cash that will grow 5% per annum forever, you would be happy to own that company and pay up to $20 for it. If that $1 in cash flow grew 8% a year forever, you could pay up to $50 for it. If it grew 9% a year forever, you might even pay up to $100 for it. What you are paying as a multiple of cash flow is equal to 1 divided by (the discount rate less the growth rate). Multiple = 1 divided by (k – g).



In other words, when you are paying $10 for that bond that pays $1 of interest you are paying 13(.10–.0) or 10 times interest income; when you pay $20 for the 5% grower, you are paying 13(.10–.05) or 20 times. And when you pay up to $50 for $1 in cash flow growing 8% a year forever, you are paying 13(.10–.08). Now you can see why you would theoretically pay 100 times cash flow for a 9% grower, and perhaps some phenomenal multiple for a company that grew 11% forever. The only problem is that there are no companies that grow their distributable cash flows at these high rates forever. But of all companies, what company or companies come closest to the ideal in terms of high, real, long-term growth of cash flow without massive infusions of new capital? The master found many of them before us. And they are concentrated in the Berkshire portfolio. Of course, there are all sorts of caveats. But clearly these companies are worth some big number. We don’t really know what it is. High growth rates, above a certain point, become too vulnerable to vicissitudes. More realistically, Berkshire’s intrinsic value is within a wide, albeit high, range.



The Story of Warren Buffett



(Courtesy of

Chris Stavrou)

Expensive Float

Berkshire shareholder Chris Stavrou and his son, Alexander Warren Stavrou, named with Warren Buffett in mind, enjoy some time on the water.

Of Permanent Value Notes from Chris Stavrou



192





BUFFETT HAS LUNCH WITH MATTHEW TROXEL


Buffett gets many requests and letters about matters that often have nothing to do with finance. In the case of Matthew Troxel, Buffett responded to his letter by writing an encouraging note for his recovery from a near fatal illness.

Matthew was a compliance officer for Lind-Waldock & Company, the nation’s largest discount commodity futures and options brokerage house, and was enrolled in graduate school courses full time at the Illinois Institute of Technology at the onset of his illness at age 24.

On April Fool’s Day 1995, the young man of Downers Grove, Illinois, suffered an allergic reaction to amoxicillin, a form of antibiotic he had taken a number of times before. This time the antibiotic was for a throat infection. Matthew became critically ill with Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis Syndrome (TENS).

The journey that ensued reminded Matt of Jerry Garcia’s words, “What a long, strange trip it’s been.”

His illness caused burning and blistering of six layers of skin from head to knee. He suffered heart, lung, and kidney failure. Because of a necrotic bowel, a part of his intestine died. He was left deaf in his left ear. He had permanent nerve damage to his feet and wrists, and his throat was burned and scarred shut. If that were not enough, he was also rendered blind.

After five months in the hospital enduring many surgical procedures and complications, Matthew was sent home on August 25, 1995 with a temporary ileostomy and a tube in the side of his stomach.

Matthew was told he would never see again. But after many visits to different doctors, he found a surgeon who operated and restored his sight. When the bandages were removed after the surgery, Matthew told his mother, Cheryl, “Mom, I can see my hand again.”

Matthew dealt with his situation with a realistic but positive attitude: “Although this illness has resulted in enormous destruction to my body, I am grateful for my life and the restoration of my sight. Prior to my illness, my vision was 20/20. The scarring and vascularization caused by TENS resulted in blindness. I could only detect hand motion at approximately one foot. After two surgical procedures to both eyes, the vision in my right eye has been restored to 20/40 and the vision in my left eye is currently 20/100.”

On March 31, 1996, he wrote Buffett about his condition. Matthew said he had plenty of time in the past year to listen to audio books about him and was inspired by his success. Matthew owned two shares of class B Berkshire stock and his young niece (his goddaughter) owns three shares of class B stock held in a Uniform Gifts to Minors Act (UGMA) account for her college education.

The following part of Matthew’s correspondence shows his sense of humor was alive and well: “My chances of survival were less than 5%, and only one in a million gets this syndrome in the manner I did. Since stock market theorists consider you a statistical 5-sigma event, I guess we share something in common.”

Buffett replied to him April 4, 1996: “Dear Mr. Troxel: You are indeed a ‘5 sigma event.’ I admire your spirit enormously and know that you are going to lead a productive life. Best of luck to you. Sincerely, Warren E. Buffett.”

“His response to my correspondence made me feel very special,” Matthew said, “because someone like Warren Buffett does not often make time for an ordinary person to provide inspiration and encouragement to lead a productive life. It is not every day that a person who has achieved such profound success writes to an average person and tells him or her they have value.” Matthew added, “When Warren Buffett told me I was valuable, believe me, it was motivating and inspiring.”

Another source of inspiration to Matthew was his relationship with Terri Modrzyk, a nurse at Loyola University in Chicago. “We met during my hospitalization,” he reported. “She has been by my side throughout my whole illness and was the first face I saw when I regained consciousness in intensive care. She has been my best friend and support throughout this ordeal.”

Matthew, as a result of his illness, continued to face pain and other medical complications that kept him from employment in the traditional workplace. Still, he ran his own limited liability company called Lexort Capital Group (Lexort is Troxel spelled backwards). Matthew also oversaw his Troxel TENS Foundation, a nonprofit organization dedicated to fighting TENS. Occasionally, he drove a car in daylight hours; and when weather and his health permitted, he played golf.

In April 1998, Matt’s illness took a turn for the worse, and his doctor informed him he had only two and a half years to live unless he received a double lung transplant. The severity of the syndrome’s attack had caused a form of pulmonary fibrosis in Matt’s lungs.

Given the grim news, Troxel wrote Buffett again to ask if he could spend a day with him. Matt received the surprise of his life when Buffett invited him for lunch. The invitation extended to his mom, Cheryl, his stepfather, Tom Kehoe, and his former nurse, fiancée Terri. He also let the author tag along. The lunch took place at the Omaha Club after the special General Re merger meeting on September 16, 1998.

At the lunch, Buffett ordered a Coke, but the waitress, who apparently didn’t recognize him, asked Buffett how about a Pepsi instead. Buffett replied how about a Coke. The waitress said she didn’t have a Coke and Buffett said, “Make it an iced tea.” Matt tried to console Buffett about it and said it would be okay if he had a Pepsi.

Buffett ordered a bacon, lettuce, and tomato sandwich with an “extra order of bacon” and for dessert had an ice cream concoction with “extra chocolate.”

During the luncheon, Matt told Buffett of some of his medical problems, pointing out that some of his body parts had previously belonged to women and some to minorities. To that tidbit of information, Buffett wittily replied, “You’re an equal opportunity recipient.”

Buffett told Matt of one of the two times he had been in the hospital. He said it was in early 1970, shortly after a dinner with Ben Graham. He had been prescribed penicillin for a sore throat and suddenly his body went into a terrible reaction. Buffett was hospitalized for several days and to this day carries a card in his wallet saying not to give him penicillin.

Buffett also told a story about an Italian publication that gave the impression he would be glad to contribute to any charity. He said Berkshire began to receive a lot of requests, “but they were written in Italian.”

Buffett told a string of jokes, talked a little about the General Re merger and how he expected it to close in the fourth quarter of 1998. He also said that he was leaving in two days for a two-week trip to an exotic place. (It turned out to be Alaska and some national parks with Bill Gates.)

Matt was so thrilled with the lunch that he wrote the following post to the Berkshire message board:

I want to take this opportunity on behalf of myself and my family to say “Thank You” to everyone who made my journey to Omaha to meet and have lunch with WEB a special memory that will stay with me all my days. The dinner at Gorat’s and the hospitality we received were very genuine, sincere, and kind. My illness has taken me to many different places, but this event will be the most memorable because it restored my belief in the golden rule that people treat others the way they would like to be treated themselves. By feeling so welcomed, we all felt at ease to just be ourselves.





Lunch with our chairman produced such a high for me, I didn’t need the plane or any of my pain medication to fly home. Mr. Buffett not only treated me like a fellow shareholder, but more importantly like a regular human being, which I believe speaks volumes about the quality of his compassion and character. The only tense moment occurred when drinks were ordered and I found out much to my surprise, that the Omaha Club does not serve Coke. I gave an inquisitive look to our chairman and said, “It’s okay. You can order a Pepsi.” After I placed my order, I told WEB he needed to meet with the management about the soft drinks offered.





When I originally contacted Mr. Buffett in 1996, the B shares did not exist. I wrote to him only out of admiration and to be his friend. I believe that the time spent during lunch created a foundation of a friendship that I hope we both will enjoy for many years to come.





Health permitting, I plan to attend the annual pilgrimage to the Mecca of Capitalism for the annual meeting in May of 1999. Should the “Master Trader” in the sky call me home before lungs become available for transplant, I will be with you all in spirit, and I know that our chairman will always do his best to increase Berkshire Hathaway’s intrinsic value from which I have benefited. However, the greatest benefit I received from my association with Berkshire Hathaway has been the true friendship our chairman has extended to me.





With best wishes and warm regards,





Matthew Troxel





On May 7, 1999, Troxel wrote Buffett that he had hoped to make the annual meeting, but his doctors had advised against it. It turned out Matt had to make a visit to the emergency room the day before but was released. “Which means,” he said, “death, and I returned to our respective corners in the ring.”

Buffett replied on May 18, 1999:

Dear Matt:





I’ve been away for almost two weeks or you would have heard from me sooner. At annual meeting time I kept inquiring about you. When I found out you weren’t in attendance, I knew you must be having health problems. It’s great to know that once again you have proven your superiority over illness and that—though it may be a 15-round fight—you’re going to emerge the winner.





As you may have read, we had a great time at the meeting, but it will be better next year when you can make it. I’m enclosing my most recent claim to fame [a short item about being one of Nebraska’s sexiest men]. You can tell Terri, however, that if the contest were being held in Chicago, I would not stand a chance against you.





On July 2, 1999, Troxel wrote Buffett a letter documenting his frustrations in finding a lung transplant. He said, “Although I know you claim to be an agnostic, I believe with all my heart that my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ had His hand involved in us becoming friends. The odds are great that I will be waiting with St. Peter for your arrival some day, and I hope you will want to play a game of bridge, and share a Coke or a DQ Dilly.”

On July 6, 1999, Buffett wrote Matt about his transplant search adding, “I’m sending along a copy of your letter to Charlie to see if he has any suggestions. [Munger is board chairman of a hospital in Los Angeles.] You’re right that it ain’t over til it’s over. I’ll probably meet St. Peter before you do, and he’s not expecting me for another 30 years.”

Although Matt’s health continued to decline, he and Terri married July 9, 2000. Buffett sent the couple a crystal bowl from his favorite jewelry store in Omaha.

Matt Troxel died on July 28, 2002. A short time later, his wife wrote the following letter to the Yellow BRKer group:

Thank you for your thoughts and prayers and remembering our family during such a difficult time. Your contribution to the Troxel TENS foundation will aid in research. Thus far, the foundation has raised $100,000.00. It gave Matthew great satisfaction knowing physicians may someday find a cure for this terrible illness. He left such a wonderful legacy. You have all shown him such kindness over the past few years. We will always be grateful. There is still a great deal of work to be done in terms of the foundation. I promised him I would continue his legacy. There will always be a special place for each of you in our hearts. Thank you again.





Sincerely,





Terri Troxel





Doing Lunch

Buffett is pictured with Troxel after an informal lunch at the Omaha Club September 16, 1998.

(Photo by

Pat Kilpatrick)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Buffett Has Lunch with Matthew Troxel

Pre-Special Meeting

Terri Modrzyk, Matt Troxel, Tom Kehoe, and Cheryl Troxel dined at Gorat’s with a Yellow BRKer group the evening before Berkshire’s special meeting September 16, 1998.



(Photo by John Gartmann)

Buffett Has Lunch with Matthew Troxel The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Buffett Has Lunch with Matthew Troxel



193





MRS. MARIANN APPLEY


Mariann Appley shared her Berkshire experience with a writers’ group at Harvard Club on October 2, 1999. She spoke further in a later interview on May 5, 2006.

Mrs. Appley came to America from Hamburg, Germany, in 1953 with a sterling family and a classical education behind her. She does not have a rags-to-riches story, but an early investment with Buffett certainly provided an enormous boon to her life. “It was a windfall,” she says. “I’m forever grateful.” At 19, she was invited by a relative to stay with them in the United States. She revealed:

To this day, I clearly remember the excitement I felt about the Manhattan peninsula and the city of New York where we spent three days, staying at the Taft Hotel. I particularly remember my dread at having to leave New York and travel so far from what I felt was an exciting place to live. My aunt and uncle, who had come from Nebraska to meet me, on the other hand, were glad to get away from what they called “the rat race.” We traveled to Omaha by rail, eating and sleeping on the train, riding for more than three days. We made a stop in Chicago, as an interlude for a day or so, to visit people, and then onward on the train.



What stuck in my mind during that long and tiring train trip were thoughts like these: What a huge country America really is.… how many people could live here (even then, Europe suffered from overpopulation).… Also, I was panic-stricken at the thought of how I could ever earn enough money to even get back to New York to board a ship to get back to Hamburg.…These dozens of hours on the train must cost a lot! I knew what my ship passage had cost, and I was fully prepared to earn enough money to pay that back (having obtained an immigration visa, so that I could legally work), but to have this long train trip, added to it, seemed entirely unmanageable to me. These, then, were my key thoughts as we crossed the flat and wide-open terrain of the Midwestern plains.”



After being married for about 10 years, and having three children, Mrs. Appley found herself alone again—divorced. “It had been entirely my wish, but still, it turned out to be a most difficult predicament for me.

When all was said and done, two-thirds of my “settlement” (financial, that is) was ‘doled out’ over 12 years. My cash portion, the one-third of the settlement, was meant to buy a house. I also needed to buy appliances, a new car (mine had nearly 140,000 miles on it), and most of my furniture, since I had left without it.



In Omaha, I did have some solid social connections, and that included the Wayne Eves family. Wayne was a long-time friend of Warren Buffett, and he had apparently spoken to Buffett about his concern for my plight and my need to manage my resources well. Wayne Eves proved to be a most true friend to connect me with Warren Buffett. At that time, Warren had a Limited Partnership of a handful of investors, and although most people had not heard of him, even in Omaha, he (just barely 32 years of age) had already closed his Partnership to the public. So, without Wayne Eves’s help, I could definitely not have entered the Partnership.



When I met Warren, at a benefit-style show for the Bishop Clarkson Hospital, I was very nervous and nearly fouled it up but, fortuitously, did arrange to see him in his office–a tiny place with a lot of paper, as I recall. I began by asking him hard, tough questions, like: “Do you have your own money in other kitties as well, so that if something happens, you would be alright, but the partners would go down?” He answered: “No–we have virtually our total net worth in the Partnership–we eat our own cooking! And, another question: If you had a cerebral hemorrhage, who would

be paid off first, your family or your partners?” Answer: “My partners!”



She said Buffett later stated she asked very tough questions of him.

Warren also asked me some general questions about the life I was planning for myself and my children, and I shared with him that I planned to go to school again, sew up whatever European credits I had and, eventually, obtain a baccalaureate degree, which I did, summa cum laude, in fact, and do graduate study which I did, attaining an M.A. degree. He advised me to make sure that I would stay away from purchasing a house, but that I should rather rent for several years (which I ended up doing).



When I had asked him in that interview if he could double my nest egg in 10 years, were I to invest it with him, he said that he couldn’t promise anything but hoped to triple it!



The chief reason that I decided to dare giving him virtually all of my nest egg (excepting only the amount I needed to make a home for myself and my children) was that I had a sense of 1000% honesty about Warren—not mostly honest—or almost honest—but totally honest, and then some! Also, of course, there was that indefinable instinct I had about the man while talking to him that I was sitting across from someone who was so unusually able.



I told him, then and there, that I wanted to be in the Buffett Partnership and would bring him a check, (for $50,000) in person, when I had my cash available. He told me that he could not legally take me in until the new year (it was early summer, then), but he would take my funds and pay 6 percent on them, until they could be invested in the partnership.



My age, at the time, was about 29, and Warren, for a financial wizard, was rather young—only about three years older than I. When I told my lawyer that I had invested virtually all my available cash with Warren Buffett, he was exasperated. While he pointed out that he was supposed to be a nice chap, alright, and well thought of, he felt I should have gone with one of the successful and highly experienced financial types (brokers) in Omaha. In fact, my lawyer had introduced me to at least one such proven financial type (gray and distinguished looking), whom I had already rejected.



In the same vein, when I told my aunt that I had given almost all of my nest egg to Warren Buffett, she said “My God! He is just a kid—though he certainly comes from a nice family (his father was a congressman and his family owned a well-run grocery store).… Why did you do that???” I couldn’t explain it, but knew in my heart that I had dared correctly.



In fact, that was, and still is, the unique thing with Warren Buffett—that I could rely on him both to be honest and doing his work diligently—and with enormous success, to boot!



From approximately 1964 on, when the Berkshire Hathaway stock was purchased for $20 per share (and that is my price for the IRS from a capital gains perspective), until 1998, when the equity per outstanding share was $37,801, the climb in equity has been phenomenal.



When the Buffett Partnership dissolved, around 1968, the Partners were paid out in Berkshire Hathaway stock and cash. (At that time, I did not know that I could have purchased more stock with the cash distribution, which, I learned later, some people did.) However, the suggestion from the Partnership was that if one would want absolute “safety” to do US Treasury Bills for cash availability, or otherwise, do bonds; if one would wish to accept some reasonable risk, then to do a then-brand-new fund named “Sequoia,” run by a friend of Warren’s. I did Sequoia with half of my cash distribution.



Most of what I had purchased with the Buffett Partnership cash distribution did quite well, though either I did not hold stocks long enough or had not a significant enough amount in there to make much of a difference. That is to say, it made no real impact financially to me. Nevertheless, things went well enough.



When my husband, Mortimer Herbert Appley, and I married, I became a happy woman, though we had money problems almost right away. (He was a professor of Psychology and a couple of years after our marriage became President of Clark University, where he served 10 years.) His children, of course, needed his support for college; and his mother, who was failing, was, at the end, financially needy as well. (He split the expenses of her care with his brother.) We were married for several months when I, one day, reluctantly discussed my own investment ventures with my husband. He was so impressed with how I was doing that he encouraged me to venture considerably more. Needless to say, that particularly daring venture I then undertook (I went into the stock market with borrowed money!) could have wiped me out and nearly did! [Buffett later told her: “How could a smart woman like you do a dumb thing like that?”] Thank God that when I secured that unfortunate loan, I had the presence of mind not to allow my two “sacred cows,” Berkshire Hathaway and Diversified Retailing (which later gave me more Berkshire stock) to be included as collateral.



This brings us back to the Buffett Partnership cash distribution of 1970 and what I did with it. Half was invested in rather solid situations (Windsor Fund, Standard Oil of California, and Diversified Mortgage). The other half was fortuitously invested in the Buffett-recommended Sequoia Fund, which was to gain considerable fame later for doing fabulously well.



A windfall of an entirely different nature—another unexpected good fortune—this one concerning our lifestyle, was the purchase of a fine brick home on Nantucket (the 1834 Frederick Mitchell house). After two years of almost continuous house hunting each summer and beyond and dealing with seven separate realtors, I heard about this house and went into cash with all my available stock positions (including the very successful Sequoia Fund holdings, but not, of course, the Berkshire stock) in June of 1978.



1978 was a bad time for stocks—interest rates were sky high (and going higher), and people could not get the banks to give them either loans or mortgages. The irony was, that after being in cash for only a few months, the stock market improved somewhat, but especially Sequoia (which gained almost 40%). It was painful not to be participating in the “up,”—and to have no house either!”



But in 1979, Appley was finally able to buy her dream house in Nantucket.



After a few years, it became my wish to pay off the mortgage (initially, I had paid over half of the purchase price in cash as a down payment). In 1986, there was a well publicized tax advantage if one sold securities before the end of the fiscal year (I believe it was 15%–20%). The stock market plummeted, because so many people sold securities at the 11th hour. I was no exception. Just an hour before the market closed for the year on 12-31-86, I sold enough Berkshire stock to pay off the mortgage on the Nantucket house and also take care of some other matters.



In dollar terms, this, my first Berkshire Hathaway sale, turned out to be rather stupid, especially since Wall Street went sky high rather quickly in the New Year (the gain was around 40% or so, and I had unfortunately timed my sale for a tax advantage of at most 20%). A lot of America had fallen into the same trap, though. However, it made more sense for me not to have the pressure of the mortgage. Though I have sold Berkshire stock many times since, that was my very first sale, and it hurt the most because the stock price was so much lower then. To this day, I cannot forget that sale!



The next significant sale of Berkshire stock occurred when we had a disaster in the Nantucket house. The equivalent of two swimming pools full of water—imagine that much water—was in our basement at one point and had washed out some of the support foundation of the house.



During those bad three years, however, 1992-1994, I again sold a significant number of Berkshire Hathaway shares to be sure to have enough of a financial backing for all the work to be done in the house—though at this point we also took the opportunity to treat ourselves to some additional painting and decorating.



In conclusion, reflecting on my windfall, had I not come to Omaha, Nebraska, I would never have met up with Warren Buffett, of course. In the same vein, the good fortune to own a very fine Nantucket property, which has been so positive for our lifestyle, is, of course, closely connected with the story of the Berkshire stock and the financial security and the confidence it gave me. Had I not been in the original Buffett Partnership, I would have had neither the Berkshire Hathaway stock nor the cash distribution which, years later, enabled me to buy the house without having to sell any Berkshire to acquire it.



Though this house is, of course, a valuable investment, we all know that a splendid property also is a money eater and not a moneymaker. To have stayed in stock (e.g., Sequoia Fund) would have been, financially speaking, a lot wiser. Nevertheless, the house is, to be sure, a happiness producer for me and my family, no question about that!



The really big windfall for me, of course, has been my good fortune to hold on to most of my Berkshire Hathaway stock!



Appley’s paper was written in 1999, and in the interview with her in Omaha, she said that even though she set up a foundation (CRUT) and also purchased a Boston condo, the statement about still owning most of her Berkshire is true today as well!



(Photo courtesy of Mariann Appley)

Mariann Appley

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Mrs. Mariann Appley

Mrs. Mariann Appley The Story of Warren Buffett



(Courtesy of Mariann Appley)

Of Permanent Value Mrs. Mariann Appley



194





MORALE BOOST FOR DAVID THOMSON


Berkshire received a letter from the sister of a man who had been paralyzed from the neck down in a traffic accident.

The paralyzed man, David Thomson of Scotland, wrote a letter to this author.

The following is part of that letter:

I was involved in a serious road traffic accident on the first day of 2003. My car collided head on with a lorry, which resulted in me breaking my neck. This left me paralyzed from the neck down. I can move my arms, but my fingers, legs and upper body muscles are all permanently paralyzed.



My lung collapsed in the hospital and I was unable to breathe for myself, so I was placed on a ventilator. This meant I could no longer talk and my spirits were very low. My family had heard me talk about the great man Warren Buffett many times before my accident. I had read scores of books about him and had the utmost respect for his abilities. Therefore, my sister Jennifer decided to write to Mr. Buffett explaining how ill I was and how much it would mean if he could send me a card or letter of support. She explained I had been doing a PhD before my accident and that due to the severity of my injuries I may not be able to return to my studies. I don’t think anyone in my family expected a reply, due to Mr. Buffett’s busy schedule. They told me nothing and simply hoped for a reply. I was delighted and even managed a smile when I received a copy of the latest edition of your book dedicated to me with the words: “To David, with admiration from Warren E. Buffett.” I was delighted with the book, and I think it showed that special touch that makes Mr. Buffett so extraordinary.



I was subsequently moved to a rehabilitation ward. Recovery from a spinal cord injury is a very slow process, but after being in the hospital for six months I was provided with a specially adapted computer keyboard (seen in the photo), which I can use, with the side of my right hand. There was one person I really wanted to write to. I wrote to Mr. Buffett and thanked him for the book and sent him a copy of The Diving Bell and the Butterfly by Jean-Dominique Bauby. This is a book that made me glad to be alive; it’s an inspiring book, just like Warren is an inspiring man.





(Photo courtesy of David Thomson)

A Lifeline

Even with a spinal cord injury, David Thomson tracks Buffett’s activities. And despite his paralyzed fingers, he can type letters on a special keyboard that his parents bought him. The keyboard has large letters; Thomson punches the keyboard with the side of his hand and uses a large roller ball as a mouse.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Morale Boost for David Thomson



195





A VIEW FROM MOHNISH PABRAI


Mohnish Pabrai, a Berkshire shareholder who runs Pabrai Funds in Irvine, California, has spent a good bit of time trying to emulate Buffett. Along the way, he has enjoyed big successes—such as a splendid annualized return for his funds. Unfortunately, a few setbacks have also occurred, including a letter of rejection from Buffett of Pabrai’s request to work for him.

Born in Mumbai, India, Pabrai did his undergraduate work at Clemson University in computer engineering. Then he went on to Illinois Institute of Technology, where he finished his coursework in engineer training, but he did not do his thesis for an MS degree.

Pabrai, in his mid-40s, says that until 1994, “I had never heard of Buffett.” Then one day while getting ready to take a flight from London to Chicago, he picked up a book by Peter Lynch in the airport. The book mentioned Buffett in reverent tones and had an anecdote about how Buffett called Lynch once for permission to use a quote, but Lynch hung up on him at first, thinking it was a crank call.

Pabrai became increasingly interested in Buffett and read the books about him written by Roger Lowenstein and Robert Hagstrom. “I felt I had discovered the Holy Grail.

“I read all his rules about investing—about concentration, about buying a business, about intrinsic value—and what struck me was that mutual fund managers were not following the rules. In physics, there is a law of gravity. Gravity is there (whether you recognize it or not). I felt that money managers were operating without a robust framework, and their returns were terrible. Nobody in the industry was following the path. You need religiously to follow the path,” Pabrai said.

Pabrai ran TransTech, Inc., a software company, but became more excited about investing. He sold his company in 1999. “I was becoming fascinated with Buffett’s approach,” he said.

Like Einstein, Pabrai saw compounding as the “eighth wonder of the world.”

A $100,000 investment in Pabrai Funds at inception on July 1, 1999, was worth $659,700 at the end of 2006—an annualized return of 28.6%.

Lipper mutual fund data says the Pabrai fund’s overall performance ranks No. 3 out of about 4,000 mutual funds, behind the BlackRock Global Resources Fund at 29.5% and the ING Russia Fund at 38.4%. Adding back Pabrai’s fees, which he jokes are “outrageous,” his funds would be ranked

No. 2.

Pabrai holds two annual meetings for his investors; one in California, attended by 290 in 2007, and one in Chicago, attended by 270, that year.

“When I was in Chicago (until 2003) we had one meeting in Illinois. When I moved, I thought it would be unfair to ask investors to come to California. So I kept the Illinois meeting and added a California meeting. It works out well. East Coast/Midwest/Europe folks come to Chicago. West Coast/Asia folks come to California,” he said.

Like Buffett, Pabrai keeps Wall Street at a distance. He buys no research, has no hired help and buys only into companies he feels he understands. Pabrai doesn’t try to replicate Berkshire’s holdings; although, he did buy convertible bonds of Level 3 Communications in 2002, before Buffett did, sensing value in telecom’s distress.

Keeping things as simple as possible, Pabrai avoids computer models and complex derivatives, simply buying what looks right to him. His minimalist approach does, however, allow for a collection of Buffett memorabilia at his home office.

Pabrai is fond of quoting Buffett on many aspects of business, including, “We don’t go into companies with the thought of effecting a lot of change. That doesn’t work any better in investments than it does in marriages.”

A devoted bridge player like Buffett, Pabrai started managing money in 1995, and through 1999 returns ran north of 70%; but he admits some of that was pure luck and even some “mistakes” turned into profits. Believing fervently in Buffett’s “hold forever” tenet, Pabrai held on for a terrific run in an Indian computer stock but then sold at the high and watched as the stock plummeted thereafter.

Fellow investors joined Pabrai, who modeled the structure of his funds on Buffett’s early partnership.

Finally, Pabrai wrote Buffett to ask if he could work for him. Buffett wrote back a detailed letter saying there was no such job at Berkshire because he “worked alone.”

“I was so disappointed I threw the letter away,” Pabrai recalls.

When Buffett announced in 2007 that he was seeking several people to help invest Berkshire’s money, Pabrai’s name was among the many mentioned. Pabrai demurs as to whether he has applied for a job, but says others have written in on his behalf.

Happy with what he’s doing, Pabrai says whoever gets such a job with Buffett will have “a ton of bricks” on them. However, if Buffett were to ask him, he would take the job out of a “sense of duty.”

Pabrai and his friend New York money manager Guy Spier made the winning bid in 2007 for lunch with Buffett that took place in New York in June 2008. The $650,100 that Pabrai and Spier bid went to the San Francisco’s Glide Foundation, which helps the homeless.

Buying the lunch with Buffett was a meaningful way to repay the great debt Pabrai says he owes Buffett.

Pabrai and his wife, Harina Kapoor, founded the Dakshana Foundation which helps poor students in India have a chance for higher education.

Pabrai has written two books. The first, Mosaic: Perspectives on Investing, is a collector’s item, going for about $400 on Amazon.

In Mosaic, Pabrai writes, “Minimizing downside risk is the first step toward being a successful investor.… You always need to be cognizant of six sigma events that can have ugly impacts on your portfolio and account for the approximate probabilities. Whenever I look at any investment opportunity, I first focus upon what factors may cause the investment to result in a significant permanent loss of capital. Beside the Yellowstone Factor (that it could erupt), there are the usual suspects—war, terrorism, fraudulent financial statements, dishonest management, disruptive innovation, etc.”

While one can’t quantify these things exactly, Pabrai says they can be put into rough guesses. He concludes: “Imagine a casino which offered the following odds:

Odds of a 50-100% loss 3%

Odds of a 1-49% loss 2%

Odds of a 2x or higher return

in 2-4 years 75%

Odds of a breakeven—

2x return in 2-4 years 20%

“The entire Vegas strip would be bankrupt quickly offering these odds. Yet, these are the odds offered to focused value investors in the U.S. equity markets. With such odds, you’d handily beat the market—generating a 15+% return over the long run—even if you factor in Yellowstone” (pp. 4 and 6).

His second book, The Dhandho Investor, tells of low-risk, high-returns ways to invest. Dhandho means “endeavors that create wealth.”

The Dhandho Investor opens with the remarkable example of how India’s Patel family came to own billions of dollars of hotels in the U.S. The Patels came to America with virtually nothing and bought hotels which were often in bankruptcy. By buying the hotels, the large Patel families had a free place to stay. Willing to work all hours, the Patels filled such positions as the front desk clerk, the plumber, electrician, maid, and operator. In the end, the Patels owned a hotel empire.

Although Pabrai’s record has been outstanding, no one is perfect. His 2006 investment in mortgage lender Delta Financial went bust, costing the fund $55 million.

So how does Pabrai see Berkshire today? “It’s running on all cylinders,” he said. “It has an intrinsic value of $150,000 a share.” Pabrai attributes the 2007 stock rise in part to a subdued hurricane season. “But it is not the thing. GEICO is spending close to $1 billion a year in advertising—more than Coke in advertising. It is in the top 10 of the most-recognized brand names.”

He also says Berkshire has great bench strength in management and a great advantage in being able to allocate new capital from businesses it buys. “Berkshire has a great moat going for it. For many businesses in the coming decades, Berkshire will be the logical buyer,” he said.

Pabrai thinks even if one bought Berkshire at $150,000 a share, one could reasonably expect a 10% annual return; and if one could buy it at a 20% discount to intrinsic value, then one might reasonably expect annual returns

of 15%.



Mohnish Pabrai and his wife,

Harina Kapoor

(Photo courtesy of

Mohnish Pabrai)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value A View from Mohnish Pabrai



Mosaic: Perspectives on Investing

(Photo by Mary Porter)



The Dhandho Investor

(Photo by Mary Porter)



196





A VIEW FROM AUSTRALIA


Two Australian investors—Ian Darling and Mark Nelson—make the journey half way around the world to Omaha each spring to catch up on Buffett’s thinking.

Darling and Nelson are executive director and chief executive officer, respectively, of Caledonia, an investment firm in Sydney called Caledonia.

Says Darling, “We first heard about Warren Buffett during the early 1980s when a new Australian company modeled itself after Berkshire Hathaway and quoted Buffett extensively in its annual report.” Darling immediately sent away for the 1983 report. “We soon discovered that it was the most exciting piece of investment literature we had ever read. It instantly made us Buffett ‘disciples.’ It soon became clear that imitating Buffett is one thing but being able to invest like him is quite another. The Australian company soon disappeared from existence.

“We first went to the Berkshire annual meeting in 1995 at the suggestion of our friend Gifford Combs. Combs, a California-based investor, for many years had joined a group of other professional investors in Omaha for a weekend of fun and investment discussion. In simple terms, Combs said, ‘One day this will no longer happen—so grab it while you can.’”

Darling continued: “We first met Buffett while watching the Omaha Royals at the baseball game in 1995. We sat down beside him in the stand, introduced ourselves, and explained that we were from Australia. He shouted with delight, ‘Hey, these guys have come all the way from Australia.’ He genuinely seemed excited by our visit. We got the distinct impression that we were the first Australians Buffett had ever met, from both his greeting and the warm letter we received from him back in Australia after the event: ‘You both are great sports to come all the way from Australia, and I hope you continue to make the trip.’ With an invitation like that, how could we possibly let him down? We have returned every year since.

“We got the impression on our first visit that very few Australians had actually ever made the journey to Omaha. At last year’s meeting [1997], Buffett informed us that as many as 14 shareholders had made the journey from Australia. There can be no doubt that now his fame is truly international.”

Darling said the long trip is worth it. “If we were two ambitious Australian golfers who had the opportunity to get a lesson from Jack Nicklaus or Tiger Woods on a golf course in the United States, we wouldn’t hesitate to make the trip. The weekend in Omaha gives us an opportunity to learn from the best; and every year, we return to Australia with valuable lessons, actionable ideas, and new insights into the world of investments.”

Darling’s partner, Mark Nelson, commented on their first trip to Omaha: “We were delighted to meet Mrs. B, who upon learning we were Australians, exclaimed, ‘My, my, what a small world, what a small world.’ We were charmed by Charlie Munger during our brief encounter with him at Borsheims and surprised to see he is much taller in real life than we expected from seeing his pictures. We had our first tasting of See’s Candies and encouraged the relevant parties to establish an operation in Australia. We also had our first tasting of Cherry Coke, but it was too sweet, too ‘foreign’ for us.” The two checked out everything in Omaha that had any relation to Buffett: his home, his office, and even where he eats. They were most impressed to run across Buffett driving himself to his own meeting in his rather modest car and struggling to find a parking space!

“The wisdom of Warren Buffett can be applied anywhere in the world,” Nelson added. “His highly disciplined, commonsense approach to investment has no national boundaries. There are some very fine investors in Australia to learn from, but there is only one Warren Buffett in the world. So it’s pretty easy to justify to ourselves why we make the trip. The great lessons from the world of investment are still primarily generated in the U.S., as are the lessons about shareholder returns and progressive management. So, in simple terms, we are happy to go ‘where the action is.’ ”

In 2000, Darling put out a documentary film about Berkshire called Woodstock for Capitalists.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Take Me Out to the Ballgame

Australian investors Mark Nelson and Ian Darling and their friend, California investor Gifford Combs, sit in the stands on Berkshire Hathaway Night with Warren “Casey Stengel” Buffett.

Of Permanent Value A View from Australia



197





A VIEW FROM CANADA


Longtime financial advisor Jeff Hull, 39, of Toronto, is known for producing widely watched television shows about business. He has been a Buffett aficionado since he bought his first Berkshire share in 1992 for $8,800.

“I thought it was expensive at the time,” jokes Hull, who attended his first Berkshire annual meeting in 1993. He met Buffett, whereupon he added both himself and his clients to Berkshire. In 1999, he bought a B share for his newborn daughter, joking, “I bought a baby Berk for my baby Brittany.”

Hull began studying Buffett in the early 1990s and became increasingly interested. He has worked in the investment industry since the age of 21 and now works for a subsidiary of the large Canadian firm Manulife Financial.

An entrepreneur to his core, Hull bought and sold his first real estate investment at age 18, making a profit of more than 200%. He became a millionaire in 1994 despite skipping college in favor of pursuing common sense investing.

Hull became disenchanted with the lack of accurate information that TV programs were providing investors; so in 1998, he decided to produce his own TV programs and fill the void, debunking money myths and unveiling truths to help investors.

Since then, his shows have aired in over 30 countries for broadcasters like CNBC. He wrote and produced the first in-depth television documentary about Buffett with the proceeds going to charity. “I wanted to get his message out for the greater good,” said Hull, who regards his film work about Buffett simply as a labor of love.

“I showed him the first documentary before broadcast to assure everything was accurate. He was fine with all the content, just saying the name of his mother (Leila) was mispronounced,” recalls Hull, who then went to quite an effort and personal expense to fix the pronunciation and recut the final version. “I think he appreciated that I wanted it to be perfect.”

As Hull got to know Buffett and his family through interviews and annual meetings, he asked Buffett in 2004 what it would take to have him invest “north of the border.” Buffett

told Hull that if he found him a business in Canada to buy, he’d pay Hull a finder’s fee.

That began a challenge that has not resulted in a purchase yet, and, oddly, the first company Hull ever mentioned to Buffett was an American company. “I brought one business to his attention that helped me better understand his screening process. It was a bullet-proof vest business with one potential pitfall.” Although Hull knew it had the metrics that Buffett wished for, Buffett said that there was one uncalculable risk—because of Berkshire’s deep pockets, a jury might award a potential plaintiff an unusually large sum. “He sees himself as the steward of Berkshire’s money, and he’s careful in exposing it to an unknown factor that could arise someday,” Hull said. The hunt continues: “My gun is loaded and I’m on safari,” says Hull.

Hull has had a number of talks with Buffett over the years, often in interviews or small groups. One such small group was before a fundraiser dinner in Toronto on October 11, 2007, attended by billionaires from Canada, Russia, and Israel.

Hull said one of Buffett’s favorite stories is how he came to buy Iscar, the Israeli metal-cutting company. Hull reports that Buffett bought Iscar, a company “that he had never seen or heard of, in a country he had never been, with a management that he had never met.” The wheels were set in motion, famously, by a one-and-one-half-page letter from Iscar’s Eitan Wertheimer to Buffett.

It was also Wertheimer who asked Buffett to attend the fundraiser in Toronto in support of the University Health Network, the Rambam Health Care Campus in Israel, and the SickKids Foundation. The event for the elite of the business world raised more than $4 million.

Buffett covered many topics. He talked about the slow but steady decline of the newspaper industry due to the many news channels available. He talked about what he saw as a continuing decline of the U.S. dollar versus a strengthening of the Canadian dollar, and he talked about Canada’s vast oil sands as a hope on the energy front for the U.S. Buffett said he has not invested in the oil sands because of high capital costs, but that he is aware of the huge potential. “The oil sands are on his radar screen,” Hull said. “He’s not ready to invest yet, but said over time, they will be worth a lot, that there will be a continuing thirst for oil in the future.”

BACK TO CANADA

On August 18, 2008, Buffett and Gates flew into Alberta, Canada to have a look at the oilsands. Buffett has said the oilsands provide a real possibility in alleviating energy shortages, and he added that he and Gates are interested in a possible investment. However, he went on to say that it may be some time before he is ready to do so.

Their hosts during their visit were a group that included Canadian Natural Resources Ltd. and the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers (CAPP) at Canadian Natural’s $9.3 billion Horizon oilsand development (Canwest News Service, August 20, 2008).

The group visited the Horizon site about 100 kilometers north of oilsands hub Fort McMurray. Horizon became Alberta’s fourth major oilsands mine when it went into production.

The story quoted sources reporting that Buffett said he favors investing in the Canadian oilsands because it offers a secure supply of oil for the U.S.

The story also said that while the oil-soaked sands are expensive to produce—some say only feasible with oil prices above the $70–$80 a barrel range—there has been heightened interest in recent years. Billions of dollars in new construction are in the works.

Stay tuned.



Doing It for the Girls

Jeff Hull sold his documentary about Buffett at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2006. Proceeds went to Girls Inc., a charity the Buffett family supports.

(Photo courtesy of Jeff Hull)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Hull with Buffett at a fundraising event in Toronto on October 11, 2007

(Photo

courtesy

of Jeff Hull)

Of Permanent Value A View from Canada



198





A VIEW FROM BRITISH COLUMBIA


Sanjeev Parsad runs Corner Market Capital Corp. and the MPIC Funds in British Columbia, Canada, in addition to founding the MSN Berkshire Hathaway Shareholders Board. He tells

a story about becoming a Buffett aficionado:

The first time I heard about Warren Buffett, I was about 14 years old, and my friend Peter Theodoridis had just read John Train’s Money Masters. He told me about the most expensive stock trading on the NYSE called Berkshire Hathaway and its CEO named Warren Buffett. I could not have cared less at the time, and I was far more interested in playing video games. It would prove to be the most expensive lesson of my life.



In 1991, my father Tony passed away, leaving my mother, Rekha, a very young widow with two sons—my 9-year-old brother Aman and myself. My father used to work at the university I attended, and I used to see him every day. When he passed away, I could no longer endure going to school and dropped out after my third year studying biology.



Feeling responsible for my family’s well-being, I started to work at various jobs, eventually settling into a unionized position with Canadian grocer Loblaws. The income helped with the bills but left very little for saving. For some strange reason, I often would read investing books during lectures. The lessons from some of those books came in handy when burdened with managing my family’s finances. At the same time, I helped my mother raise my brother, who now thankfully is a university graduate.



During my years at Loblaws, I knew I had to do something, so I cut my expenses to the bone. No luxuries, scrimped, saved, and invested the money in bonds and mutual funds. I drove my first car for 13 years! By 1996, I had saved a substantial sum and was now dabbling in stocks. I say dabbling because it certainly wasn’t investing. Even after reading many investment books and articles, including those by Peter Lynch, numerous Canadian investment advisors, and all the top financial magazines, I was losing more money in stocks than I was making.



In early 1998, I decided that I would investigate some of the companies that my successful mutual funds were investing in. A particular fund company in Canada had modeled its business using a “buy and hold” approach. Within one of the funds I owned, I noticed that it had shares of Coca-Cola, American Express, and another company called Berkshire Hathaway.



I visited the Berkshire Hathaway corporate Web site in mid-1998, and I decided to read the 1998 Letter to Shareholders. What I found was a CEO who was addressing me in relatively simple terms, with a dash of quick wit and an uncanny ability to gain my interest. In particular, this passage got me hooked:



Whatever the future holds, I make you one promise: I’ll keep at least 99% of my net worth in Berkshire for as long as I am around. How long will that be? My model is the loyal Democrat in Fort Wayne who asked to be buried in Chicago so that he could stay active in the party. To that end, I’ve already selected a “power spot” at the office for my urn.



—Berkshire Hathaway 1998 Letter to Shareholders



That was enough to get me to read the Letters to Shareholders from 1977–1997 on the Berkshire Web site. So, every day for the next few weeks, I would read one of the letters. Each one taught me something new, and it felt like somebody had hot-wired my brain. The lessons learned from the “Letters to Shareholders” are more valuable than the curriculum taught in most MBA programs.



My mind, after a long absence from school, was suddenly excited, passionate, and firing on all cylinders. The idea of creating an intellectual framework around which to make investment decisions was intriguing. Warren viewed each investment decision based on its “intrinsic value,” and he willingly attacked the status quo with impunity. It was a breath of fresh air.



I decided to buy some shares in the company, but to my dismay, I found out the A shares were trading around $75,000. So, instead of buying any shares, I decided to read more about the company. I bought a couple of books about Mr. Buffett and studied intensely.



By mid-1999, I was well-versed regarding Berkshire Hathaway and Warren Buffett. The dot-com mania was booming, and many great companies were being abandoned for greener pastures. In November of 1999, I bought my first share of Berkshire Hathaway. Between November 1999 and the end of February 2000, I liquidated my entire portfolio and put it all into Berkshire Hathaway stock. As everyone knows, second chances are hard to come by, and I wasn’t going to let Berkshire slip away at 40% to 50% discounts to recent prices.



While the ensuing months after buying Berkshire proved to be very beneficial economically, the real value of my exposure to Buffett was lying ahead of me. I soon realized that my calling in life was something vastly different than what I was doing. In June 2001, I took some courses in investments, insurance, and finance. By September of 2001, I left my job at Loblaws to work in the financial industry as an investment dealer. Not only had Warren changed the way I viewed investing, but he had changed the course of my life.



Another benefit of owning Berkshire shares is that you will desire to understand more about the company. In turn, this will lead to a better understanding of business. I cannot explain the sheer comfort with which I speak to people about finance. I have little trouble conversing with MBA graduates, economists, accountants, business journalists, and investment managers. Not bad for a university dropout.



On a couple of occasions, through my work at PFSL Investments Canada, I’ve met and spoken to the man whose mutual funds introduced me to Berkshire. Thanks to Warren’s influence, Michael Lee-Chin, CEO of the AIC group of funds, is now a billionaire. I’ve also had the privilege of speaking at length to Berkshire managers, such as Ajit Jain and Chuck Huggins.



In February of 2002, I started the MSN Berkshire Hathaway Shareholders Board, which is a public Internet forum for Berkshire shareholders. We have over 1,500 members now, who were influenced by Buffett or own Berkshire shares. About 15% are investment managers, advisors, analysts, dealers, or brokers. The MSN Board is a valuable site for Berkshire shareholders, and I take the time to provide interviews with people of interest to board

members.



What is intriguing about Berkshire Hathaway is the humility with which shareholders treat other shareholders. Certainly a trait passed on by the conduct of Berkshire’s Chairman. Over the last few years, it’s quite astounding the number of people I’ve become good friends with, who were also influenced by Warren and Berkshire. Two of those people are Prem Watsa and Francis Chou.



LUNCH WITH PREM WATSA

Prem Watsa is Chairman of Fairfax Financial, whereas Francis Chou is the fund manager of the Chou Funds and a former vice president at Fairfax. Fairfax has grown virtually from scratch into one of the largest insurance groups in Canada, in part due to the investment team at Fairfax subsidiary Hamblin Watsa, most of whom have worked together for a long time. Their investment record speaks volumes; and without a doubt, they are one of the best investment teams in North America. In 2004, Francis was chosen Morningstar Fund Manager of the Decade in Canada.



In April 2005, I spent nearly five hours at Fairfax Financial’s head office, where I began with a nearly two-hour lunch with Prem Watsa. He is such a devoted student of Ben Graham and Warren Buffett that he named his eldest child Ben. Fortunately, his two other children were girls, so he couldn’t call either one “Warren.”



A few weeks before my visit, Francis Chou and I were speaking about me going to Toronto for the Fairfax Annual General Meeting. The next thing I know, Francis told me to just come by the office around noon and have lunch with Prem, then I’ll take you around the office and introduce you to the investment team.



First I was hesitant to accept, since why would they want to have lunch with me? What do I have to offer them? I’m only a small shareholder. But then you never look a gift horse in the mouth, and I gladly accepted. How often would I get to meet Prem Watsa and have lunch with him? Afterwards, I found out from Francis that it would only be Prem and I. No one else for lunch.



When I arrived at the office, the staff welcomed me and took me to the conference room. I was told that Prem would be there shortly. The conference room contained all sorts of Fairfax memorabilia and a life-size bust of Sir John Templeton. While looking at the memorabilia, Prem’s assistant, Jo Ann, came in and made me feel totally at home. She said that they had ordered lunch into the office for Prem and me.



I wasn’t very nervous leading up to the luncheon, but the night before I had a queasy feeling. Again, I was thinking to myself, why the heck would these guys want to meet me? I figured, well I’m not going to look like a fool, and I read all the Fairfax annual reports all night with only two hours of sleep. I wrote down all sorts of questions on a notepad and had loads more in my head. I didn’t know if I’ll ever be lucky enough to meet Prem like this again, and I was going to pick his brain with a fine-tooth comb!



When Prem came in, he was extremely gracious and put me at ease within a minute. Very much like Warren, he seems like an old family friend or uncle whom you’ve known for years. I wish I could tell you what we discussed, but that is not how Prem or Fairfax works, and I promised that our discussions were between us. Suffice it to say that when I comment on how the media threw the moniker on Prem as “Buffett of the North,” they may have finally got something right for once!



For nearly two hours, we talked and talked. When our wonderful Indian meal arrived, neither Prem nor I ate much of our food, because we were talking so much. I asked him every single question I had, and he answered every one without hesitation.



What struck me the most about Prem was the fact that he never forgot how he started, who helped him along the way, or who is working on his staff now. There is an undying loyalty to Prem by his team, not unlike what we hear and see at Berkshire. This culture of trust and honesty filters through the whole company. The office staff, vice presidents, managers, and investment analysts are all extremely gracious and spent considerable time with me.



I had arrived at Fairfax’s office around 12:00 p.m., and Francis was still taking me around to meet people at 4:30 p.m. I told him that I had taken up enough of their time, and tomorrow was a very busy day because of the annual general meeting (AGM). All the presidents from the various subsidiaries had come for the AGM, and Fairfax set aside time to have me visit!



Some of the stories of how people entered the business and joined Fairfax are quite amazing. They are a unique group of individuals who work together really well. Everyone is gifted in his own right, yet as humble as their Chairman.



I’ve been very fortunate to have met many people in the industry who follow a similar investment philosophy. I can’t help but acknowledge how lucky I am to have mentors like Prem Watsa, Francis Chou, Tim McElvaine of McElvaine Investment Management, and Mohnish Pabrai of the Pabrai Funds. They are the best at what they do, and they have given freely of themselves with nothing in return. Their support provided Alnesh Mohan and I the courage to start our own investment funds.



I’m not sure what I’ve done to deserve such friends, but I can only hope that I continue to earn their trust and friendship. At the same time, their enormous accomplishments are ambitions that I can only dream of, and I will do my best to try and swim in the same waters one day!



Warren was heavily influenced by his mentor, Ben Graham, and in turn, all of us perceive Warren as our mentor. I cannot begin to imagine how many he will inspire, and where Buffett’s legacy will eventually end.



For many people, reading the Letter to Shareholders has little meaning. But for some people, it’s like fireworks exploding in their head. I’ve heard this so often and experienced it myself. You either get it or you don’t; and if you do get it, it’ll change your whole life and the way you view business. Like a domino effect, one obstacle hits another, and you slowly overcome each one. As you solve one problem, you move on and on and on. He’s influenced every investment manager I know and changed their lives in the process.





Sanjeev Parsad and Buffett

(Photo courtesy of

Sanjeev Parsad)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value A View from British Columbia



Sanjeev Parsad and Prem Watsa at

Fairfax Financial’s office in Toronto

A View from British Columbia The Story of Warren Buffett



Francis Chou

(Photo by Sanjeev Parsad)



More Brain Food

Watsa’s favorite book is Napoleon Hill’s Think and Grow Rich. Chou’s favorite is Security Analysis.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value A View from British Columbia



199





VIEW OF INTRINSIC VALUE FROM TRINIDAD


Richard Azar of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago, the two southernmost islands of the Caribbean, is proof that anyone anywhere in the world who makes a rigorous study of Buffett can succeed.

Azar has been actively investing since he was 17. His father loaned him $100,000 at the time, and Azar paid his father back two years later by buying Berkshire and making currency trades. Azar still retains a significant stake in Berkshire stock today.

Educated in Canada and the U.S., Azar was turned down at Harvard Business School but said that ended up being a blessing. He used those years for intensive study of books about Buffett and value investing and continued business success.

He kept piling up stunning returns, vaulting himself into the top ranks of businessmen in Trinidad. If Azar lived in the U.S., he would be one of the wealthiest Americans for his age and could be in Fortune’s list of the 40 wealthiest people under 40.

The CEO of West Indies Stockbrokers Ltd. Peter Clarke said about Azar, “[His] extensive knowledge of industries gained through reading literally hundreds of annual reports a year provides him with an insight that few can match. He is the largest independent individual investor on our local stock market.”

Azar first read about Buffett in Peter Lynch’s One Up on Wall Street. He also collected and studied the books and many articles written by Ben Graham. He bought books on value investing and studied them intensively. One of Azar’s claims to fame is that he bought Wal-Mart at the time Buffett turned out to be doing the same thing.

Azar began buying Berkshire in late 1987 (after the crash) at which time he read his first Berkshire Annual Report. He said, “God sent me a blessed gift when I got the Berkshire report. It immediately set me on a new course in my business life.”

Azar added, “Prior to that I was following Peter Lynch’s philosophy and was much more diversified. As Mr. Buffett advised, I adopted a more concentrated approach to my business and investment transactions.

“My concentration levels were at various times 40% to 50% of my net worth and today the four major positions I own represent 85% of my net worth. I became much more focused, and the threshold of knowledge and understanding underpinning each investment idea increased dramatically. I had learned from Mr. Buffett that most of the fortunes of the world had been made with a few securities that were well understood by their owners and held for a very long time. This seems evidently clear when one looks at the Forbes list of wealthiest Americans every year.

“It was clear to me from my first reading of the Berkshire Annual Report that Mr. Buffett was a very honest and honorable businessman. His thoughts and ideas were clear in terms of buying a piece of a business, its stock, or the entire business, both of which he understood on the basis of their strengths and weaknesses and those of their competitors. He also demonstrated how certain economic characteristics made certain businesses more successful and rewarding than others. Obviously the right price and the right management made the investment all the more attractive.”

Azar’s broker, Vincent Vella of Fort Lauderdale says he met Azar in 1985, after Azar had received some money from his father and was interested in investing. “He was very eager to learn and wanted to know everything about the investment markets. He had a few bumpy times at the beginning, but as his education and knowledge increased, he began to become a very wise investor,” Vella said.

“He really gained enlightenment when I gave him annual reports from Berkshire Hathaway.… From that point on, Richard became a Warren Buffett aficionado and began to look at investments and business in an entirely different way. His investment skills and analytical capabilities began to grow at geometric rates. He also started making few, but very large investment decisions, concentrating in areas he could understand.”

Vella said that Azar made very profitable currency trades in addition to creating his own companies in Trinidad. “I have witnessed his success over the years and watched him turn a small amount of funds into a net worth in the low nine figures,” Vella added.

In 1990, Azar founded a dairy business, which now controls 50% of the powdered milk market for dairy products. “The amount of detail of his knowledge regarding the dairy industry and milk in general was astounding for a person who had no formal training as such in the field,” said Kieran Lonergan of Lakeland Dairies in Ireland.

However, Azar didn’t limit himself to the dairy industry. He also owns the largest shopping mall on the western part of the Island of Trinidad, The Falls of Westmall. In addition, he has sold a major stake in an insurance company but maintains the largest individual stake in the Caribbean’s largest bank, RBTT Financial Holdings Ltd.

Over the years, Azar has had brief correspondences and personal encounters and meetings with Columbia University Professor Louis Lowenstein, Buffett, and Munger. At one point when Azar was thinking of applying to Columbia Business School, he wrote to Lowenstein, a professor of finance and law. Lowenstein replied: “Buffett likes to say that those who encounter the Graham-and-Dodd analysis for the first time come away from it with one of two reactions: either a light bulb goes off and they see business and finance thereafter in new and different terms, or no amount of repetition will make it sink in. Obviously you are one of the first group, which remains dismayingly small. I am not sure why you want to go to business school.” Lowenstein invited Azar to New York.

Later Azar met with Lou Lowenstein in New York and gave him his collection of Ben Graham articles dating back to the 1930s and 1940s. Lou Lowenstein passed the collection on to his son, Roger, who was writing Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist, in which Azar is mentioned.

Azar first met Buffett at Borsheims during his initial trip to Omaha for Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 1992. He met Buffett again at the meeting in 2004. He was also among the international shareholders who met with Buffett and Munger in 2004.

It was at the 2004 meeting that Azar described to Buffett the method of discounted cash flow he used to arrive at Berkshire’s intrinsic value. Buffett replied, “I see you’ve done your homework,” and a round of applause followed.

Once Azar wrote Buffett and mentioned that he was a nonexecutive chairman of a telecommunications company in Trinidad called TSTT and was receiving a $1-a-year salary. Buffett wrote back: “Thanks for your TSTT report. I held a ‘dollar-a-year’ job at Salomon a few years ago, so I know what it’s like to be overpaid.”

Azar’s letter to TSTT shareholders had the distinct flavor of being influenced by Buffett’s reports to shareholders.

Another time Azar wrote to Munger about valuing businesses. Munger replied: “In a stable business, we tend to use real cash flows for shareholders, (1) usually reported earnings minus compulsory maintenance expenditures of franchise, or competitive position in excess of reported depreciation and minus compulsory net increases in required working capital, but sometimes, (2) reported earnings plus amortization charges for goodwill. An expanding business with high returns on equity and good cash flow characteristics (apart from what is spent expanding) then becomes x dollars in cash flow (real for shareholders, as if not expanding) growing at y% per year, never projected to infinity. A business not expanding in physical units, but able to grow with inflation in cash generation without capital added is a plus, incorporated in projection now requiring projection (forecast) at an inflation rate.” In closing, Munger said, “There is no magic formula.”

Azar says Buffett and Graham’s three main ideas of investing, the true fundamentals, remain as important as ever: (1) when buying a stock, think of it as a “piece of a business,” (2) have a margin of safety in regards to the purchase price, and (3) keep emotional Mr. Market in mind, knowing he is there to serve not guide you.

However, according to Azar, there’s a fourth pillar to investing that Buffett has not talked about much but has demonstrated over and over again throughout his career. This final element is courage. Graham himself said one must “have the courage of your knowledge and experience. If you have formed a conclusion from the facts and know your judgment is sound, act on it even though others may hesitate or differ.”

Graham said you are neither right nor wrong because the crowd disagrees with you. You’re right because your data and reasoning are right.

Many people have the concepts of value investing in their head, Azar said, but lack the courage to execute their ideas. Azar thinks the fourth item, when used with the other three, is the crucial one. He stresses that Graham, who wrote The Intelligent Investor for defensive investors, said, “In the world of securities, courage becomes the supreme virtue, after adequate knowledge and tested judgment are at hand.”

In 2006, Azar bid $485,000 for lunch with Buffett, unfortunately, there was a higher bid. Buffett wrote Azar a note saying, “Maybe the price of the lunch will experience what they call in the stock market, a ‘correction’ next year, and you will get your opportunity.”

On June 30, 2006, Azar calculated Berkshire’s intrinsic value to be about $128,000; and on June 30, 2007, he figured it to be about $144,000. Here’s Azar’s work from June 30, 2007:

Based on the two 10-year discounted cash flow tables, on the following two pages, which are very conservatively calculated, Berkshire’s intrinsic value could be in the range of $121,000 to $131,000 dollars per share. I used my conservative core earnings assumption for 2007—between $8.3 billion and $8.9 billion as the range or “core operating after-tax earnings” for my 2007 estimate. I say “could be” because intrinsic value is pretty nebulous and it is no exact science. If I went out further into the future in terms of the cash flow forecasts, the numbers sort of disconnect from the real world, so I like to keep it simple and did a 10-year assumption.



However, a more simplified approach is taking the liquid assets of Berkshire at 6/30/2007, which was $40 billion of cash, $25 billion of fixed maturity securities, and $73.610 billion of equities, a total of $138.6 billion of liquid assets divided by 1,545,206 shares outstanding in $89,696 per share of investments alone.



If you then take my forecasted operating after-tax earnings (not counting any investment gains or losses) of $8.3 billion minus $3.4 billion of after-tax insurance investment income, you get to $4.9 billion of core operating earnings (not counting income from those liquid investments) divided by 1,545,206 shares outstanding is $3,171 of core earnings per share 17 times earnings (for the quality of company); and that is $53,908 per share plus the $89,696 of investments, which is a total of $143,604 per share—not far off the range of value in DCF [discounted cash flow] analysis (with straight core operating after-tax earnings) of $8.3 billion inclusive of Insurance Investment Income but not realized gains.



You have a diverse group of earnings from companies with very strong competitive advantages. That facilitates owning more assets than your equity “would otherwise” provide with no risk of leverage, run by the greatest investor of all time.



Berkshire is selling for $184 billion with $140 billion of liquid assets at 6/30/07, and about $5 billion of operating earnings unassociated with Insurance Investment Income, from those liquid investments. Berkshire is still at the lower end of the valuation band.



Mr. Buffett taught me that a DCF should never have to be done, and Ben Franklin used to say the most exquisite folly is “wisdom spun too fine,” so I think even doing the DCF analysis makes me feel a little foolish.



My conclusion: Hold on for dear life!





Richard Azar, Collects Money and

Books on the Subject

Azar’s book collection includes not only a first edition of Ben Graham’s The Intelligent Investor, but also second, third, fourth, and fifth edition of the book. In addition, his collection contains the first, second, and third editions of Security Analysis by Benjamin Graham and David Dodd—all collector’s items now—as well as most of the other books about value investing, including many about Buffett.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Azar in His Office



Buffett 101

One Up on Wall Street by Peter Lynch provided Azar’s introduction to Buffett.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value View of Intrinsic Value from Trinidad



The Falls at Westmall

This mall, the flat building in the foreground, is an Azar property located on the Gold Coast of Trinidad.

View of Intrinsic Value from Trinidad The Story of Warren Buffett



Azar at home

(All photos courtesy of

Richard Azar)

Of Permanent Value View of Intrinsic Value from Trinidad



201





THE YOUNG AND THE BRAVE


THE STORY OF ALEX BOSSERT

Lately, one of the first people to show up at the Berkshire annual meeting is Alex Bossert, an 18-year-old student at Cathedral High School in St. Cloud, Minnesota.

Arriving at the site around 4:00 a.m., Bossert makes a day of it. The meeting in 2009 was his fourth one.

“I’ve been investing since I was 10 and read my first book about Buffett when I was 13,” he said.

“When I was 13, I was at Barnes & Noble and the first book I pulled out was How to Pick Stocks Like Warren Buffett by Timothy Vick. I had no idea who Warren Buffett was, but I read it, and it sparked my interest in investing. I had read many books on investing before that, but none made much sense. I’ve read everything I can on Warren Buffett since then.

“About that time, I bought one Class B share [of Berkshire] by saving every penny I made from summer jobs, birthday money, mowing lawns, shoveling, etc. I purchased the one share at $2,284 and still hold it today,” Bossert reveals.

Bossert is known for his writings on his blog site: http://alexbossert.

blogspot.com. There he stated, “I follow the investment principles used by Warren Buffett, Ben Graham, Edward Lampert, Charlie Munger, Joel Greenblatt, and other successful investors. I attempt to learn everything I can about investing/business in hopes of eventually starting my own investment fund.

“I started my Alex Bossert’s Thoughts on Value Investing to keep track of my portfolio and to write about value investing-related topics,” he explains. “I write a report on each company I invest in, and if I find something interesting on the Internet related to value investing, I pass it on to my readers. One of my first posts was an analysis of Buffett’s investment in First Industrial Realty Trust that he made in his personal portfolio in 1999.”

Bossert tracks investment ideas coming in from such investors as Seth Klarman and Mohnish Pabrai. Regarding Klarman, Bossert wrote, “A friend sent me a video of a speech given by Seth Klarman at the Columbia Business School. Klarman’s hedge fund, the Baupost Group, has done over 20% a year since he founded the firm in 1983 with only one down year. Also, Seth Klarman’s book Margin of Safety: Risk-Averse Value Investing Strategies for the Thoughtful Investor is also one of the best books I’ve read on value investing. It’s currently out of print and selling for about $1,600, but I got a copy through my library’s intra-library loan program.

“For my personal portfolio, I’m generally looking at small companies that are being overlooked by large institutions. I’m trying to replicate what Buffett did back in his partnership and early days running Berkshire. Smaller companies are many times misunderstood and overlooked and at the same time may be very cheap. Some may trade for single-digit free cash flow or p/e yields, below cash or significantly below book value. I just read all the annual reports I can find, and the latest 10 Qs. I search the Internet, talk to management, which is very easy at small companies, read what other bloggers say about the company, ask friends to research it and see what they think—just trying to get all the information I can. I also find it useful to look at what other value investors are buying.… Eventually I want to run other people’s money.”

ERIC SCHLEIEN: DORM ROOM HEDGE FUND

Eric Schleien, 21, began a friendship with Bossert in 2007 when they met at the Yellow BRKer meeting. Schleien runs a hedge fund, ElS Capital Partners, LLC, which he started in his room at Babson College in Wellesley, Massachusetts. He later transferred to the University of Buffalo.

He said:

I’ve been interested in investing since I was 11 years old. I started out reading a Motley Fool book called Investment Guide for Teens, the teens guide to having more money than your parents (or something like that) and as an 11 year old that was very enticing to me for the novelty of it all. That book mentioned investors and then I would read about those investors. I read about Lynch, O’Neill, and then when I read about Buffett, that’s when it really clicked. So I started reading more and more books about Buffett. Then they’d always mention Graham and the Intelligent Investor … so I read some Graham and his book the Intelligent Investor as well. At the end of the day, value investing was what made the most sense to me.



For my high school graduation present, I decided I wanted to go to Omaha. So me and my dad headed off to Omaha in 2006. It was a wonderful experience. Being in the presence of Buffett and Munger and listening to them speaking was just like everything I had read about and here they were in person. I got invited to play bridge with Buffett, but unfortunately I didn’t know how to play bridge. I asked the woman who was one of Buffett’s friends if she could teach me for tomorrow and she goes, “No its not a game I can teach you in a day so you’re out of luck,” and then I never saw her again.



What’s a key thing in my opinion to take away from it, is my passion for value investing came from my inspiration from Berkshire Hathaway and Buffett. This is just another example of how Buffett has created a culture that empowers others to do this kinda stuff. As Charlie said when they get even larger, Berkshire can create a culture that does more than this and actually help transform humanity.



SCOTT DINSMORE AND MIKE MCCOY

Scott Dinsmore, 27, who went to the University of California Santa Barbara and Mike McCoy, 28 (whose birthday is on the same day, as Buffett, August 30), who went to the University of California Davis, have been learning about Warren Buffett and Berkshire Hathaway for the majority of their lives.

Dinsmore also studied at the London School of Economics and McCoy at Cambridge and that’s where they really got to know one another. As childhood friends, classmates and eventually colleagues, they scoured just about every book they could find on the topic of value—Buffett, Charlie Munger, Ben Graham, Mohnish Pabrai, and Joel Greenblatt. Eventually they picked up a couple of class B shares and made it to their first shareholders meeting in 2007.

It would be the weekend that changed their careers (and much of their lives) from that point forward. After hearing Buffett and Munger all day on Saturday and meeting guys like Pabrai and Whitney Tilson among so many other like minded value gurus, it became clear to them that running an investment partnership was the best way to apply their passions to life. Dinsmore and McCoy are fans of and have met with former Stanford University student Tim Bliss, an investor who heads Investment Group of Santa Barbara. “He’s the one who got us on track,” Dinsmore says.

The initial plans for their new business were sketched out on the plane ride home from Omaha that year. Dinsmore and McCoy planned, worked with lawyers, and convinced some supportive friends and family to trust them with a small portion of their capital.

By the end of 2008, Cumbre Capital Partners LLC, of San Franscisco now, had been formed and was ready to launch just as the U.S. economy and credit crisis was nearing its darkest hour. Seeing the environment as the best opportunity in their investment history to find bargains, they launched their fund on January 1, 2009, with $340,000 under management.

Cumbre Capital Partners is named after La Cumbre Peak in Santa Barbara, California, where the fund was founded. Mostly unknown by locals despite “hiding in plain sight,” Cumbre Peak is the tallest and most impressive peak in Santa Barbara County. Cumbre Capital seeks out similar situations in the marketplace—market leaders and opportunities in ignored or out-of-favor niches.

Mike and Scott’s fund, which owns some Berkshire shares, was inspired by the original Buffett Partnerships of the 1950’s and 60’s and is structured almost identically to Buffett’s original partnership rules including charging no management fee and requiring a 6% hurdle before any performance fees are charged for running the fund.

Scott and Mike continue to attend the Berkshire meeting each year and in 2009 Scott took the liberty of using his shareholder discount to buy his girlfriend of 7 years an engagement ring at Borsheims only after receiving a letter from Buffett offering his advice for the purchase. Dinsmore spent about 6% of his net worth on the ring—in line with what Buffett has said he did and what he suggested Bill Gates do.

Cumbre Capital’s first year in business was 2009 and they could not be more excited with the progress thus far—closing the year with a net return to investors of 31% and over $1.2 million under management. And even more importantly they are working with people they admire and respect, are doing something they love and have the most valuable mentors in the world in guys like Buffett and Munger.



Alex Bossert

(Courtesy of Alex Bossert)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Eric Schleien

(Courtesy of Eric Schleien)

Of Permanent Value The Young and the Brave



Mike McCoy, right and Scott Dinsmore

The duo, now veteran annual meeting attendees, take in the annual meeting in 2011.

(Courtesy of Scott Dinsmore)



202





BERKSHIRE’S RISING INTRINSIC VALUE


One anonymous Internet poster recorded these thoughts about Berkshire’s intrinsic value:

I believe in the two-column approach also, but use it to determine the intrinsic value of BRK. It took awhile to be comfortable with this, and I had to break it out somewhat differently to understand it.



I named the two parts “INCO” for investments and “OPCO” for the operating companies.



INCO is fairly easy to determine by adding the following from the balance sheet:



Cash and cash equivalents

Fixed maturities securities

Equity securities

Other (investments)





which add up to the same $117.5 billion you derive. This is $75,800 per share at the end of September [2006].



WEB gave us the compounded growth rate for BOTH 40 years and last 10 years. I think the 10-year is most pertinent to evaluating the future and in INCO it is 13% rather than the 40-year 28% rate. I don’t suggest using that number, just an indication of the trend. It makes sense to me that the insurance businesses are effectively added into INCO using this approach.



OPCO is more difficult to derive from the info we have. WEB tells us that number “excludes goodwill amortization.”



This is where the concept of two “companies” helped my own thinking the most.



OPCO is a group of some 60-odd companies BRK has acquired. It has a growth rate of 30.2% the past 10 years! I repeat for emphasis, 30.2 percent!



Quoting from the 2005 AR, “As you can see from the two tables, the comparative growth rates of Berkshire’s two elements of value have changed in the last decade, reflecting our ever-increasing emphasis on business acquisitions.”



EVER-INCREASING!



So, OPCO is an operating company growing at 30.2 percent compounded in the past 10 years. It hasn’t accomplished this by increasing the earnings of each business anywhere near that growth rate but rather through acquisitions. Again, quote from the 2005 AR: “Over the years, our current businesses, in aggregate, should deliver modest growth in operating earnings. But they will not in themselves produce truly satisfactory gains. We will need major acquisitions to get that job done.” (Think Iscar.)



As far as I know, OPCO is the only “company” of substance that has a 30% plus growth rate the past 10 years. It causes one to think of the growth periods for WMT [Wal-Mart] or MSFT [Microsoft]. Their growth, however, was tied to specific industries.



OPCO’s growth is not at all industry-specific. It can come from any industry and from all areas of the world. Rather than planning the next store or the next product, OPCO increases “same store” profitability while waiting for the phone to ring.



If one accepts this concept, one must adjust IV [intrinsic value] accordingly.



As you said, Neuro [another Yellow BRKer], “Then again, history seldom repeats in the same way.” When the market recognizes this, I believe the historical chains of price to book value will be broken.



The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Rising IIntrinsic Value



203





OAK VALUE’S GEORGE BRUMLEY


George Brumley III, chairman and CEO of Oak Value Capital Management (acquired by R. S. Investments of San Francisco in 2010) in Durham, North Carolina, was a fixture at Berkshire annual meetings. He was killed in a plane crash in Kenya on July 19, 2003. When the plane hit Mount Kenya at a point 16,000 feet high, the accident took the lives of 12 Brumley family members and two pilots.

The family members in the fatal crash were Brumley; his wife, Julia Preston Brumley; their son, George William Brumley IV; and daughter, Jordan McNeill Brumley of Chapel Hill, North Carolina; Brumley’s parents, Dr. George Brumley, Jr., and his wife, Jean Stanback Brumley of Atlanta; Brumley’s sister, Elizabeth Brumley Love; her husband, William Jenkins Love; and their daughter, Sarah Jennings Love of Atlanta and London; and Brumley’s sister, Lois Brumley Morrell; her husband, Richard Morrell; and their son, Alexander Brumley Morrell of Atlanta.

The Brumley family was in Kenya visiting game preserves on a trip planned by Brumley’s father, a retired pediatrician and well-known philanthropist. Dr. Brumley wanted to show his family the country after his climbing adventures at Kilimanjaro several years earlier.

A graduate of Duke University business school, young Brumley, III, 42 at the time of his death, and David Carr founded Oak Value in 1986. Historically the firm has invested heavily in Berkshire stock.

“It’s an almost unimaginable tragedy,” Buffett said in a statement. Buffett had been close to the Brumley family for more than 50 years. “George, Jr., and Jean Brumley and son George, III, were personal friends and outstanding citizens,” Buffett said (Omaha World-Herald, August 3, 2003).

Brumley’s uncle, Fred Stanback, who was not on the plane, was Buffett’s classmate at Columbia and lifelong friend.

Carr, Brumley’s cofounding partner and chief investment officer of Oak Value, had this to say: “Our relationship with the Brumley family extends back for many, many years, and we are shocked and grief-stricken at this terrible tragedy. We know all of the individuals involved, and they were wonderful people of character and integrity, with a great tradition of service and philanthropy. We are praying for the victims and the surviving members of all the families, and trying hard to pull together with our own families and loved ones to cope with such a tragic loss.”

In 2007, Oak Value’s President Larry Coats commented on the tragedy and aftermath: “In 2003, tragedy struck in perhaps the most extreme of circumstances. In addition to losing a great business partner, we lost a family of friends. For the period that followed, we focused on the surviving family members and the clients and employees of the firm.… George was a good friend, leader, and investor. While he will be missed in the halls of Oak Value, his legacy lives on in our pursuit of ‘good businesses with good management at attractive prices.’”

In light of Oak Value’s loss of its company’s major role player and in consideration of this company’s position in Berkshire, Oak Value’s June 2004 report addresses Berkshire’s management succession and the risk factors:

There are a handful of risks that are germane to an evaluation of Berkshire that we have delineated in our past summaries that remain relevant today. We believe the largest one remains the inevitable psychological blow—and we suspect follow-on stock price weakness—that would accompany Mr. Buffett’s death or incapacity, the outcomes he has indicated would precipitate his departure from Berkshire. We’re sure that the stock price would suffer immediately, but as we’ve said before, we think one growing attraction of Berkshire is that Mr. Buffett has “Buffett-proofed” the company from an operating perspective and ensured its long-term success in his absence.



We have heard only increasingly encouraging thoughts related to succession over the past few years. Mr. Buffett indicated this year that he thought Berkshire was in far better shape than ever before, with four qualified internal candidates to succeed him and potentially more to come over time from future acquisitions. It has also become increasingly clear that this item is getting a high level of attention and frequent discussion among Berkshire’s board of directors. Mr. Munger opined at the Wesco meeting that while the acquisition strength of Berkshire would probably decline under a successor, the rest of the company would continue to do well. And that in his view, the acquisitions side would be fine, if diminished, from Mr. Buffett’s rarefied gifts in that area. And he then summed up the pretty solid position Berkshire shareholders find themselves in with a signature hilarious and blunt one-liner: “But it’s silly to complain, ‘what kind of world is this that gives me Warren Buffett for 40 years and then [someone] comes along who’s worse?’”



Moreover, the Berkshire board has only gotten stronger in our view, and we particularly note the capital allocation credentials of its recently added members. A year ago, in response to one of our questions on another topic at the Wesco meeting, Charlie Munger reminded shareholders that should sizable deviations of stock price from intrinsic value occur and persist, he knew “of ‘someone’ [i.e., Berkshire itself] with a little cash on hand.” His comment has only gotten more true over time. Berkshire currently maintains a cash balance that is a sizable percentage of its total equity market capitalization (and nearly as large as the equities it holds), providing Berkshire’s succeeding management and board ample liquidity in the event of stock price to intrinsic value dislocations. Conversely, investing that cash in operating companies in a fashion consistent with past practice prior to Mr. Buffett’s departure will help insulate the company from senior management dependence. Either they have the cash or they get in exchange an increasing volume of operating earnings that have nothing to do on a day-to-day basis with headquarters in Omaha. In any event, we think Berkshire’s position has been augmented relative to its past from both an appearance and reality standpoint.



At the same time, we are also cognizant of the sizable potential for short-term price dislocations and know the havoc that can play on investor emotions. We would place stock price weakness related to Mr. Buffett’s death or serious illness in the category of a short-term price shock, rather than a permanent impairment of fundamental business value. There would be initial price risk in our view, but little or no long-term risk of real capital destruction (relative to the prices we have paid for Berkshire shares in client accounts) to Berkshire shareowners over the long-term. The upside would probably be truncated, but that represents opportunity cost rather than capital impairment risk. Nonetheless, we remain aware that this opinion might be in the minority on the matter, especially in the uncertainty in the short-term, and would be little consolation for those who might need to sell into potential price weakness. Therefore, in our view, Berkshire remains an investment for longtime horizon (greater than five years) investors.



After the third quarter of 2007, Oak Value revisited and confirmed its

optimism about Berkshire:

Shares of client portfolios’ largest position advanced respectably during the quarter as the “Fort Knox” of financial stability stood firm. Our long-term holding of Berkshire has been based upon the one-two punch of its advantaged business model and the seemingly perpetual discount assigned by the market as reflected in its share price. Though the share price advanced during the quarter and perhaps closed a portion of the valuation gap we believe existed, the closing of the gap may well be less than the proportional change in share price. We acknowledge that this position may seem counterintuitive, at least at first glance.



In the end, we believe that the long-term value of Berkshire Hathaway will be most significantly determined by the company’s continued ability to source capital at attractive rates and to invest that capital at attractive returns. As is the case with all of the companies we own on clients’ behalf, we have analyzed this business with the reality that the future is not known with certainty. Our historically conservative valuation work on Berkshire has long incorporated the assumption that cash would build at a rate that would challenge management’s ability to deploy it. However, while we certainly have no specific information on the matter, we believe the odds favor the likelihood that Berkshire has used the recent market volatility and dislocation to put a portion of this money to work at attractive and noticeably higher returns than the company has been earning on cash.



Even in the absence of George Brumley, Oak Value remains an important

participant in Berkshire with a committed belief in its long-term prospects.



George W. Brumley III

(Photos

courtesy of

Oak Value)



David Carr

The Story of Warren Buffett



Larry Coats

Of Permanent Value Oak Value’s George Brumley



204





INTO A FOXHOLE


Buffett once told Columbia business students about the first moments of the Salomon crisis and how he picked Deryck Maughan to run the business.

“I faced the immediate problem of deciding who was going to run Salomon Brothers, the institution, while essentially, I had to deal with regulators and the public and the politicians, etc.

“On Friday night and again on Saturday morning, I met with about 12 people. These 12 people were top-level managers at Salomon. And essentially, I had to pick from that group of 12 someone to run a $150 billion institution that was going to be under great stress and who could lead 8,000 people under very trying conditions.

“It may be of interest to you what went through my mind because you’re going to be hired. And how would you develop yourself in some way that you be the one? This was the most important hire of my life.

“I interviewed those people Saturday morning over a couple-hour period, knowing that I was going to pick one when I got all through. I didn’t have time to do a lot of psychological tests or anything. The good news is I did not ask them what their grades were in business school. (Laughter.) They all had the IQ, just like everybody in this room. It doesn’t make any difference whether your IQ is 140 or 160 if you’re running Salomon or doing most things in this world. They all had the energy level and the desire. The question was: Who would be the best leader? Who was going to go into a foxhole with me? Because whoever went into the foxhole with me could stick a gun to my head.

“If they wanted to come around and say they got an offer from Goldman Sachs or something for twice as much money as they were making, or wanted special personal indemnification because of lawsuits—a million things could happen and would happen with some people. In the end I picked someone and fortunately, it was not only the most important decision of my life, but probably as good a business decision or hiring decision as I could make. I devised this little system in getting you to think about how you might attack that problem yourself, or how you might be the person that would be chosen under those circumstances.

“Imagine that you have just won a lottery I conducted. And by winning it, you had a very unusual prize. The prize you get is the right to pick within the next hour one of your classmates. And you get 10% of the earnings of that individual for the rest of your life.

“What starts going through your mind? Are you going to give an IQ test, or look up their grades and take the person with the highest grades? Are you going to try to measure desire or energy or something? I think you’ll decide that those factors tend largely to cancel. They could be important up to some threshold limit, but once you hit those levels, you’re OK.

“I think you’ll probably start looking for the person that you can always depend on; the person whose ego does not get in his way; the person who’s perfectly willing to let someone else take credit for an idea as long as it works; the person who essentially wouldn’t let you down; who thought straight as opposed to brilliantly.

“And then, let’s say there’s a catch attached. For the right to buy this 10% interest, you had to go short 10% of somebody else in the room. So in effect, you get the 10% of the first person’s earnings, but you have to pay out 10% of the second person’s. Now again, do you look around for the person that’s a little slippery, the one that everything has to be his or her idea, the one that never quite does what’s expected of them, or pretends to do things that they don’t. You really get back to things that interestingly enough … are things that you can control.

“You have these—what I would call—voluntary items of character, behavior. Essentially, you can pick out those qualities of behavior, and if you want them, you can have them yourself. Take that one person where you would go short, and if you find a few of those qualities creeping into your own behavior, they are things you can get rid of.

“If you’re taking all the credit for things when other people do it, you can do something about that. You can make yourself into the person that you would buy the 10% of, and you can make very sure that you’re not the one that you would sell short 10% of. And I would say that most of it’s habit. It’s just as easy to have good ones as bad ones, and it makes an enormous difference.

“Deryck Maughan simply behaves well, and he behaves in a high-grade manner. He doesn’t give up his independence or his ability to think independently or any of those qualities whatsoever. I’ll give you an example. Deryck, two or three months after he took the job, had never asked me how much he got paid, let alone had a lawyer around negotiating for him or anything of that sort.

“Deryck, when he came in, had one thought in mind and that was keeping the place initially together, and then building a business that fit his image of what he wanted it to be.

“He never asked me for a dime of indemnification, and he could have been targeted. He could have gone broke. There were dozens of suits. He was working 18-hour days. He could have been making more money someplace else. Somebody once said that in looking for people to hire, you look for three qualities: integrity, intelligence, and energy. And if they don’t have the first,

the other two will kill you. You think about it, it’s true. If you hire somebody without the first, you really want them dumb and lazy. (Laughter.)

“Pick the kind of person to work for you that you want to marry your son or daughter. You won’t go wrong” (Omaha World-Herald, January 2, 1994).

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Into a Foxhole



205





WRONG-TURN CAPITAL MANAGEMENT


A Buffett-led group made a bid September 23, 1998, for the ailing and secretive Long-Term Capital Management LP (LTCU) hedge fund after its highly-leveraged positions came under pressure during the world financial crisis in the “Summer from Hell” of 1998.

The low-ball offer was rejected, and Long-Term Capital (nicknamed Wrong-Turn Capital Management and Long-Gone Capital) accepted a bid that was orchestrated by Goldman Sachs with the help of the Federal Reserve and a number of banks.

Buffett’s $250 million offer was from a partnership that would have included Berkshire, American International Group (AIG) led by chairman Maurice Greenberg, and Goldman Sachs led by chairman Jon Corzine. Berkshire would have put in $3 billion in capital, AIG $700 million, and Goldman Sachs $300 million.

Buffett’s bid, which only lasted for 50 minutes, also called for the ouster of Long-Term Capital’s founder John Meriwether, who once was the head of bond trading for Salomon. After he left Salomon following the company’s bond-trading scandal, Meriwether started Long-Term Capital in 1994. He ran the firm along with an elite group of investors, including Nobel Prize winners and Harvard, MIT, Stanford, and Berkeley graduates. For several years they were very successful. Then they were caught in the crash of 1998, and their lenders came calling.

“Long-Term Capital... used leverage to magnify returns for investors. At the end of August [1998], the hedge fund had $2.3 billion in capital, which it had used as collateral to borrow securities worth about $125 billion. It had then used those securities as collateral to buy derivatives and forward contracts, whose value was tied to assets worth $1 trillion” (Bloomberg, December 29, 1998).

Long-Term Capital had bet that bond yields in Asia, Latin America, Europe, and the U.S. would converge as the world became a safer place. However, in the summer of 1998 the world became a riskier place. Bond prices were diverging, not converging.

At the height of the crisis, Buffett called General Re’s Joseph Brandon and said: “There are folks that are in meltdown. They may not make it. Accept no excuses for anyone who doesn’t post collateral or make a margin call. Accept no excuses” (Roger Lowenstein, When Genius Failed, p. 183).

Buffett’s role in the LTCM crisis resolution story was well-tracked by Fortune’s Carol Loomis, Buffett’s longtime friend.

As the crisis mounted, Buffett became more involved. Unfortunately, the timing of his heightened involvement was in conflict with some events on his calendar. He “was trying to leave his office [September 18, 1998] to get to a granddaughter’s birthday party. That night, he was scheduled to fly to Seattle to join a Bill Gates group that was going to spend nearly two weeks touring Alaska and a galaxy of Western parks. It was a highly uncharacteristic move; Buffett ordinarily has no interest in scenery of any kind. But his close friendship with Gates had lured him and his wife, Susan, into signing on for the trip” (Fortune, October 26, 1998).

Still, the bid took shape over the next few days as Buffett used quite a lot of vacation time on the phone—so much so that friends staged a shot of him on the phone ignoring Old Faithful. (Buffett joked that the photo taken of him at Old Faithful was of a geezer and a geyser.)

“The bid was faxed to Meriwether at 11:40 on Wednesday morning [September 23, 1998], and he was advised it would expire within an hour, at 12:30” (Fortune, October 26, 1998). Buffett did not want his bid shopped around.

Here is a copy of the bid, which appeared in The Wall Street Journal (September 30, 1998):

HIGHLY CONFIDENTIAL





September 23, 1998





Mr. John Meriwether





Chief Executive Officer





Long-Term Capital Management, L.P.





One East Weaver Street





Greenwich, CT 06331-5146





Dear Mr. Meriwether:





Subject to the following deal structure, the partnership described below proposes to purchase the assets of Long-Term Capital Management (and/or its affiliates and subsidiaries, collectively referred to as “Long-Term Capital”) for $250 million.





The purchaser will be a limited partnership whose investors will be Berkshire Hathaway for $3 billion, American International Group for $700 million and Goldman Sachs for $300 million (or each of their respective affiliates). All management of the assets will be under the sole control of the partnership and will be transferred to the partnership in an orderly manner.





This bid is also subject to the following:





1) The limited partnership described herein will not assume any liabilities of Long-Term Capital arising from any activities prior to the purchase by the partnership.





2) All current financing provided to Long-Term Capital will remain in place under current terms and conditions.





The names of the proposal may not be disclosed to anyone. If the names are disclosed, the bid will expire.





This bid will expire at 12:30 p.m. New York time on September 23, 1998.





Sincerely,





Warren Buffett Maurice R. Greenberg Jon S. Corzine1





Agreed and Accepted on Behalf of Long-Term Capital





John Meriwether





1. Corzine rose from a bond trader at Goldman Sachs to become its CEO, but was forced out in 1999 after Goldman suffered large trading losses as a result of the collapse of Long-Term Capital. He went on to be a U.S. Senator of New Jersey and later its governor before joining MF Global, a trading firm which invested heavily in Europe and which went bankrupt in 2011.

According to Carol Loomis (Fortune, October 25, 1998), “Meriwether showed no interest in the bid, and the fund was bailed out by bank loans.”

The negotiations were not aided by Buffett’s cell phone going out toward the end of the talks (Vanity Fair, October, 1999). Buffett has said his efforts might have fared better had he been in New York rather than at Old Faithful.

Because markets later recovered, Buffett has joked that failing in the bid for LTCM might have been “a $2-billion vacation.”

He has also jested that he didn’t want to call Munger about it. “Charlie was in Hawaii. I didn’t want to bother him with a little thing like a bid for $100 billion worth of securities.… We made a very firm bid for over $1 trillion worth of derivative contracts.”

Long-Term Capital suffered losses after it bet that yields of certain corporate bonds would converge with those of U.S. Treasury bonds. Instead, when financial turmoil worsened in the international markets in the summer of 1998, the spread between the yield widened as investors fled to super-safe Treasuries. LTCM’s collapse shook the global financial system.

Berkshire’s bid for Long-Term Capital probably helped calm markets at the time. Berkshire investor Chris Stavrou is of the opinion that it did: “I think Berkshire’s attempt to rescue LTC by bidding for it will eventually go down as one of the most stabilizing financial aids since J. Pierpont Morgan stabilized the New York Stock Exchange during the panic of 1907.”

Nicholas Dunbar’s Inventing Money gives an excellent account of the LTCM story, stating toward the end:

All the assumptions buried in the small print of the Black-Scholes formula—liquid and continuous markets, Normal distributions—had broken down that summer, as well as the old shibboleths such as diversification.



For Scholes, Merton, and the tight-knit group of quants they had nurtured over the years, the world they had invented had fallen apart. The Nobel Prizes now must have felt like an albatross hung round their necks.



When the young Fischer Black had crossed the Charles River Bridge to work with Scholes, 29 years earlier, the film 2001: A Space Odyssey was in the movie theatres. In that film, a computer, HAL, runs amok and tries to kill the hero. And now, during August and September 1998, LTCM’s computerized money machines, had also gone berserk, and had destroyed their creators (Nicholas Dunbar, Inventing Money, p. 224).



Roger Lowenstein’s When Genius Failed was published in 2000. In his book he describes LTCM’s rise and fall and states that in the early, heady days of LTCM, Meriwether tried to get Buffett to invest in the fund (Lowenstein, pp. 31–32). “Meriwether, who was continuously angling to raise Long-Term’s pedigree, went to Omaha for a steak dinner with Buffett, knowing that if Buffett invested, others would, too. The jovial billionaire was his usual self—friendly, encouraging, and perfectly unwilling to write a check.”

In A Modern Approach to Graham and Dodd Investing, Thomas P. Au weighed in by saying, “The risks of Long-Term Capital’s strategy were best depicted in the novel The Bonfire of the Vanities [Tom Wolfe, 1987], in which the hero, Sherman McCoy, and his fictitious firm, Pierce & Pierce, bet $6 billion in the hope of earning one sixteenth of a percentage point, or less than $4 million, and actually earned one eighth of a point, or just under $8 million. In real life, of course, a firm could easily earn one sixteenth of a percentage point less than expected, which would cause the $6 billion trade to only break even; and a shortfall of one eighth of a point would have caused a loss of several million dollars, all in one afternoon. In fact, this portion of the novel was a parody of Salomon traders, including several alumni who staffed up Long-Term Capital” (Thomas P. Au, A Modern Approach to Graham and Dodd Investing, p. 94).

Buffett mentioned Long-Term Capital in a talk to University of Florida students: “They relied on mathematics to try to make money they didn’t need. I think that’s madness. You know, it’s easy to go broke. It happens to those who know nothing and those who know everything.” He said it was a case of “smart people doing dumb things” (Miami Herald, December 27, 1998).

Buffett has also been quoted as saying, “Underneath the mathematical elegance—underneath all those betas and sigmas—there was quicksand” (Fortune, October 26, 1998).

The Story of Warren Buffett



When Genius Failed

by Roger Lowenstein

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Wrong-Turn Capital Management





(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)



Old Faithful



206





SITCOM


Each annual meeting begins at 8:30 a.m. with a company movie—a collection of highlights and comedy routines and the latest commercials for company products. This low-budget movie, updated annually, was created for many years by Berkshire’s treasurer, Marc Hamburg. Buffett’s daughter Susie now heads the effort. The video, though highly requested, is not available for purchasing due to possible copyright issues. Susie Buffett said, “It’s one thing to get permission to use things that are in one item that never gets distributed; it’s one entirely different thing if we start selling copies.”

The film is always packed with fun. One opened with Buffett strumming a ukulele, singing a welcoming song to the tune of “I’d Like to Buy the World a Coke” and “When NASDAQ’s down, you’ll never frown; Berkshire is here to stay.”

Or the movie may open with a cartoon. Opening cartoons over the years have included spoofs on Batman and Robin, James Bond, Survivor, and American Idol. One such cartoon featured the Oracle of Omaha as Agent 008 battling the terrorist Has Been Rotten; the Oracle prevails by firing exploding Berkshire products. The popular pre-meeting videos have featured Buffett in a soap opera, Omaha Press Club appearances, and many skits of him with various celebrities.

In a takeoff of The Graduate, in which Dustin Hoffman is told, “the future is in plastics,” the word “plastics” is substituted with “GEICO.”

One clip in the 1997 video showed The Washington Post’s Katharine Graham complaining that Berkshire-related businesses are so cheap they don’t offer dental programs until you are 90. She continued her lament that she was being forced to keep working and had decided on a discount furniture business, “Mrs. G’s.” Her talk was accompanied by an ad: “Mrs. G’s blowout discount on furniture.”

One popular segment over the years features Buffett and Gates appearing before Judge Judy to sort out a fuss over a bridge game. When Gates argues his side, Judge Judy tells him to go to “shutup.com” and orders Gates to give Buffett a break so he can amount to something.

Other clips have shown funny tributes from Bill Gates and Tom Brokaw and even highlights of Nebraska’s greatest football plays. In 2007, the skit was a sequence of shots of Buffett and LeBron James making impossible shots on a basketball court with Buffett making a final full court swish to defeat James.

The movie has cameos from celebrities like Tiger Woods (with Buffett as his caddy), Bono during a photo shoot with Bill and Melinda Gates, Jimmy Buffett, Jamie Lee Curtis, and Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger.

The 2006 movie was a great hit; based on American Idol, it was called Omaha Idol. The three idol judges were Buffett, Munger, and Mrs. See.

One skit spoofed Bill Gates’s Windows product as an actual window.

Arnold Schwarzenegger was spoofed for his new voting machine that allowed votes only for him. At one point, Arnold held up two books—one about him and one about Buffett—saying, “Mine is bigger.” Then he turned the book about Buffett sideways for viewers to see it was an earlier version of this book. Arnold then proclaimed, “Yours is thicker.”

Donald Trump and Snoop Dogg were lampooned.

One clip featured Buffett and Munger with Dick Cheney, who was dressed as Elmer Fudd. Buffett said, “Hunting with Dick Cheney? Then you need insurance now!” Cheney then shot Munger in the rear, and Munger said, “Any closer shave would have to be by Gillette!”

A See’s Candy clip featured Ellen DeGeneres getting factory workers to look away while she stuffed candy down her dress.

Another skit involved Buffett suddenly falling in love with hi-tech stocks but having difficulty persuading Munger about the idea. Buffett then called Jamie Lee Curtis, who was lying suggestively in bed, and asked her if she’d call Munger, who is a big fan. Munger took a call from Curtis asking, “Is this really Jamie Lee Curtis?” She replied, “Is this really Mr. Hunger, I mean Munger?” Munger promised he’d speak to Buffett about the hi-tech stocks.

A skit with Tiger Woods showed Tiger having trouble with a shot, and Buffett suggesting to him that he was “putting too much arm into it.” Woods then hit a perfect shot and declared Buffett his new coach.

A Desperate Housewives skit featured the actual actresses discussing the sexual prowess of old men. When the movie ended, Buffett and Munger walked on stage to huge applause. Then, like a bolt from the blue, Buffett offered this quip, “I’m Warren. He’s Charlie. You may wonder why Charlie gets the girls (Jamie Lee Curtis) in these things. It has to do with what I call the Anna Nicole Smith rule. When choosing between two old, rich guys, pick the older.”

Woodstock was underway.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Jamie Lee Curtis

(AP/Photo)

Of Permanent Value Sitcom



207





BERKSHIRE’S ROCKING ANNUAL MEETING


When the auditorium opens for Berkshire’s annual meetings, the Buffetteers—grown men and women acting somewhat like swallows returning to Capistrano—race inside to get the best seats. Buffett described Berkshire’s annual meeting as “our capitalist version of Woodstock.” It is reminiscent of the actual Woodstock rock concert held August 15–18, 1969, three days of peace and music.

The 1998 meeting was covered by many reporters, including Daniel McGinn of Newsweek. He wrapped up his “Woodstock of Capitalism” story this way: “Back at the auditorium the rest of the disciples disperse, their appetite for wisdom sated for another year. The lights go dim. Buffett has left the building.”

The annual meetings have been described in other ways as well. Some have said it’s a cross between a religious revival and a fraternity rush party. Some have suggested it’s a capitalist psych ward.

The 2008 Annual Meeting had 31,000 attendees with more than 700 coming from 50 countries, giving the meeting an international flavor. Buffett personally greets every foreign visitor.

Shareholders are given red Coca-Cola bags in which to stash samples and purchases from the many display booths offering Berkshire products.

Each spring the convocation draws press coverage from national to international media including Brazil, Germany, England, Switzerland, France, Japan, and Canada.

At the annual meeting in 1992, Buffett and then Coca-Cola President Don Keough donned bright red Coca-Cola aprons to serve shareholders Cokes as they arrived for the meeting. From their perch in front of a display of Coke cases, Buffett and Keough provided a small sip of Coke from the Fountain of Wealth. Buffett sipped Cherry Coke, chatted, and signed annual reports. Keough sipped Diet Coke and bear-hugged and lavished good humor on any shareholder within reach. A number of delighted shareholders got a handshake or a word with the men and, in some cases, a quick photo opportunity.

“The [Berkshire] Annual Meeting is the best thing I’ve ever seen in all of commerce,” Keough has said.

Early in the meeting, Buffett has been known to give a report about sales at Borsheims from the previous day (usually a record) and notes that Berkshire has its products for sale at booths in the meeting hall. In the 1999 Annual Report, Buffett said: “So, overcoming my normal commercial reticence, I will see that you have a wide display of Berkshire products at the Civic that you can purchase. As a benchmark, in 1999, shareholders bought 3,059 pounds of See’s candy, $16,155 of World Book Products, 1,928 pairs of Dexter shoes, 895 sets of Quikut knives, 1,752 golf balls with the Berkshire Hathaway logo and 3,446 items of Berkshire apparel. I know you can do better.”

In 1992, Buffett and See’s Candies’ Chuck Huggins donned caps with a See’s logo and passed out small boxes of See’s candy to shareholders.

Happy Berkshire pilgrims now journey to the event featuring Buffett and Munger at the dais. As they share Cokes and See’s candies, the two wizards of wealth guide an adoring shareholder group through a quick course in the wisdom of the financial ages.

The increase of attendees at Berkshire’s annual meetings is reflective of its growing number of shareholders. About 1,000 Berkshire shareholders were on the books when Diversified merged into Berkshire at the end of 1979. About 1,900 shareholders came in 1992, and 2,900 in 1993; many of those come in with the Blue Chip merger. Now more than 30,000 of some 300,000 shareholders attend. Why? “They come because we make them feel like owners,” Buffett says (Janet Lowe, Personal Finance, February 26, 1997).

With Berkshire’s growth and the spread of Buffett’s reputation for wit and wisdom, the numbers of shareholders attending the meeting has continuously risen. In 1996, shareholders came from all 50 states as well as from foreign lands—Australia, Greece, Israel, Portugal, Singapore, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom—creating the need for larger meeting places.

The annual meetings were once held at the Joslyn Art Museum (“Temple of Culture,” as Buffett calls it) in Omaha, where 580 shareholders met in 1988. For several years, the meetings were held at the Orpheum Theater; then they were held at the Holiday Inn Convention Center; and then moved to Ak-Sar-Ben, an old horse racing track and betting facility. It was at Ak-Sar-Ben that Buffett, as a very young kid, would search through discarded stubs on the floor, sometimes finding a winning ticket (Roger Lowenstein, Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist, p. 4).

One year, Buffett welcomed his audience to the Orpheum Theater in Omaha, with an apologetic explanation. “Most of you know we held our annual meetings at the Joslyn Art Museum the past several years until we outgrew it. Since the Orpheum Theater where we’re meeting today is an old vaudeville theatre, I suppose we’ve slid down the cultural chain. Don’t ask me where we’d go next.”

In 1994, with the theater full, Buffett announced that the next meeting might have to be elsewhere and that sliding down the cultural pole would continue. He thought it might be held at Ak-Sar-Ben, where keno and horse-racing take place.

Indeed, the downwardly mobile trend continued, first to a Holiday Inn in 1995 and 1996, and then finally, just as Buffett had predicted, meetings were held at the racetrack and betting faculty, Ak-Sar-Ben—cultural hell.

Ak-Sar-Ben, which was torn down in 2002, had been home to many Omaha events since 1928. It hosted balls, livestock shows, ice skating extravaganzas, rodeos, and was the site for appearances by President Franklin D. Roosevelt and President Dwight D. Eisenhower. Entertainers have also made appearances: Bob Hope; Milton Berle; Liberace; Jerry Lewis; Captain and Tennille; Sammy Davis, Jr.; Bill Cosby; and Frank Sinatra, who was paid $250,000 for a 1994 appearance. More recently, Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera performed.

Another piece of trivia associated with Ak-Sar-Ben; “Ten Ton” Irwin (his weight swayed from 400 to 540 pounds) came to town and performed there with his cowboy and horse-racing shoes. The man who trained Irwin’s horses was Tom Smith, who barely ever said a word to human beings but talked regularly with horses. Upon first spotting a small, lazy but fast horse called Seabiscuit, Smith said, “I’ll see you again.” Smith, businessman Charles Howard, and Jockey Red Pollard—as different as three men could be—combined behind the hard-running Seabiscuit in one of sports legendary stories of the 1930s, captured by Laura Hillenbrand in the bestseller Seabiscuit.

When the site for the annual meetings could descend no further, the next meeting site headed back up the cultural ladder. In 2000, the meeting was held at the Omaha Civic Auditorium because Ak-Sar-Ben, due to budget restraints, scaled back the operation of its coliseum, reducing its seating capacity. The meeting at the Civic Center was held on Saturday rather than Monday to allow for more parking.

As the annual meetings have blossomed into cultural events, Buffett has tried to figure out ways to accommodate the crowds. He says he now has a fantasy that one day it’ll be held at the Nebraska football stadium and that he’ll be the announcer. As the managers run on the field, he’ll yell: “See’s Candies, Chuck Huggins…”

When Adam Smith, who covered the Berkshire Annual Meeting in 1990 for his Adam Smith’s Money World television program, asked shareholder Charles Dennison of Princeton, New Jersey, why he was coming to the meeting, Dennison said, “I hear it’s a great show.”

Robert Baker, a retired lawyer from Chagrin Falls, Ohio (he died in 1992), was among the Berkshire shareholders who regularly made the annual trek to Omaha. Baker, having read about Buffett in the early 1980s, recalled his initiation into the Buffett fan club. “I read enough to know he was terrific; and then on April 8, 1983, the ‘Heard on the Street’ column in the The Wall Street Journal quoted from his annual report. On April 11th, I went and bought five shares. I asked to get them at $920. The broker called back and said I had bought them for $910.” A year later, Baker started going to the annual meetings.

“They are fully worth it for the wisdom.… It’s worth every penny,” Baker said. “He always expresses the great truths so simply. We’re always too busy making things so complex. He reminds us not to play games or make things complex.… I think he looks at the bottom line and looks to see if the managers are having fun, if they love what they do.”

Shareholder Lloyd Wilson attended Berkshire meetings regularly for years. Unfortunately, in 1994, he was hit by a car and left a quadriplegic and partially blind. Buffett wrote him shortly after the accident: “It’s hard to keep a good Berkshire shareholder down, so I know you will be ready for another Annual Meeting before long. I wish you the best in your recovery.”

Wilson died in early 2000.

A great camaraderie exists among shareholders who spend the annual meeting weekends swapping Buffett stories. For example, Bob Sullivan of Long Meadow, Massachusetts, once told of writing Buffett that he had named his dog after him. Buffett wrote back that if Sullivan ever got another pet, he should name it Munger. Sullivan got another dog and did just that. Unfortunately Munger died. Sullivan wrote Buffett: “Buffett’s still alive, Munger’s six feet under.”

The annual meetings are a communion for kindred spirits who have found investment heaven. “It’s the Club Med for investors,” says Berkshire shareholder Pat Mojonnet of San Francisco. “And when you come home and tell people about it, nobody believes you.”

As an example of the unexpected, Buffett picks up a batch of invited guests for a Sunday country club brunch. Arriving in “Ollie the Trolley,” a converted bus that looks like a streetcar, Buffett shakes hands with shareholders as they get aboard at a hotel stop or two.

Usually, the only real status check during the annual meeting weekend comes from the query, “How long have you been a Berkshire shareholder?” The longer you’ve been, the wiser you are. For the uninitiated, seeing Buffett in action can be a jolt.

It’s not the usual annual meeting where the chairman drones on, overstating progress with a studied rosiness. Plus, Berkshire’s meetings don’t have public relations folks who dread questions from disgruntled shareholders. While most ordinary meetings are forgotten within seconds, Berkshire shareholders still delight in what Buffett said years ago.

At the Berkshire Annual Meeting, shareholders get no excuses about the sluggish economy and disappointing results, or some pie-in-the-sky story about how fabulous the following fiscal year will be. You get no gadfly—no Evelyn Y. Davis—questioning the chairman’s motives or pay package.

With Buffett and sidekick Munger, you get what you see. Buffett carries his Coke supply, and Munger walks on stage and the duo sit at a plain table adorned only by See’s candy.

Buffett normally starts off with a joke or two, sometimes ostensibly testing the microphone: “Testing … testing … one million … two million … three million.”

Buffett’s instincts for distrusting complicated technology were confirmed at the Annual Meeting in 1990, when Berkshire’s Chief Financial Officer at the time, Verne McKenzie, tried to fix the faulty microphone system. “Verne McKenzie is our resident technology expert,” Buffett jested. “Can you hear me? Can you hear me?.… This is why we don’t buy technology stocks.”

In 1993, because of the huge crowd, a giant screen was set up so people could see Buffett and Munger better. When at first there was noise and flickering, Buffett teased, “We’re masters of technology here.”

Buffett’s sister Doris recalls sitting with her mother at the meeting in 1992 when Buffett started on one of his Bartles and Jaymes routines with Munger. “There was a heavy man sitting in front of us who thought it was so funny his whole body was shaking. My mother loved it.”

In 1992, in anticipation of the usual question of how long he intends to be at Berkshire, Buffett said, “We plan to be here until we’re both sitting here wondering, ‘Who’s that guy sitting next to me?’”

Buffett usually introduces Munger, sometimes saying, “It’s no breach of etiquette to walk out during his answers.”

He will jokingly warn the audience to be careful in saying anything off-color about the Buffett family because he has relatives strategically placed throughout the audience.

In 1993, Buffett explained that the meeting would go until noon or until Munger said something optimistic. Munger, known for doubt, laconic answers, never did say anything cheery; however, and after each sobering Munger answer, Buffett kept saying, “We’ll be here until noon.”

After Buffett’s initial jokes and introduction, he takes up housekeeping matters by first electing his wife to the board of directors. Straight-faced, he may note that attendants “hired from a local modeling agency” are on hand to give you a proxy card should you wish to change your vote.

A SON NAMED BERKSHIRE

In 1992, Buffett made his usual introductions of the managers and the board; and when he introduced his wife, Susan Buffett, Buffett said, “It’s a name we got out of the phone book.” He then introduced his niece, Cynthia Zak, saying she has a son named Berkshire. “That’s a not-too-subtle method of trying to get into my will,” Buffett joked.

Cynthia Zak says her children actually have family first names and “mountains especially meaningful to us” as middle names: James Cadillac (Cadillac Mountain in Maine’s Acadia National Park next to Bar Harbor, Maine), Winston Everest, Lowell Berkshire, and Victoria Cascade. So Lowell “Berkshire,” a.k.a. “Berky,” is really named for the mountain chain rather than Berkshire Hathaway. “I love Uncle Warren’s jokes,” she added.

Cynthia Zak is the daughter of Roberta Buffett Bialek, Buffett’s younger sister. Roberta Bialek has two other daughters, Susan Lansbury and Carolyn Ackon. All these women live in California.

____________________

Buffett always suggest shareholders visit Borsheims or the Nebraska Furniture Mart. In 1991, his pitch went like this: “At noon we’ll break. And there’ll be buses to take you to Borsheims, Nebraska Furniture Mart or anything else that we have an economic interest in.”

Voting at the meeting is a moot point since Buffett’s block of stock and the holdings of his wife, insiders, and old friends easily make up well over 50% of the stock.

In 1997, Buffett called for a vote this way: “All those in favor of the slate signify by saying aye. All those opposed say, ‘I’m leaving.’ ”

Shareholders go along with Buffett’s litany of business matters; and after everyone has said aye to some unarguable point, such as dispensing with reading minutes of the prior year’s annual meeting, Buffett will say, “You’re doing fine.”

He notes that Berkshire meetings are not meant to be democratic; they take their “Stalinist manner” and autocratic origins from somewhere deep in the old Soviet Union. He says these things almost every year, and they always elicit a little chuckle—about a three or four on the laugh meter.

At the 1994 meeting, Buffett said, “Let’s get the business of the meeting out of the way so we can get on to more interesting things.” He then moved the meeting be adjourned, adding, “Democracy in Middle America.”

The whole routine takes just five or 10 minutes, and if you have not been to a Berkshire meeting before, you are surprised at the move to adjourn. You have come across the country and suddenly it’s over. Over? Well, not really. The fun is just beginning as Buffett leans back from the table a bit and says, “Any questions?” The administrative donkey work is over.

When questions are posed, Buffett offers responses that are stunning in speed, depth, and originality. Once, longtime shareholder Irving Fenster of Tulsa, Oklahoma, got up with a question and started by saying he was from Oklahoma—Nebraska’s biggest football rival; Buffett yelled, “Who let you in?”

When asked for advice to young investors, Buffett explained, “Look at stocks as businesses; look for businesses you understand, run by people you trust and are comfortable with, and leave them alone for a long time.”

The questions roll on for almost three hours, often with shareholders from the Northeast addressing him as “Warren,” and shareholders from the South saying “Mr. Buffett.”

After a 15-minute lunch break, hard-core fans who want more of Buffett stick around for another three hours and even more questions. Buffett fields everything shareholders can throw his way.

Munger always plays the straight man. Sometimes Buffett will describe how some business is deteriorating, and Munger will interject, “He means it went to hell.”

Munger sits stone-faced, arms folded across his chest, usually offering comments like “Yes” or “No,” “No comment” or “I have nothing to add.” After one “That’s exactly right” statement from Munger in 1991, Buffett said, “He’s learning. Susie take notes” (Susie had just been elected to Berkshire’s board). Frequently, Munger will invoke the word “civilization,” combining America’s social and economic fabrics, as in “the civilization needs program trading like it needs more AIDS.”

During the annual meeting in 1992, Floyd Jones of Seattle praised Buffett’s handling of the Salomon scandal. Jones explained that he had worked for the collapsed Drexel Burnham Lambert firm, adding that he felt Buffett had averted what could have been an international financial crisis had Salomon collapsed. Jones said, “I think you are a hero in world corporate society.”

Earlier in that meeting, for the sake of rotating the questions around the large crowd, Buffett had divided the audience into various zones. It so happened Jones’s question came from zone four. After Jones’s eloquent remarks, Buffett said, “Let’s stay in zone four for a while.”

After the meetings, most shareholders make a run for the Nebraska Furniture Mart or Borsheims before catching flights out of Omaha. Buffett helps with the transportation to either store—sometimes providing a rented school bus with no air conditioning. For the meeting in 1989, Buffett hired two old school buses for $100. After all, he wants selling, general, and administrative expenses kept below rock bottom.

“It’s great to hear Warren and Charlie answer every question openly. And it feels good to know your money is in their hands,” says Don Keough.

Free-wheeling give-and-take abound.

LaVerne Ramsey of Birmingham, Alabama, asked Buffett at the 1991 meeting what would be revealed if Kitty Kelley wrote an unauthorized biography of him and Munger. Buffett, as quick as a Magic Johnson pass, shunted the question off to Munger.

“I’m afraid not very much,” Munger said, “But that wouldn’t stop Kitty Kelley.”

Buffett answered, “What you see is what you get with the two of us.” Ramsey, a Buffett admirer, explained later she really asked her question as a test of Buffett’s wit. “He passed,” she said. A small sequel to that story is that later Ramsey sent a note and some photos to Buffett explaining the question was just in fun, as Buffett well knew, and he wrote her back, “LaVerne, Thanks for the pictures. I always enjoy them. Charlie should have some Kitty Kelley material for next year; don’t let him off the hook.”

Later, when asked how he had spent his day, Buffett started out with “More of the Kitty Kelley bit, eh?” Then he said he spends most of the day and night reading and talking on the phone. After giving his answer, he said, “That’s what I do. Charlie, what do you do?”

Munger was not caught off guard: “That reminds me very much of a friend of mine in World War II in a group which had nothing to do. A general once went up to my friend’s boss, we’ll call him Captain Glotz. He said, ‘Captain Glotz, what do you do?’ His boss said, ‘Not a damn thing.’ The General got madder and madder and turned to my friend and said, ‘What do you do’? And my friend said, ‘I help Captain Glotz.’ That’s the best way to describe what I do at Berkshire.”

In 1992, one shareholder asked Buffett what books he read. He answered that before the Salomon scandal, he had read a lot of books. Then he tossed the question to Munger who said one book he’d enjoyed was The Third Chimpanzee. “Are we going to add him up here?” Buffett quipped.

When a shareholder asked about billionaire Ross Perot’s entry in the presidential race and whether that gave Buffett any ideas, Buffett said it gave him no ideas whatsoever and added, “We’ll see if he’s a billionaire when it’s over.”

Buffett’s Investor Club Med is all great fun, including talking to other Berkshire shareholders on the bus ride to the Berkshire-owned stores. Again, most conversations start with, “How long have you been a Berkshire shareholder?” Other tidbits of information about Buffett or Berkshire’s latest investment are shared. But, not all the bantering at the meeting is so lighthearted.

Sometimes Buffett soberly reminds his audience about the dangers of the marketplace. “You shouldn’t own common stocks if a 50% decrease in their value in a short period of time would cause you acute distress,” he said at the Annual Meeting in 1988.

After the Annual Meeting in 1992, Berkshire shareholder Paul Cassidy said of Buffett, “He’s a great education. I bought a couple of shares early on. He gave me the financial security to open my restaurant [The Loft in North Andover, Massachusetts]. I try to carry on in my business the ways he talks about. And I tell my children to be long-term investors. They’ve been buying Coca-Cola stock. I believe that will help send them to college. Our family gets great laughter and enjoyment from Buffett.”

A short time later, Tom Weik, president of Weik Investment Services, Inc., in Wyomissing, Pennsylvania, was talking in the afterglow of the annual meeting. An avid bridge player, Weik has kept up an occasional correspondence with Buffett about the game, and Weik said Buffett once wrote to him about Ben Graham’s relationship with bridge. Buffett said Ben Graham played but wasn’t hard core about it. “This was his only failing.” (Bridge champion Bob Hamman and chess champion Patrick Wolff are usually on hand at annual meeting festivities.)

Reflecting on what Berkshire had done for him, Weik said, “It enabled me to have the comfort to start a business from scratch.”

Buffett got a 10 on the laugh meter at the meeting in 1994 when Allan Maxwell, a pharmaceutical salesman in Omaha, asked, “Now that you’re the richest person in the country, what’s your next goal?” Buffett responded, “That’s easy—to be the oldest person in the country.” In 1999, Maxwell asked a variation of his question: If Buffett weren’t himself, who would he like to be? “I’d probably want to be Mrs. B. She made it to 104,” Buffett replied.

Later at the 1994 meeting, Buffett said he was in pretty good health then waved at his two-liter bottle of Coke saying, “This stuff does wonders for you.”

Every year, he is asked about splitting the stock, and every year he repeats there are no plans to do so. In 1994, a shareholder asked if he planned a reverse split, which leaves fewer shares outstanding. “Now you’re talking,” Buffett said.

At the 1995 meeting, Buffett announced that shareholders had come from 49 of 50 states, with only Vermont not being represented. International visitors had come from Australia, France, Israel, Canada, Sweden, and Zimbabwe. Because people had come from such distances, Buffett said he would extend the meeting, which in prior years lasted until noon or so, until mid-afternoon.

Buffett began the 1995 meeting by explaining a proposal to get authorization to issue preferred stock should the board see fit. “There is no downside to the proposal … if we do something dumb, we can do it in any form [such as cash]… this gives more forms of currency to make acquisitions.”

Buffett said if the acquisitions were huge, like $5 billion, Berkshire would have to come back to the shareholders for another vote. He added if that were to happen, it would come back “with the votes already in hand.”

As the questions rolled on, one shareholder asked Buffett about having his wife and son on Berkshire’s board. Quipped Buffett, “It’s terrific for family harmony.”

Soon a typical answer of “no” came from laconic Munger, and Buffett joked: “I was hoping Charlie would have a near-life experience this morning.” Munger shot back with, “No comment.”

Later, when Munger said Berkshire could be successful even if shareholders didn’t get rich as fast as in the past, some shareholders groaned. “It’s a tie vote,” Buffett said.

During the meeting, Buffett asked Katharine Graham, Don Keough, and Tom Murphy, who were sitting together, to stand. When they stood, Buffett said they were responsible for $6.5 billion in profits “so far.” (The audience applauded.)

Buffett and Bank of Granite Chairman, John Forlines, met for the first time near the Omaha Marriott the day before the annual meeting in 1996. They had only traded several letters beforehand. When they did meet, Buffett said, “I just read your report.” Buffett then began citing figures from the Granite Falls, North Carolina, bank’s first quarter report. “He was right. I was surprised. I was overwhelmed, to say the least,” Forlines said.

Buffett mentioned the bank at the meeting, saying the bank was one of the most profitable for its size in the U.S. He added, “We had requests as far away as Hong Kong for annual reports.” Forlines beamed. In all, 250 requests came in. The bank had to order and reprint reports. In 1996, the bank was the subject of stories by Forbes (October 21) and CBS (November 20).

Forlines, who took over the bank in 1954 when he was 36 years old, attended Duke University and was a major in the Army’s finance unit. A Bank of Granite share bought for $211 in that year, through splits and reinvested dividends, increased to 2,948 shares and was worth more than $78,000 by 1998 (The Washington Post, October 25, 1998). Its “efficiency ratio”—its noninterest expenses as a percentage of its revenues—is 38% versus 60% for similar-size banks.

At the 1997 meeting, Buffett was asked about a small band of anti-abortion protesters who showed up outside Gorat’s steakhouse the night before the meeting and again later the next morning outside the Ak-Sar-Ben auditorium. Those demonstrating opposed Buffett’s donations to Planned Parenthood and his pro-choice views. Buffett said the protesters had every right to protest and that when it came time for charity giving at Berkshire, some shareholders contributed to pro-choice and some to pro-life charities.

Later, during the 1997 meeting, a woman identified herself as a “very minimum shareholder.” Buffett replied: “Don’t minimize your holdings. Between the two of us, we control the company.”

Here is a typical example of the repartee between Buffett and Munger:

Munger: “Life is a whole series of opportunity costs. You’ve got to marry the best person who is convenient to find who will have you. And investment is much the same sort of process.”



Buffett: “I knew we’d get in trouble after lunch.”



Buffett has said of the annual meetings: “We want to make it convenient. We want to make it interesting. And we want people to have fun.… I think if you see them [shareholders] at the ballpark or at Gorat’s or at Borsheims, most of ’em are smiling. If people are smiling as they head out to Eppley (Airfield), we’re going to see them again” (Omaha World-Herald, May 2, 1998).



Even with Berkshire’s poor performance in 1999, there were only a few hostile questions at the meeting in 2000. Perhaps the worst comment came from a shareholder who noted that he had covered his Berkshire losses during the year with gains from his hi-tech investments.

One youngster noted that she had bought Berkshire with the hopes of helping to pay for her college education, but had “started to look at correspondence schools” when the stock hit its lows.

RAISINS AND TURDS

The most talked about, out-of-the-blue comment of the 2000 Annual Meeting came from Munger during the morning session. When he was talking about the benefits that the Internet and technology are providing to society compared to the evils of stock speculation in these areas, he said: “When you mix raisins and turds, you still have turds.” A few in the audience whispered, “Did he really say ‘turds’?” Buffett said: “Now you know why I write the annual reports,” and later added, “We’ll try to stay away from raisins this afternoon.”

Munger’s mind was still in the toilet at the meeting in 2002 when he suddenly blurted out: “To say derivative accounting in America is a sewer is an insult to sewage.”

____________________

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 2000 Annual Report: “We have added so many new companies to Berkshire this year that I’m not going to detail all the products that we will be selling at the meeting. But, come prepared to carry home everything from bricks to candy. One new product, however, deserves special note. Bob Shaw has designed a 3-x-5 rug featuring an excellent likeness of Charlie. Obviously, it would be embarrassing for Charlie—make that humiliating—if slow sales forced us to slash the rug’s price, so step up and do your part.”

Annual meeting festivities in 2003 included appearances by some of the world’s top bridge players: Bob Hamman, Sharon Osberg, Fred Gitelman, and Sheri Winestock. Other top experts in their field included Patrick Wolff, twice U.S. chess champion; Bill Robertie, one of only two players who have twice won the backgammon world championship; and Peter Morris, winner of the World Scrabble Championship in 1991.

In 2003, Buffett put to a vote the decision to hold the meeting on a Saturday or Monday. The vote was 2 to 1 in favor of Saturday. Buffett and Debbie Bosanek both were in favor of Monday. Buffett joked that the vote might be Berkshire’s last experiment with democracy.

Referring to the upcoming 2004 Annual Meeting, Buffett wrote this in Berkshire’s 2003 Annual Report: “Our exhibition of Berkshire goods and services will blow you away this year. On the floor, for example, will be a 1,600-square-foot Clayton home (featuring Acme brick, Shaw carpet, Johns Manville insulation, MiTek fasteners, Carefree awnings, and outfitted with NFM furniture). You’ll find it a far cry from the mobile-home stereotype of a few decades ago.”

THE BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING IN 2004

Berkshire’s Annual Meeting on May 1, 2004, was held at the Qwest Center Omaha, a much larger locale than previous ones.

With more than 481,000 square feet—196,000 of that for the exhibition hall, the center fully provided for the biggest Berkshire meeting ever.

Throngs amounting to 19,500 arrived at the meeting, filling the 17,000 seats plus an overflow room at the new Omaha Convention Center and Arena. Berkshire’s shareholder meeting remains the best-attended annual meeting in the world.

Shareholders milled about the exhibition hall inspecting the displays featured in booths of the various Berkshire companies before settling in for the company movie featuring Arnold Schwarzenegger, the governor of “Collyfonya” who threatened to run for governor of Nebraska. Dressed in army fatigues, Arnold ordered Buffett to do 500 situps and run on a treadmill [because Buffett had suggested higher taxes for California]. Finally, Arnold yelled, “There will be no Dairy Queen for you.”

After the meeting came to order, Buffett introduced Munger as “this hyperkinetic fellow next to me.” One of the first questions was how to avoid trouble in an inflationary period. Munger said, “One of the greatest defenses against inflation is not having a lot of silly needs in your life.”

“Charlie,” Buffett countered, “we’re selling consumer products in the other room.”

Buffett and Munger sipped soft drinks and ate peanut brittle and chocolate. At one point, Buffett said, “Don’t eat ’em all, Charlie.”

Throughout the meeting, Buffett and Munger made these pronouncements:

• Average investors who steadily invest in low-cost mutual funds that reflect the broad stock market will do better than 90% of the people who give financial advice.

• Inflation and higher interest rates are probably coming at some point.

• Maintaining strict asset allocation percentage is “nonsense.” Investors should judge stocks, bonds, and other investments on their merits and not their price.

• Berkshire required the auditors to answer a series of questions about the company’s financial reports so that auditors would be partially responsible for misstated numbers.

• Buffett and Munger don’t ask employees to donate to charities. “Think what the reciprocity implications would be,” Munger said.

• A person’s best protection against inflation is to have “a lot of earning power.” For a business, the ideal situation is to be “able to raise prices as inflation expands or as profits remain at least steady. We’re starting to see it heat up in this country.”

• Buffett commented about risk: “The best way to minimize risk is to think.”

• About the use of compensation consultants, Munger said, “I would rather stick a viper down my shirt than hire a compensation consultant.”

In Berkshire’s 2004 Annual Report, Buffett said he was changing the sequence of the next meeting so that the questions come first and the official meeting last.

As human nature would have it, a few questioners have grandstanded with long monologues about themselves, their businesses, or their views of the world in past years.

“We have made this change because a number of shareholders complained last year about the time consumed by two speakers who advocated proposals of limited interest to the majority of the audience—and who no doubt were relishing their chance to talk to a captive group of about 19,500. With our new procedure, those shareholders who wish to hear it all can stick around for the formal meeting and those who don’t can leave—or better yet shop,” Buffett wrote.

THE BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING IN 2005

Berkshire’s Annual Meeting on April 30, 2005, was held before a crowd of more than 20,000 people.

Buffett said he couldn’t take specific questions about the insurance investigation because investigators “don’t want people collaborating on their stories.” He and Munger did praise AIG’s former CEO Hank Greenberg as someone who built an important company.

Buffett said Berkshire continued to write all kinds of insurance, including nontraditional insurance.

Both Buffett and Munger defended the current Social Security system. They said the country faces more pressing problems than the projected Social Security insolvency in 40 or 50 years. “Anything that would take Social Security payments below their present guaranteed level is a mistake. The obligation of the people who do well in the society is to provide a reasonable level of sustenance for those in their later years.”

Munger, who called himself a “right-wing Republican,” said, “Republicans are out of their cotton-picking minds to be taking this issue on now.” He said efforts should be directed at reducing nuclear tensions with North Korea and Iran.

Buffett said the focus should be on cutting the budget deficits. He also pointed out the large U.S. account and trade deficits still weigh on the dollar and could cause a financial calamity. An increasing number of investors, he said, have “hair trigger” positions, calling such investors “the electronic herd.” Some untoward event could trigger “a stampede by that herd” all going to exit doors at once.

Finally, Buffett said public education has declined in many places. “It’s the No. 1 problem with the country. We’ve got the resources, and we’re not providing it.”

He continued, “A good public school system is somewhat like virginity. You can preserve it, but you can’t restore it.”

REPORTERS

In an effort to get more questions directly related to Berkshire, Buffett picked three financial panelists to whom shareholders could submit questions before the meeting. The panelists picked the best questions, but they were not shown to Buffett or Munger beforehand.

The three panelists were Carol Loomis of Fortune magazine, Becky Quick of CNBC and Andrew Ross Sorkin of The New York Times.

ANALYSTS

In a move to broaden the base of the understanding of Berkshire, Buffett told The Wall Street Journal (November 21, 2011) that beginning with the annual meeting on May 5, 2012, he would have three analysts to also ask questions. “We want a majority of the audience to find the meeting useful,” he was quoted as saying.

The three analysts chosen were Jay Gelb of Barclays Capital; Cliff Gallant of Keefe, Bruyette & Woods; and Gary Ransom of Dowling & Partners.



Running Naked through the Money

Berkshire’s Annual Meeting could be described as the world’s largest financial orgy.



The Road to Omaha

Original souvenir program for the movie Close Encounters of the Third Kind

The Story of Warren Buffett



The Big Day

Buffett and his daughter, Susie, arrive for Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1997.



The Rock Star of Investing

Shareholder groupies swarm around Buffett, seated between his daughter, Susie, and his wife, Susan, before the annual meeting in 1997.

(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)

(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting



Drug of Choice: Caffeine

Always a two-fisted Cherry Coke drinker, Buffett gets fortified for the 1992 Annual Meeting.





Greatest Show on Earth

The Berkshire annual meeting is held each spring. In 1992, Adam Smith of Money World aired a show about the meeting.

Mr. Berkshire

Buffett is pictured at the 1994 Annual Meeting in front of a portrait of the classic cover of the Berkshire Annual Report.



Coca-Cola: Better than Money

Don Keough, former president of Coca-Cola, in his Coke apron, chats with Sequoia Fund’s Bill Ruane. Both are longtime friends of Buffett’s. The late Ruane, a Harvard alumnus, has joked there’s little difference between him and Buffett except billions of dollars and 100 IQ points.

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

Buffettabilia Machine at Work

Buffett, decked out in a Coca-Cola apron, signs annual reports and Buffettabilia before Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1992. The next year, he wore a See’s Candies cap during the Annual Meeting.



(Photos by LaVerne Ramsey)

Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting The Story of Warren Buffett



(AP/Wide World Photos)

Buffett and Gates in the

Final Stretch

Actually, Seabiscuit leads Triple Crown-winner War Admiral in the first turn at a race at Pimlico in Baltimore, Maryland, on November 1, 1938. Seabiscuit won by three lengths and set a track record.

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting



Buffett, the Boston Terrier

(Photo by Bob Sullivan)

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)



Dubious Trade

Buffett and Robert Sullivan at Borsheims the day before Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 1995. Buffett asked Sullivan if he brought his dog along. Sullivan said instead he brought a friend, a stockbroker. Buffett joked, “That’s a bad trade.”

Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting The Story of Warren Buffett



Goodwill Hunting

Frank Betz, with Carret & Co.; Phil Carret; Buffett; John Forlines, Bank of Granite Chairman; and “Ollie the Trolley.” On Sunday before the Berkshire Annual Meeting in 1997, Buffett picked up some shareholders by trolley for a brunch.

(Photo by

Paul Fleetwood)



Buffett and Munger: An Unusual Combination

From left: Jamie, Ceily Mae holding Buffett the Dog, Bobby holding Munger the Turtle, and Charlie. The Sullivan children are a combination of Berkshire, Wesco, and Coca-Cola shareholders.

(Photo by

Celia Sullivan)



(Photo

courtesy of

Robert Sullivan)

Nightly News Tonight

Robert and Celia Sullivan with NBC News Anchor Tom Brokaw at Berkshire Annual Meeting festivities in 1998. In the early 1960s, Brokaw lived in Omaha when he was a reporter for an NBC affiliate. Brokaw’s wife, Meredith, was an English teacher then at Omaha Central High School where Buffett’s Aunt Alice once taught and where Munger attended school.

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting



Shopping Spree

Susan Buffett, left, and Astrid Menks at Borsheims before the Annual Meeting in 1992.

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)



Wise Guy

Early Berkshire investor Irving Fenster of Oklahoma.

Who let him in?

(Photo courtesy of Bob Sullivan)



Billionaires in Sweaters

Buffett, Astrid Menks, Sue Scott, and Kiewit Chairman Walter Scott at a museum party in Omaha in 1996.

(Photo by Andrea “Andy” Holg/Metro Monthly)

Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting The Story of Warren Buffett

“They Thought He Checked Alarm Systems.”

Right—Buffett’s daughter Susie at Borsheims in 1992. She said her friends in school thought her security analyst father “checked alarm systems.”



(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)



Planning a Borsheims Shopping Spree

Susie Buffett, left, sporting a Nebraska national championship shirt, talks with Washington Post’s Katharine Graham and Fortune’s Carol Loomis near Borsheims the day before the Annual Meeting in 1995.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

The Babe Ruth of Berkshire



No Writer’s Cramp Here

Fortune’s Carol Loomis near Borsheims in 1997. She’s showing off her bracelet with charms Buffett gives her for editing the Berkshire Annual Report, which she has read since 1977. Born June 25, 1929, in Marshfield, Missouri, she attended the Missouri School of Journalism, started out writing in-house publications for Maytag Co., and then went to Fortune as a researcher in 1954.

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting



The Autograph That Counts

Below—The autograph that counts—and keeps on counting. Buffett, a human Buffettabilia assembly line, signs items at Borsheims in 1993.





Cashiers?

Left—Donald Yale, former president of Borsheims (left), and Berkshire Vice Chairman Charles Munger counted the money following the Borsheims shopping spree in 1993.

Singing “Impossible”

Above—Berkshire’s Michael Goldberg, a graduate of Stanford Business School where he was a student in Dr. Jack McDonald’s class, oversees Berkshire’s commercial finance businesses. He heads Berkshire Hathaway Credit Corp. Goldberg has described one negative of his job: “How do you ever think much of your abilities after being around Warren Buffett?”

(Photos by LaVerne Ramsey)



(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

With Mother and Daughter

Buffett and his daughter Susan Buffett, on the left, look on as his mother, Leila Buffett, center, engages in conversation with Linda O’Bryon, then of Nightly Business Report and now with Northern California Public Broadcasting in San Francisco.



Above Average Family

Dr. Michael Prus, his wife, Judy, and their above-average children, Michael, Elizabeth, and Jeff of Grosse Pointe Farms, Michigan, are regulars at Berkshire annual meetings.

Not Pregnant This Year

Chad and Carol Brenner of Cincinnati, Ohio, are irregulars at Berkshire annual meetings. Their attendance depends upon whether Carol is pregnant that year. The Brenners have three children: Reed, Ryan, and Rochelle. These children have a promising financial future, as their father has said, “I’ve never sold a share, and my kids will inherit them all.”



(Photos by

LaVerne Ramsey)

Books and Bucks

Michael and Eiko Assael of New York are proud Berkshire shareholders. Michael is holding Buffett-signed “investment guides,” including a 1934 edition of Ben Graham’s Security Analysis. Such first editions are worth more than $1,000. Eiko sports her personalized “100 BRK” license plate with a message from Buffett. It’s another piece of Buffettabilia for a Berkshire museum in their kitchen.



(Omaha

World-Herald)

Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting The Story of Warren Buffett



Paul McCartney?

This man holds the world’s autographing record, and no, he’s not one of the Beatles. He is Warren “When-I’m-Ninety-Four” Buffett, signing autographs at Borsheims before Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1996.

(Photo courtesy of Allan Maxwell)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting



Have You Heard the One about the Dog and the Turtle?

Katharine Graham and Buffett sign books at Borsheims during Berkshire annual meeting festivities in 1997. They happen to be signing the 1996 version of this book, and Buffett is telling Graham about a shareholder who has a dog named Buffett and a turtle named Munger. The shareholder, Robert Sullivan, right, said Mrs. Graham laughed so hard she nearly fell out of her chair.

(Photo by Bob Sullivan)



(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey

John Forlines

Former Bank of Granite Chairman died in 2010 at age 92.



Another Version of the Four Tops

Astrid Menks, Buffett’s companion at that time and now his wife; Phil Carret; Susan Buffett, Buffett’s wife until her death; and Debbie Bosanek chat at Berkshire Annual Meeting festivities in 1997.

(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)



Bank of Granite: “The best little bank in America.”

Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting The Story of Warren Buffett



Bigger Than Life

This Dairy Queen in Omaha, with its large Coca-Cola, is where Buffett and Munger had dessert with shareholders the night before the Berkshire annual meeting in 1998. Come to a few meetings and you may encounter a NetJets plane at the DQ one year.

(Photo by Frank Kilpatrick)



The Autographed Dusty Sundae

Actually, it’s Buffett having a Dusty Sundae dessert and signing autographs at a Dairy Queen in Omaha May 3, 1998, the eve of the Berkshire annual meeting. At the 2000 meeting, Buffett was spotted opening a Dilly Bar package with his teeth. His hands were full with See’s candy and Cokes.

I’ll Have Ice Cream with My High I.Q.

Berkshire Vice Chairman Charles Munger holds an ice cream cone at the Dairy Queen where about 500 people showed up to see Buffett and Munger. Munger had to have his friends hold his ice cream so he could sign autographs.



(Photos by

Nancy Line Jacobs)



(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)



You’ve Come a Long Long Way, Baby

Buffett and his two sisters, Mrs. Bertie Bialek and Ms. Doris Buffett, reunite during the Berkshire annual meeting weekend in 2001.



(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)

Ernie Banks and The Bank

Hall of Fame baseball player Ernie Banks and Warren “The Whip” Buffett chat at festivities surrounding Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 1999. Banks, who spent 19 seasons with the Chicago Cubs at Wrigley Field, is famous for a classic baseball saying: “It’s a great day for a ball game. Let’s play two.” From 1955 to 1960, Banks hit 248 homeruns—the most of any player in the majors, including Mantle, Mays, and Aaron. One shareholder, after meeting both Buffett and Banks, said, “I met my lifelong hero—Ernie Banks!”

(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting



Girls Gone Wild

Containing the wild ones is tough duty, but doesn’t someone have to do it? Nancy Hess, left, of Suffield, Connecticut, and Carol Padelford of Seattle have a photo op with the Oracle of Omaha at Borsheims the weekend before the Berkshire annual meeting in 1999. Yes, blondes do have more fun.

(Photo by Bob Sullivan)



All-Important Shareholder Relations

Presumably, Buffett is working on shareholder relations here with Celia Sullivan.

(Photo by Bob Sullivan)

Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting The Story of Warren Buffett

Elvis Has Entered the Building

The King of Investing and three bodyguards enter Omaha’s Civic Auditorium for “the capitalist’s version of Woodstock” in 2001.



(Photo courtesy of the Omaha World-Herald)



(Photo by

Mary Porter)

Nancy’s Nightmare

Munger’s wife takes a dim view of his analogy.





(Photo by

LaVerne Ramsey)

Mrs. Buffett and Astrid Menks

Susan Buffett, left, and Astrid Menks at Berkshire’s annual meeting weekend in 1997. Mrs. Buffett died in 2004, and Buffett married Menks in 2006.

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting

“A Bag of Cement”

John C. Holt of Clinton, New Jersey, here with Buffett in 2000, wrote to the Oracle in 2003 saying that he had tried unsuccessfully to catch up with him during shareholders’ weekend to sign Of Permanent Value. “At the year’s annual meeting, I lugged it around Nebraska Furniture Mart (NFM) all night on the outside chance that you might inscribe it. I made it into the line where you were signing autographs at NFM but was cut off at the pass. A security person said you were signing only a limited number of autographs, and I was too far back to be included. I understood and fully sympathize with your imposed limitation amidst 10-15 thousand admirers all reeking of barbecue. However, I’m only a year younger than you and after carrying Andy’s 45 lb. tome around several hours, near the end I was not only disappointed, but selfishly wishing he had written a bag of cement instead.” Holt, a geologist who graduated from New York University, worked for years for Holt Machinery Co. in New Jersey. After attending Berkshire’s 2004 Annual Meeting and making the most of its related events, Holt wrote that he couldn’t “quite see himself aimlessly wandering NFM all evening carrying a wide-screen TV, a copy of Of Permanent Value, or a small refrigerator home as a surprise for the little woman.” It remains to be seen if the “little woman” lets Holt go to next year’s meeting. Maybe he’ll have to take her to Borsheims where Holt swears that he saw a woman there who couldn’t make up her mind between a $185,000 diamond necklace and one for $170,000. Finally, she said, “Why not wrap them both?” (Why not!!!)



(Photo courtesy of John Holt)



The Early Birds

Joe Lionberger, center, with a big bag on his left shoulder, arrived first at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2000. He showed up at 3:15 a.m. Larry Oberman of Chicago had been the early bird each of the previous six years. Lionberger, 28, originally of Martell, Nebraska, is a finance student at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln.

(Photo by Mary Houbolt)

Cost/Benefit Analysis

Joe Lionberger, shown here with Buffett, explained the reasoning behind his early bird arrival: “Having been a bakery manager at a HyVee in Lincoln for four years while contemplating a business degree, I was accustomed to little sleep. When I realized that I would get little or no sleep whether I tried to or not, I considered the options in a common risk/return, cost/benefit analysis. On one hand, I could be extremely sleepy and possibly dangerous on the road at 7 a.m. (and get a very bad seat). On the other hand, I could get the best seat in the house, and spend several hours with people who no doubt would have the same priorities (investing) and role models (Warren Buffett) as me.… I reasoned that in order for someone to get up super early and stand outside the Civic Auditorium for hours, they would be of a certain demographic.”



(Photo courtesy of Joe Lionberger)

Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting The Story of Warren Buffett



Charlie Warren

Berkshire shareholders Larry and Debbie Oberman named their baby—born on the fourth of July 2000—Charlie Warren after, you guessed it! He goes by his middle name. Photo shows the family at Niagara Falls in 2008.

(Photo courtesy of Larry Oberman)



(Photo courtesy of Allan Maxwell)

Printing Money

Allan Maxwell of Omaha, pictured here in 1995, loves to attend Berkshire annual meetings and collect Buffett memorabilia. If it’s signed by Buffett, so much the better.



“Anything to Add, Charlie?”

Abrupt and judgmental Munger and folksy Buffett, Berkshire’s dynamic duo, field some questions at Borsheims the weekend of the shareholders’ meeting in 2001.

(Photo by Lee Armstrong)



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Keeping Up with the Buffetts

Buffett and his wife, Susie, at the 1997 Annual Meeting.

The Next

Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger?

Another dynamic duo—Debbie Reynolds and Berkshire’s Debbie Bosanek

—meet during Berkshire’s shareholders weekend in 2001.



(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting



(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

Not the Real Thing

Buffett gave a few of these autographed fake $100 bills

to shareholders during the 1997 Berkshire annual meeting festivities.



The Real Thing

One Berkshire shareholder has a different sort of investment,

a $1,000 bill signed by Buffett.

The Three Musketeers

These Berkshire fans, from left, are Steve Wallman, Dr. Peter Fang, and Bill Scargle. Wallman said, “Who would have thought that a chance gift (the Money MastersWall) and an odd choice of seats (in front of Scarg [Scargle]) would change my life so much for the better?”



(Photo by Frank Kilpatrick)



The Rocking Face of Capitalism

About 14,000 shareholders picked the minds of Buffett and Munger for six hours on May 4, 2002, at Berkshire’s annual meeting.

(Omaha World-Herald)

Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting The Story of Warren Buffett



Displaying Our Products

This sculpture depicts Buffett and 15 products made either by Berkshire or a company in which it has significant holdings.

(Sculpture by Tom Kerr/Photo by Laura Inns/Omaha World-Herald)



Buffett Bullish?

Buffett holds the bull by the tail as he autographs it at the shareholders’ barbecue at the Nebraska Furniture Mart, May 3, 2003.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



(Photo courtesy of the Omaha World-Herald)

Stampede

The festivities before Berkshire’s 2003 Annual Meeting included a stampede down the street. Justin Boot executives rode the herd to the annual extravaganza.



Across the Atlantic, Mr. Lindbergh?

Buffett is pictured in front of the NetJets trade show display on May 1, 1999, the weekend before Berkshire’s Annual Meeting.

(Photo by John Gass)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting



Rulers of an Empire

Munger and Buffett converse before a May 4, 2003, press conference in Omaha.

(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)





(Photos by Mary Porter)



Berkshire’s Annual Meeting Credentials

Credentials were so popular, some were even auctioned on eBay. One bid was for more than $150. To undercut the price, Berkshire stepped in and offered the credentials for $2.50 each. “We don’t like the fact that the tickets are being scalped,” Berkshire’s CFO Mark Hamburg was quoted as saying. Berkshire sold hundreds of extra tickets as a result.



The Multitudes—

19,500 People

Throngs arrive for Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2004 at Omaha’s Qwest Center. Back in 1804, the Lewis and Clark Expedition camped near here. How did Lewis and Clark do it? “Courage is being scared to death but saddling up anyway,” John Wayne said.



(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting The Story of Warren Buffett



Buffett and Bodyguard Dan Clark

(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)

Anticipated Arrival of the King

“Elvis” arrives for the Berkshire annual meeting in 2004.



(Photo by

Lee Armstrong)

The Charlie Rose Show

Right, journalist Charlie Rose interviews Buffett’s daughter, Susie, during Berkshire’s annual meeting weekend in 2005.



(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

Below, Charlie Rose with Renee Carret, the granddaughter of investor Phil Carret, during Berkshire’s 2005 Annual Meeting weekend.



(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)



Buffett’s Son Howard

Howard Buffett sold and autographed his books at the annual meeting in 2004.

(Photo by

Nancy Line

Jacobs)



Carol Loomis

Fortune’s Carol Loomis once again shows off her bracelet of annual report cover charms, which Buffett has given her over the years for editing the report. In 2004, she received a purple charm in honor of the purple report cover.

(Photo by

LaVerne Ramsey)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting



A Home Away from Home

A Clayton mobile home is on display featuring many of Berkshire’s other products, such as Nebraska Furniture Mart furniture, Shaw carpeting, and World Book encyclopedias. Buffett has said the display was a “huge hit,” estimating that between 4,000 and 5,000 people waited in line to walk through the home. He joked that he may start selling tickets (Knoxville News-Sentinel, September 29, 2004).



(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)





(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Too Cool for School

Gentle giant Justin cowboy on stilts wrangles up balloon animals for the children.



(Photo by Mary Porter)

Cooking

“Berkshire cooks!” proclaims a

Pampered Chef apron.

Showtime

Shareholders watched the Berkshire movie in this tent.

Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Melissa Guillotin)

Playing Blindfolded: Checkmate

Patrick Wolff, twice the U.S. chess champion, took on six chess players; and although he was blindfolded; he still won all the matches. He was told of all the moves of each of the opposing players. Even without seeing the boards, he played at the speed of lightning. Wolff has become a regular fixture at the annual meeting festivities.



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Bill in Deep Thought

Jeff Hull of Toronto; R. J. Meurer Jr., of Duxbury, Massachusetts, and Rick Casterline of Austin, Texas, watch Bill Gates play bridge at Berkshire’s annual meeting festivities in 2006.



(Photo by

Melissa Guillotin)

A Good Reason to Smile

Berkshire shareholder Nan Shelley of Birmingham enjoys a free-flowing chocolate fondue, a “tower of chocolate.”

Charlie’s Angels

These three nurses attended to Mrs. Buffett during her recovery from oral cancer surgery. They are from left, Sarah McCarthy, Mellyn Reading, and Lisa Furia. Buffett’s daughter, Susie, said: “My dad invited them to the meeting months ago. They were on 24-hour duty for months and had seen Warren only in his bathrobe (sometimes my mother’s bathrobe when he couldn’t find his) and his SEC sweatsuit. They were stunned at the other part of his life. They had a ball, and I think they might come back next year.”



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

“The Money Honey”

CNBC’s Maria Bartiromo (a.k.a. “The Money Honey”) talks with the master of ceremonies at the Berkshire Annual Meeting. Also seen here is Jeff Hull (left) of Canada, who filmed a documentary about Berkshire called Warren Buffett—Money Master. All the proceeds from that documentary went to World Vision, which supports impoverished children and tsunami relief efforts. Proceeds from a DVD version of the TV broadcast will go to Girls Inc.



(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

Berkshire’s Beauties

Mrs. Celia Sullivan and Mrs. Deedee Walter pose for their closeup.



(Photo by Jeff Hull)

The Brother and Sisters Act

Buffett is seated with his sisters Bertie, center, and Doris at Berkshire’s

annual meeting in 2006.

Berkshire’s Brains

Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger bobble heads are

popular with shareholders.



(Photo by Mary Porter)

Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting The Story of Warren Buffett



Berkshire’s Visitor’s Guide for 2008



(Photos by Mary Porter)

More Wisdom

Purls of Wisdom is a knitting business run by Buffett’s daughter.



License to Save

Buffett’s license plate says THRIFTY. Thus, the bumper sticker above was available at the Berkshire annual meeting in 2006.



Notarized by Buffett

This fake $1 billion bill has an authentic signature.

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting

Carol Loomis and Buffett are pictured at the Berkshire Annual Meeting in 2005. In Fortune’s September 29, 2005 issue, Loomis wrote of her 51 years and counting at Fortune, revealing such tidbits as that her piled-high desk is known as “a toxic-waste dump” and that she once had two dates with Ty Cobb. She was 28 and he was 70. One date was for lunch; one for a ball game. She also explained that the book she and Buffett had long planned—with her editing and him writing—was abandoned “because he didn’t want to put in the work.”



Loomis and Buffett

Photos by

Nancy Line Jacobs)



Playing Your Cards Right

Investing in Berkshire, historically, has been a good play.

(Photo by Mary Porter)



Ready for Action

Buffett arrives in his usual good spirit for the Berkshire annual meeting in 2005.



Taking a Load off

Charlie Munger enjoys a Coke before the

press conference in 2005.



Shaw Carpet Rug Shows Buffett’s Routine

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

“Berky Bookseller” in Operation in 2005



(Photo by Jordon Jacobs)



A Random Duo

MidAmerican CEO David Sokol, left, and Berkshire board member Walter Scott stand together before Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2006, which was attended by 24,000 shareholders.

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)



And Let Me Add...

Jeff Hull interviewed Buffett at Berkshire’s

annual meeting in 2005.

(Photo courtesy of Jeff Hull)



“I Have Nothing to Add”

Munger offers one of his common

I-have-nothing-to-add statements during the 2005 Berkshire Annual Meeting.

Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting The Story of Warren Buffett



Carol Loomis

(Photo by

LaVerne Ramsey)



Becky Quick

(Photo by

Tommy Terrell)



Andrew Ross Sorkin

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Rocking Annual Meeting



208





SPECIAL MEETING


Berkshire held a special meeting on September 16, 1998, to vote the issuance of new stock to buy General Re.

Munger didn’t make the meeting, and Buffett joked about Munger’s planned absence beforehand: “I guess he figures that his salary is such that we are entitled to only one appearance per year.”

Buffett quoted Munger as saying, “Take off the training wheels and see if you can handle this yourself.”

Shortly into the meeting, Buffett got a tough question and said he needed Munger’s help. He reached over to Munger’s normal seat and pulled up a large cardboard cutout of Munger and placed it in the chair.

To another question, Buffett turned to the Munger cutout and asked for help and then played a taped response from Munger: “I have nothing to add.”

At one point, Buffett said Munger was more animated than usual. And Buffett continued to play taped responses from Munger, such as “No comment” or “No.”

The Story of Warren Buffett



Cardboard Cutout—Munger in Wood Stock

Buffett is pictured with his cardboard cutout of Charles Munger at Berkshire’s special meeting September 16, 1998. David Ramsey of Montgomery, Alabama, wrote Buffett an apology for taking this photo since pictures are not allowed at Berkshire meetings. He received a letter back from Debbie Bosanek saying, “We received your nice letter and the picture. We’re sending it on to Charlie as it is one of his better photos.”

(Photo by David Ramsey)

Of Permanent Value Special Meeting



209





BERKSHIRE’S ANNUAL MEETING IN 2007


Long ago, in a galaxy far, far away... —Star Wars

Braving inclement weather, as did original Woodstock attendees, 27,000 people flocked to the Annual Meeting in 2007. When Buffett was introduced, it wasn’t Warren who appeared but a Buffett by the name of Jimmy, Warren’s musical stand-in.

Serving as a warm-up act, Jimmy Buffett sang a version of his hit “Margaritaville” rewritten for fellow Berkshire shareholders. Jimmy Buffett, who bought his Berkshire shares at $1,600 more than 20 years ago, sang “Wastin’ away in Berkshire Hathaway-ville.”

The following are selected photos of the activities at the Annual Meeting in 2007:



Packed House

These 27,000 fans in the packed Qwest Center, now named the CenturyLink Center, in Omaha are not there for a sporting event but are anticipating the sporting talk of Buffett and Munger at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2007.

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)



The Story of Warren Buffett



Head Parrothead Performing at the Meeting

Jimmy Buffett is the first Buffett to make an appearance in 2007.



Years of Experience

Buffett and Munger, at center stage, have a combined 159 years worth of experience.

Buffett, Munger, and Buffett

Jimmy Buffett, right, joins Buffett, and Munger at the head table



(Photos by Tommy Terrell)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2007



Odds Against the Dynamic Duo

Gates and Buffett double-team table tennis champion Ariel Hsing. The only thing that throws Ariel is when Buffett and Gates hit simultaneous serves at her.

(Photo by Jordan Jacobs)



Swing Low, Ariel

Buffett turns out to be Ariel’s only

limitation.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Ping Pong Kiss

Hsing, 12, an all-A student at Chaboya Middle School in San Jose, California, dreams of one day making the Olympic team, going to Stanford, and becoming an eye doctor. Buffett knows talent when he sees it.

(Photo by Jeff Hull)



Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell

Don’t ask because no one is to tell how badly Ariel Hsing beat her wealthy opponents.

(Photo by Jordan Jacobs)



George W. Bush at White House Press Conference

Charlie Rose looks on as Gates tries to laugh off the competition.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2007 The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Summit Meeting

Buffett and Gates play with bridge champions Bob Hamman and Sharon Osberg.

(Photo by Jordan Jacobs)



Railroad Talk?

Bill, if we merge the railroads, say, in 2060, we could make a buck. Even then, they won’t be able to ship coal and lumber by cyberspace.

(Photo by

Jordan Jacobs)



Justin Provisions

The beef and boots at Justin’s 2007 booth would have been prime items for purchase at the

original Woodstock.



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Mini-Woodstock

Buffett, Warren at that, puts on a show at the Justin Boots stage in 2007.

(Photo by Jeff Hull)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2007



See’s Delivery Cycle

But where will the candy ride?

(Photo by Jordan Jacobs)



Anything Undervalued, Susan?

Buffett with Borsheims president Susan Jacques

(Photo by Jordan Jacobs)



A Clayton Home

“Be it ever so humble” with a Clayton Home.



Shaw Carpet for a Clayton Home

(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2007 The Story of Warren Buffett



Buffett’s Understudy

The Gecko and Caveman work the GEICO display together.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Framing It

Larson-Juhl frames it all.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Pretty Pamela

Panda Poses

Garan booth displays

children’s items.



The Source for All You Need to Know

World Book knows knowledge.

(Photos by

Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2007



-

Leisure Vehicles

CNN’s Susan Lisovicz takes a pretend test drive as Andy Winkler, owner of Valley Marine, and Roer Plant (left) of Anchor Distributing, back her up at the South Bay Boats display.

Not a Leisure Business

Jason Steed (left), field sales manager for Precision Brand, and Ed Schenkenfelder (right), field sales manager for Precision Steel Warehouse, pose with Buffett cutout at Precision’s booth.



(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Just ’a Tooling

Campbell Hausfeld displays tools.



Iscar Booth

Iscar’s cutting-edge metal technologies are on display.

(Photo by Sidarta Tanu)

Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2007 The Story of Warren Buffett



How Does He Do That?

Chess champion Patrick Wolff wins blindfolded.

(Photo by Jordan Jacobs)



Documentary

A documentary by Jeff Hull about Woodstock is underway.

(Photo courtesy of Jeff Hull)

MidAmerican Energy Booth

MidAmerican powers thousands of homes.



(Photo by Tommy Terrell)



How Does She Do That?

Race car driver Stephanie Warn pilots See’s car.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Under the Big Top

A tent is erected in front of Borsheims for some of the activities during

Berkshire’s annual meeting weekend.

(Photo by Sidarta Tanu)

Dairy Queen

Dilly Bars

are served here.



(Photo by Sidarta Tanu)



(Photo by Sidarta Tanu)

Fruit of the Loom

Buffett said, “Though we like to think of the meetings as a spiritual experience, we must remember that even the least secular of religions includes the ritual of the

collection plate.”

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2007



Collector’s Items

Buffett and Munger stamps are hot items.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)





Paul McCartney

Bono

THE BEGINNING OF BERKSHIRE’S AUTOGRAPH BUSINESS

A Dollar Bill Signed by Buffett





A Dollar Bill Signed by Munger

(Photo by Tommy Terrell)



Oakies Heading West

This truck resembles a Berkshire shareholder’s car headed back to California after

visiting the Nebraska Furniture Mart, Borsheims, and the company display booths at the annual meeting.



210





BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING IN 2008


“DANCE TO THE MUSIC” —SLY AND THE FAMILY STONE

A multitude of people—31,000—came to the Annual Meeting in 2008. Actress Susan Lucci, speaking for Buffett on stage, said Berkshire would change its no-dividend policy, issue earnings projections weekly, and raise the pay for board members. The crowd roared. Woodstock was underway.

Artist Michael Israel had kicked off the festivities shortly after 6 a.m. on May 3 by creating a portrait of Buffett, which was to be auctioned off with the proceeds slated for Girls Inc. Known for his portraits of Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton, Israel painted Buffett in under 10 minutes using a double-fisted paint brush. The painting was signed by both Israel and Buffett.

The event was sponsored by Benjamin Moore Paints to mark its 125th birthday, and the painting was displayed at the Benjamin Moore booth at the Annual Meeting. It was framed by Larson-Juhl and later auctioned on eBay. The meeting was sprinkled with questions from people around the world who had come to hear the wit and wisdom of their cult leaders.

BUFFETT AND MUNGER

One high school student from Germany asked what he should do with his life. Munger replied, “We prefer questions that are harder.”

Woodstock—back in 1969—couldn’t have been as much fun.



Love and Peace

The Story of Warren Buffett





WOODSTOCK, 1969


“THREE DAYS OF PEACE AND MUSIC: AN AQUARIAN EXPOSITION”



Arlo Guthrie

“Amazing Grace”



Joe Cocker

“With a Little Help from My Friends”

People with Large Corpora Callosa

Harvard University found that musicians have a bigger corpora callosa—the mass of fibers connecting the two cerebral hemispheres. The right hemisphere is the creative side of the brain and this may account for why women are more intuitive than men—women have bigger corpora callosa.



Joan Baez

“We Shall Overcome”



Jimi Hendrix

“The Star-Spangled Banner”

Janis Joplin

“Try Just a Little Bit Harder”





Richie Havens

“Freedom”

Of Permanent Value Berkshire Annual Meeting in 2008



Tent Revival

Shareholders gather in a huge tent outside Borsheims the night before the annual meeting in 2008. The pre-party is underway, and Woodstock would begin at dawn.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Buffett’s Advice

Buffett’s words of wisdom on the rolling billboard outside the Qwest Center



And So It Begins

Crowds begin gathering at the 2008 Annual Meeting

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Berkshire Annual Meeting in 2008 The Story of Warren Buffett



Camping Out

The crowd gathers in anticipation.

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)



Actress Susan Lucci and Buffett

With Cherry Coke in hand, Buffett shares a moment with Susan Lucci during the 2008 Annual Meeting.

(Photos by Jordan Jacobs)



Larger than Life

Buffett signs a Michael Israel portrait created from Benjamin Moore paints. Later this painting was bought by shareholder John Morgan. He paid $100,000 for it, money which went to Girls Inc. Morgan donated the painting to the University of Nebraska at Omaha’s Mammel Hall.



Buffett’s Signature

on Portrait

Michael Israel’s Light Show



(Photos by Jordan Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire Annual Meeting in 2008



Girl Talk

Buffett’s daughter, Susie; Jackie Wilson, Berkshire’s spokeswoman; and Debbie Bosanek, Buffett’s assistant, enjoy a chat during the annual meeting.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



(Photo by Tommy Terrell)

Debbie Bosanek

and CNBC’s

Becky Quick



Berky Bookseller Rocks

(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Taking a Walk through Berky Bookseller

Becky Quick, along with Buffett, makes a stop at Berky Bookseller.

Berkshire Annual Meeting in 2008 The Story of Warren Buffett



Out of This World

Mars Candy makes its debut at the 2008 annual meeting.

(Photo by Jordan Jacobs)



Marmon Booth

Marmon, a group of 125 nuts and bolts businesses, was purchased from the

Pritzker family of Chicago.

(Photo by Jordan Jacobos)



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

GEICO’s

Easy Rider



Randomly Selected Person for a Photo of One of More than 30,000 Attendees

This 13-year-old plans to attend Harvard next year on scholarship.

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire Annual Meeting in 2008



Berkshire Mall

(Photo by Tommy Terrell)



Flower Children at Woodstock 2008

Berkshire shareholders John Gass, a Denver, Colorado tax attorney with a private practice, and Holly Bakke, the former Banking and Insurance Commissioner of New Jersey, are shown at Berkshire’s annual meeting festivities, where everyone is a rock star.

(Photo courtesy of John Gass)



(Photo by Mary Porter)

Berkshire Jigsaw Puzzle



A Collage of Berkshire’s Products

(By Nancy Line Jacobs)



212





BERKSHIRE’S ANNUAL MEETING IN 2010


By the time the annual meeting in 2010 rolled around, Berkshire had completed its purchase of the Burlington Northern Railroad, split its B shares 50 for 1, and joined Standard & Poor’s 500 Index. With all that, a record 37,000 people showed up for the meeting, bringing in a new set of stars, starting with Star Wars writer and producer himself, George Lucas; Superman director Richard Donner; and tennis champion Billie Jean King.



Neither a Standard nor a Poor Crowd

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Train of People

Berkshire’s two-engines, Warren Buffett and Charles Munger, really pull in the crowd.

But where is the caboose?

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Spotted in the Crowd

Buffett and his daughter, Susan, enjoying Berkshire’s annual meeting festivities.

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)



(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

2010 Visitor’s Guide

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2010



The Bigger, the Better?

Buffett brings out the big paddle to go against table tennis phenom Ariel Hsing, age 14, of San Jose, California, but finds bigger is not always better if not also faster.



Awarding the Virtual Axe?

Ariel’s goals, other than beating Buffett, are to attend Stanford University and perhaps compete in the 2012 Olympic Games. She had played against Buffett at the annual meeting in 2007 and the year before at his birthday party. The axe, symbol of traditional rivalry between Stanford and Berkley, is awarded annually to the school winning the big game. Or maybe Buffett is thinking of asking Ariel to pledge her future fortune to charity.

(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)



“I’ve Been Working on the Railroad.”

Before the meeting, Buffett sang “I’ve Been Working on the Railroad” with the Quebe Sisters at the Justin Boots booth.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacob)



Bridge to Friendships

Buffett, his neighbor and friend Mary Nelsen, bridge champion Sharon Osberg, and Berkshire’s Ajit Jain are enjoying a game of bridge.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2010 The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

Stop, Look and Listen

Attendees at Berkshire’s 2010 Annual Meeting gained much investment insight by taking the time to stop their daily routines and listen to the engines that run Berkshire.



Much to See and Do

First-time annual meeting attendees may wonder, “Which way do we go?” as they enter the exhibition hall filled with booths, presentations, and products of companies either partially or totally owned by Berkshire.

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)



Exceptional Engineers

Train engineers Buffett and Munger proudly showed off their latest and biggest purchase of the Burlington Northern railroad.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacob)



Wheeling and Dealing

A large toy train set was a feature item at the meeting with Buffett and

Burlington CEO Matt Rose.

(Photo by Rose Nguyen)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2010



Home Shopping

A sample Clayton home was set up in the exhibition hall.

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)



Make Yourself at Home

Interior of a Clayton home displayed at the annual meeting offers an elegant

come-and-dine atmosphere.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



(Photo by Rose Nguyen)

Covering North America

with Confections

Berkshire made special equity and debt investment in Wrigley when Mars bought Wrigley in 2008.

Time for a Cold One

Meeting attendees stop by the Dairy Queen display for a cool treat.



(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)



213





BERKSHIRE’S ANNUAL MEETING IN 2011


PLANES, TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES

During the annual meeting weekend in 2011, Buffett did it all. He posed with Nebraska cheerleaders and personally sold jewelry at Borsheims. But mostly he tried to explain the David Sokol matter saying Berkshire’s original press release didn’t rebuke Sokol enough about his stock trading in Lubrizol at a time when he was pitching the stock to Berkshire to buy it outright.

Buffett said, “The phrase that came out of my mouth then was that what had happened was inexplicable and inexcusable.”

Then he explained that statement: “I think for reasons that are laid out in the audit committee report, I don’t think there’s any question about the inexcusable part. He violated the code of ethics. He violated our insider trading rules. He violated the principles I lay out every two years. The inexplicable part ... I’ll tell you what goes through my mind when I think about it. He made no attempt to disguise the fact that he was buying the stock.”

Crowds were a bit smaller than the previous year, but Buffett and Munger went full force all weekend with activities and press conferences. Attendance turned out to be 36,000, down 1,000 from the year before.

Buffett said the first quarter of 2011 was one of the worst for the insurance industry, with disasters in Japan, Australia, and New Zealand totaling about $1.7 billion in losses.

Also, early in the second quarter, tornadoes in the South caused the loss of about 25,000 cars. Buffett said it would be a tall order to have an insurance underwriting profit in 2011 since the year was off to such a poor start.

But Buffett did joke that the cost of the annual meeting could be defrayed if only 66 shareholders would sign up with GEICO as this would increase GEICO’s value by $100,000 because each new policyholder generates $1,500 in goodwill value.

At the meeting, Buffett announced the marriage of his younger sister’s (Bertie’s) daughter. Cynthia Snorf received a Borsheims ring from Richard C. Livermore, a Superior Court judge in San Mateo, California. Livermore is the longest serving drug court judge in California history.

TRAVELING 16,400 MILES FOR THE 2011 MEETING

To attend the Berkshire annual meeting in 2011, Serik Iman, 28, a money manager for family and friends in Kazakhstan (the former Soviet Union) boarded a flight from Almaty, Kazakhstan, to Amsterdam, Holland, about 3,200 miles away. From there he flew to New York, another 3,650 miles, and the last flight was a simple 1,300 miles to Omaha. That’s a total of 8,200 miles one way; times 2 (for the numerically challenged) amounts to a round-trip of about 16,400 miles. Hooray to the frequent-flyer program.

Serik bought a book from me at the Berky Bookseller during the annual meeting weekend. Our first conversation went about like this:

Andy: “Wow, you’ve come a long way. Why are you buying such a big book to lug all the way back home?” [Expecting an answer of: “Because I wanted to learn about value investing.”]

Serik: “Because you have a photo of Ulysses in it and that’s my favorite book.”

Andy: [Surprised]“Oh, OK.”

In a later trade of e-mails, Serik shared about the way he had come to know of Berkshire, some of his own interests, and his impressions of the annual meeting. Some of his comments and thoughts, along with mine in brackets, follow.

Serik wrote that he had to grow up fast because of the collapse of the Soviet Union which worsened the shortage of role models right when I needed them the most. “So,” he said, “I decided to look elsewhere. As trivial as it may sound, I started looking for things that I like and understood [Oh, OK, Warren]. For a kid it doesn’t mean a whole lot, but it pointed me to Coca-Cola. So I ended up buying all their annual reports from 1925 from a collector in California. [Oh, OK, Serik, maybe I should have thought of that.]

“I was amazed by the business and their aspirations of becoming a true lovemark,” Serik continued.

[Serik, I think you mean to use the word trademark, don’t you?]

“Yes, lovemark is a trademark but lovemark is something that is exceptionally loved and adored by loyal customers (ex.: Coke, Pampers, Tide).

“Coca-Cola paved the way. I became a Berkshire shareholder in 2009.”

[Oh, OK, Serik.]

From the Coke reports, Serik had discovered that Buffett owned a large block of Coke stock. “Couple of months later there I was reading Berkshire’s reports,” wrote Serik. “Luckily they were all online.”

[Smart move, Serik]

“My other interests are Russian and foreign literature (Dostoevsky

[Dostoyevsky], Joyce, Nabokov, Kafka) [Good grief, Serik!] which I think helped me to become a little better at understanding things. Currently I try to read everything I can about business. The thought that there might be a person that is reading more is killing me.” [It’s painful. Serik.]

Serik offered his brief impressions of the meeting: “(1) Met with a lot of good people (2) made me hungrier for wisdom, (3) found a one dollar bill on the floor.”

[Believe you’re on your way, Serik.]



Why I Tap Dance to Work

Buffett poses with Nebraska cheerleaders at the Justin Brands Boots booth during Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2011. Justin CEO Randy Watson is on the left with cheerleaders,

from left, Ashley Haug, Caitlin Schultz, Kara Brostrom and Jessie Pitre.

(Reprinted with permission from The Omaha World-Herald)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2011

2011 Visitor Guide

Planes, Trains, and Automobiles: Berkshire has many modes of

transportation.





(Photo by Mary Porter)

Cover of James Joyce’s

Ulysses

Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2011 The Story of Warren Buffett



Where the Action Is

The Berkshire annual meetings take place at the Qwest Center, now CenturyLink Center,

in Omaha.

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)



Royal Wedding vs. Annual Meeting

The royal wedding of Prince William and Catherine (Kate) Middleton was held the day before the Berkshire annual meeting. Buffett was unable to get to the wedding and the Queen didn’t make it to the Berkshire meeting.

(Cartoon courtesy of Jeff Koterba – Omaha World-Herald)



What’s All the Fuss About, Warren?

Becky Quick of CNBC, Liz Claman of Fox Business Network, Buffett’s bodyguard Dan Clark, and Buffett appear to be on the move prior to the annual meeting on April 30, 2011.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2011



Paparazzi Galore

Is the stock going up?

(Photo by Michael Terrell)



Buffett and Munger on Stage

“We make a good team. I can see and he can hear.”

(Photo by Michael Terrell)



The Super Bowl of Annual Meetings is Underway

Close to 36,000 shareholders showed up for the meeting in 2011.

(Photo by Michael Terrell)



Borsheims Sales Force of Susan Jacques and Buffett

On the day after the annual meeting in 2011, Buffett gave a hand actually selling a few items himself. Bodyguard Dan Clark keeps an eye on things. Borsheim’s sales figures rose 45 percent in 2011 compared to 2010, in part because of Buffett’s one-hour work as a salesman and in part because the store decided to sell jewelry at the Quest Center during the annual meeting. Sales by Buffett included a $30,000 ring for one woman and a diamond bracelet to a man who held up his credit card and said he just wanted something from Buffett. (Omaha World-Herald, May 5, 2011)

(Photo by Robin Silvers)

Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2011 The Story of Warren Buffett



Insurance Guru Ajit Jain

Jain, center, is calculating the odds as to whether he can hold off world champion bridge player Bob Hamman, left.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Philanthropist Guru Bill Gates

Bill Gates is running the data as to whether he can hold off Jain in bridge. Gates is not feeling very generous in this game.



Rug of Berkshire Logos

The many logos show Berkshire’s range of businesses

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2011



Traveling with Marmon

An old-time Marmon car is on display.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



A Boy and His Really Big Train Set

The BNSF display is one of Berkshire’s most popular at Berkshire’s annual meeting.

(Photo by Robin Silvers)



Rugs for Sale

Via satellite from the Business Hall of Fame Heaven, Mrs. B, in Satellite Heaven, is running this rug sale at the Nebraska Furniture Mart booth.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



News Flash

Business Wire sets up a bureau in Omaha.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



214





THE PRESS CONFERENCES


2005

Buffett praised Gates as one of the best minds in the world and said he will help Berkshire as a board member “after I’m gone.” Buffett’s remarks about Gates came at a press conference the day after the company’s Annual Meeting in 2005.

“People are always asking him for everything,” Buffett said, adding he was reluctant to ask Gates to devote his time and energy to Berkshire. But, Buffett quipped, Gates would make an extra $900 a year as a Berkshire director.

Once Gates became a director, he had to disclose his stock position in Berkshire, which turned out to be more than $400 million at that time. “I treat him with new respect now,” Buffett said.

Buffett and Munger added that the “public hangings” related to accounting problems at such companies as Enron probably had diminished the accounting problems in corporate America. Buffett did say that he was surprised by problems after buying Gen Re. “It was an impressive-looking edifice, but there were a few termites at work.”

A number of Australian reporters asked questions related to a Berkshire policy under scrutiny with the bankruptcy of an insurer. Buffett replied that he thought the policy was honestly conceived and that Berkshire went to the extent of asking regulators to bless it. Reporters asked Buffett if his confidence remained the same in Berkshire’s insurance guru, Ajit Jain, who sat in on the press conference. “There’s nobody in Berkshire Hathaway that I have more confidence in than Ajit,” Buffett responded.

The conference covered a broad range of topics, including the possibility of foreign investments, the lack of help of hedge funds, the betterment of Western civilization.

Munger expressed the opinion that many business schools “teach a mass of drivel” regarding investments. He said the key issue is “opportunity cost”—the value of investing in one thing versus another or versus doing nothing at all.

Buffett remarked that the Fitch rating service that issued a possible upcoming downgrade of Berkshire’s triple A credit was right “to look for any kinks in the armor” in Berkshire’s ability to pay its bills. Buffett joked that the report, which cited his age, discovered he’s mortal. “I was not terribly pleased with that. I hope to prove them wrong,” he said.

All managers are aging, he added, but joked that he’s aging at less a percentage rate than most.

2006

Miscellaneous Buffett comments:

“Korea for the past six years offered extraordinary values, but most of them we couldn’t put in hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars. We found 20 companies [for his personal portfolio] at good values, with good balance sheets, at three times earnings.”

“There are dozens of countries [we could invest in]. Below a certain size, they became too small for our needs. It’s not like there are 200 plus countries … but maybe 25 countries.”

“We don’t have any special views on pharmacy.”

“The nice thing is that there are others [Iscar] out there, but there aren’t really any Berkshires out there.”

Buffett on GM: “When GM wanted to give retirement benefits, the accounting rules were such that there would be no accounting loss. GM had to decide between a small known cost (paying a few cents per hour), or a huge unknown cost [pensions and medical costs], and they chose the huge unknown cost. They essentially went short healthcare. Can you imagine going short the cost of lifetime healthcare?”

“Capitalism can be tough. It is creative destruction. Capitalism is constantly looking to get people what they want at a price they want, and to do it efficiently. The problem is someone else gets hurt. There used to be lots of farmers in America, and then you had the tractor and then the combine, etc. This is good for consumers. It has made food cheap. If you look at inflation for food over the last couple hundred years, it is down. But if horses could have voted, they would have voted down tractors.”

Munger had a word to say about Iraq. “Once you’re in, there aren’t any good options. I could see how very reasonable people could be on either side. If you’re confident you know the answer and are correct, you’re probably stupid.”

2007

Munger: “A successful fund attracts massive amounts of money, and, then later they keep publishing their returns for the whole period. If you made the same compilation per dollar, controlled per year, you’d have a much lower rate of return.”

Buffett addressed the CEO succession issue: “In this case, it is a he. That’s a huge hint. We have three very good—extraordinarily good—candidates. All three would be better than I am in some respects, but they don’t have 30% of the stock, so they have to wait.”

In regard to his health, Buffett said, “I feel terrific. You ought to try this peanut brittle.”

“We’ve become comfortable having a lot more assets outside the United States.”

Additional Buffett comments:

“We made more money in Korean stocks in the last four or five years than in the United States.”

“We’ve owned stock in four or five Japanese companies that have not shown up on our published list of holdings.”

2008

Buffett said homeowners misled about mortgages should receive help, and that mortgage papers should have a single sheet of warnings clearly spelling out the worse case payments. Munger said homeowners shouldn’t be punished for being misled, “but I don’t think they should be protected from making mistakes.”

Buffett said he had read a 270 page 10-K report on a company he was considering buying. After four hours, he had marked 25 places with questions and decided not to buy the business.

Both Buffett and Munger praised a number of foreign economies as places they would be willing to invest in, namely South Korea, Taiwan, China, Singapore, and Hong Kong.

Buffett’s response to being named by Forbes as the richest person in the world was rather nonchalant: “It doesn’t change anything, really. Charlie treats me with more respect than he did before.”

Berkshire has bought a number of companies that were experiencing family disputes, with one sibling staying on to manage the company and another cashing out. “If every family was a happy one, we’d be a smaller company,” Buffett said.

2009

When it comes to cash, Buffett said he doesn’t “try to reach for yield.” He wants his cash related to the federal government backing, not some lender who might be in question in a time of turmoil.

Said he would buy some stocks at current prices, including Wells Fargo.

Said he would disclose any major health problems. He had recently had a cataract operation and was about to have another, but those would not be disclosed. His colon surgery of years ago was disclosed. He said don’t worry about his health but to worry if Ajit Jain caught a cold.

Said the real lesson of the financial meltdown was to avoid leverage, too much debt.

Asked what company had a business moat, he and Munger both answered: Google.

Said Berkshire had no currency deals, that the “cost” of its position the Brazilian real had been sold.

Said GEICO sold 68 new policies during the annual meeting weekend, which more than paid for the entire meeting. He also said See’s had set records for weekend sales.

2010

Gave a spirited defense of Goldman Sachs which had been charged in a civil case involving mortgage backed trading.

On whether Gates Foundation selling of Berkshire shares will depress the stock, Buffett said about 1.5% of shares are sold annually. Buffett said if that amounted of selling hurt the stock, it probably should go down.

Biggest threat to the economy: nuclear or biological attack.

How possible successors to him as chief investment officer fared in 2009. “They did well—none of them used leverage at all.”

Thought float more than $60 billion will grow slowly unless there’s an insurance acquisition.

Said he’d make a trip to India in March 2011.

2011

Continuing to field questions about the abrupt resignation of David Sokol, Buffett said he knew of no other stock trading violation by Sokol who resigned after it was learned he had bought stock in Lubrizol shortly before pitching it to Buffett for Berkshire to buy.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Press Conferences



215





GORAT’S


For more than 40 years, Gorat’s is the place where when you order a

T-bone, you have the choice of the triology of spaghetti, mostacciole or green beans.

Buffett wrote in his annual letter to shareholders dated March 1, 1996, that they were welcome to join him for dinner at Gorat’s, his favorite steak house, the Sunday night before the annual meeting.

A year later he wrote: “My favorite steakhouse, Gorat’s, was sold out last year on the weekend of the annual meeting, even though it added an additional seating at 4 p.m. on Sunday. You can make reservations beginning on April 1st (but not earlier) by calling 402-551-3733. I will be at Gorat’s on Sunday after Borsheims, having my usual rare T-bone and double order of hash browns. I can also recommend—this is the standard fare when Debbie Bosanek, my invaluable assistant, and I go to lunch—the hot roast beef sandwich with mashed potatoes and gravy. Mention Debbie’s name and you’ll be given an extra boat [he meant to write: XTRA truck] of gravy.” Well, that set things off.

One shareholder reported calling April 1st before the restaurant opened and barely managed to land a table for 4:30 p.m. No other times were available. The lady answering the phone, was clearly swamped, said the restaurant was virtually sold out. With the sounds of the phone ringing and chaos apparent, the hostess, exasperated, said: “I think I’ll go back home.”

One of those who did get reservations, Ken Mills of Lakeland, Florida, kept his Gorat’s menu and sent it to Buffett (the Gorat Entertainer/Educator) to autograph. Buffett wrote: “Ken, keep ordering the T-bone,” and closed with his signature, Warren E. Buffett.

Hundreds of people show up at Gorat’s each year to have dinner with Buffett. In 1998 they included Disney’s Michael Eisner and NBC news anchor Tom Brokaw. The year before a fellow from Singapore named J. P. Tan was among that group. Buffett invited Tan to the meeting although not as a shareholder. Tan flew 24 hours to attend and wound up only a few feet from Buffett’s table saying, “I’m overwhelmed.” A waitress asked for his order. “I’ll have Mr. Buffett’s favorite,” Tan said, ordering a T-bone steak. (However, Tan decided to have his steak medium; Buffett has his rare.) Many other diners asked what Buffett was having and some said, paraphrasing the immortal line from the movie When Harry Met Sally: “I’ll have what he’s having.”

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1998 Annual Report of the shareholders’ dinner at Gorat’s: “The cognoscenti will continue to order rare T-bones with a double order of hash browns.”

In spite of his heart-attack-on-a-plate style of eating, Buffett keeps on ticking.

Buffett’s friend Louis Gorat is the owner of the restaurant. His daughter Deb told the following story to Berkshire shareholder John Zemanovich of Canada: “Warren had been in the night before to meet some people for dinner. Apparently Warren was early or his guests were late because he waited anxiously at the front door of Gorat’s to see them arrive in the parking lot. The funny thing is that while he stood at the front door, he acted as doorman—opening the door for patrons of the steak house. Nobody could believe it.” Zemanovich added that Deb told him that one patron remarked, “Isn’t that Warren Buffett at the front door?” She answered affirmatively and said she told him that if he needed “XTRA” work, they would hire him. She added that he would get lots of tips.

Louis Gorat has said Buffett eats at his steak house several times a week but “doesn’t go overboard” in tipping (Worth, March, 2002).

Buffett has said, “The best place to have lunch is Gorat’s Steak House. I’d suggest the hot roast beef sandwich, mashed potatoes, and extra gravy. The best place to have dinner? Gorat’s. I don’t get around much” (Fortune, June 28, 2004).

SERVING SHAREHOLDERS

Gorat’s served 3,426 shareholders from Thursday through Sunday during the annual meeting weekend in 2009. Buffett’s signature 12-ounce T-bone was downed by 1,250 shareholders (Omaha World Herald, October 12, 2009).

GORAT’S FOR SALE

After 67 years in business, Gorat’s put itself up for sale for $1.3 million (Omaha World-Herald, September 24, 2011). Pal Gorat, who cited age and family conflicts for the sale, made a call to Buffett to see if he knew of a buyer, according to the story, which also said Buffett had a possible buyer in mind.



More Than 60 Years of Steaks

Gorat’s, Buffett’s favorite steak house, opened in 1944 by Italian immigrants Louie and Nettie Gorat, but is generally closed on Sunday. Their son, Louis “Pal” Gorat who still works there every day at age 80, a grade school classmate of Buffett’s, agreed in 1996, upon a request from Buffett, to serve the Sunday of Berkshire’s annual meeting weekend.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Latest Acme Brick Ad

Top judges in “America’s Best Steak Contest”—Buffett enjoys his fare and fellowship at Gorat’s Steak House the night before Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1997.

(Photo by Bob Sullivan)



The Buffetts at Gorat’s in 2002

(Photo by Bob Sullivan)

Of Permanent Value Gorat’s



That’s Rich

Buffett and Gates, the two richest people on earth, became stranded in Gorat’s parking lot one evening when Buffett’s car wouldn’t start. Columnist Michael Kelly (Omaha World-Herald, September 21, 2002) reported: “Gates had slipped into Omaha on his way to play bridge at the Championship in Montreal. One of the reasons Warren likes Omaha is that he can take Bill out and people don’t go gaga. After dinner, Buffett says, his car’s steering column locked and he couldn’t get his key to turn in the ignition. So the two men with a combined net worth of about $90 billion stood around. No limos. No police escort. No horse-drawn carriage. No pretense. They hopped a cab.” That’s rich. Buffett had paid $35 in cash total for the two dinners at Gorat’s (The Wall Street Journal, November 14, 2003).



Steak Anyone?

Louis N. Gorat as shown in the 1948 Benson High School Yearbook.

(Photo courtesy

of Herb Sklenar)



“Finest Vintage” Cherry Coke

Berkshire shareholder Allan Maxwell of Omaha sent over the “Finest Vintage” Cherry Coke to the Buffett table at Gorat’s during Berkshire’s annual meeting weekend in 2004.

(Photo by

Cathie Adams)

Gorat’s The Story of Warren Buffett



Two Businessmen in Omaha Dining Out

Buffett and Gates at Gorat’s during the Berkshire annual meeting festivities in 2006. Shareholder Terri Maxwell looks awed at seeing billions blow by.

(Photo by

Cathie Adams)





The Three Wise Men

Allan Maxwell’s $2 bill is signed by Buffett, Munger, and Bill Gates.

(Photo courtesy of Allan Maxwell)

Gorat’s Menu for 2011

The rich and famous dine here.

Of Permanent Value Gorat’s



A Gates Signing

Bill Gates signs his father’s book at Gorat’s in 2011.

(Photo by

Cathie Adams)

(Photo by Allan Maxwell)



216





AN ELECTRIFYING TWO MINUTES


The Berkshire Annual Meeting in 1993 occurred just weeks after “Marlboro Friday” when retail prices of Marlboro cigarettes came tumbling down to compete with generic brand cigarettes. Brand managers as well as their ad agencies were shaken badly, and many businessmen were wrestling with the question of just how generic brands were competing with long-standing, famous brand names.

Sitting before a crowd of more than 2,000 people, with no notes, no aides, and no idea a question about generics was coming, Buffett stunned the audience with his mastery of the business scene.

The question: “Will developments in the generic brand area hurt Coca-Cola? That’s a terribly important question.”

Over the next few minutes, Buffett offered the following explanation: “Generic brands have been with us a long time. But lately they’ve attracted a great deal of attention—partly because they’re doing better and in particular because of Philip Morris’ actions a few weeks ago—when, in reaction to the threat and the inroads of generics, they cut the price dramatically on Marlboro.

“I wouldn’t say Marlboro is the most valuable brand name in the world. Coca-Cola is more valuable—and I think that’s been proven by subsequent events. But Marlboro earned more money than any brand name in the world.

“And all of a sudden, Philip Morris took some actions which dramatically reduced the earnings of that brand and changed the pricing dynamic that had existed in the cigarette business for many decades. And since then, Philip Morris has had $16 billion lopped off its market value and RJR’s [R. J. Reynolds’] suffered accordingly.

“It’s a terribly interesting case study, and it illustrates one of the dangers of generic competition. Philip Morris cigarettes got to where they were selling for $2.00 a pack. The average cigarette consumer uses something close to 10 packs a week. Meanwhile, the generic was at about $1 or thereabouts. So you really have a $500-a-year differential in cost per year to a 10-pack-a-week smoker. And that is a big annual cost differential. You better have something that people think is dramatically better than the generic for the average consumer to shell out an extra $500-a-year. It’s happening in other areas, too—whether it’s corn flakes or diapers or a lot of things.…

“In our case, I think the Gillette brand name, for example, is far better protected against generic competition than the main product of Philip Morris—although there always has been generic competition in blades, and there always will be. “The average male purchases something like 30 blades a year. He pays 70 cents each if he buys the best—which is the Sensor. That’s $21 a year. The best he can do if he wants something that leaves him Band-Aids on his face and an uncomfortable experience costs him $10 a year. So you’re talking $11 for a 365-day experience.…

“I think there’s a generic threat of some sort in any industry where the leaders are earning high returns on equity. It just stands to reason that that’s going to encourage competition.

“And the threat may be accelerating in many industries. But I think that brand names with the right ingredients are enormously valuable. Sometimes infrastructure is a problem for the generics. The worldwide infrastructure for Coca-Cola, for example, is very impressive and very hard for a generic provider to duplicate.

“But if somebody wants to sell a generic box of chocolates in California against See’s Chocolates, that’s obviously somewhat of a threat. And I just hope that they take them home on Valentine’s Day and say, ‘Here, Honey, I took the low bid.’ ”

Then Buffett addressed the question of Coca-Cola point blank:

“Wal-Mart’s selling Sam’s Cola. And Wal-Mart is a very, very potent force. One thing that’s helpful is that they were selling it as cheap as $4 a case here. And I don’t believe that’s sustainable. That’s 162/3 cents a can.

“It’s been a while since I looked at aluminum—and it’s down. But I think the can is close to a six-cent item by itself. The can is far more expensive than the ingredients.... Distribution costs, trucking, stocking, and all that sort of thing have to be fairly similar. In a 12-ounce can, there’s 1.3 ounces of sugar—which at the domestic price, would be around 13/4 cents per can. And that’s got to be the same whether it’s Sam’s Cola or Coca-Cola.

“The Coca-Cola Company sells about 700 million 8-ounce servings—largely of Coca-Cola, but also of other soft drinks—worldwide every day. If you take 700 million and multiply it by 365 days, you come up with 250 billion or so 8-ounce servings of Coke or its products in the world each year.

“The Coca-Cola Company made about $21/2 billion pretax last year. That’s one penny per serving. One penny per serving does not leave a huge umbrella. The generic is not going to buy the can any cheaper. And they’re not going to buy the sugar any cheaper and so on. Their trucks aren’t going to be any cheaper.”

Buffett, in an electrifying two minutes, took the listener through business school.

“Better than business school, awesome,” says shareholder Michael Assael. “Buffett’s the best professor ever.”

A PH.D. IN GLOBAL ECONOMICS IN ONE MINUTE

In an interview (CNBC, September 7, 2007), Becky Quick asked Buffett about the effects of an $80 per-barrel oil price. Buffett just winged it: “Anything that you import, and we import maybe 11 million barrels a day of oil, so everytime it goes up a dollar that’s $11 million that goes out of the American economy and goes to somebody else around the world. And so, it’s a tax on … in effect, a higher oil price is a tax on the American economy. And that tax is not paid to the American government, it’s paid to various entities around the world. So, it’s always a negative. But, I’ll take a negative. We had higher prices than this adjusted (for inflation) 25 years ago. So, the economy can take it, but it is a tax, and it comes right out of the American consumer’s pocket and goes into the purchasing power of somebody in the Middle East.”

Perhaps Becky was stunned. She didn’t ask another question.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value An Electrifying Two Minutes



217





THE BOOK OF REVELATIONS


In the old days, Buffett began his revelations for the Berkshire Annual Report at his home in Laguna Beach, California, where he went at the end of each year with his first wife Susan. His ex-daughter-in-law, Mary Buffett, Peter Buffett’s wife of 12 years, remembers Buffett starting the report at the beach home. “He’d be waiting for a last call from Chuck Huggins at See’s Candies. He’d say, ‘Chuck ought to be calling any minute now.’ He would call with a report to say See’s sold 500 pounds more than last year, or something,” she said.

These days, since he doesn’t go to Laguna Beach for Christmas holidays, he sits down in Omaha to write small sections of the report, sometimes as early as September. Sitting down with a yellow pad and a black felt-tip pen, his strategy is to imagine he’s writing to an intelligent sister who may have been away much of the year.

Buffett writes with respect, humor, and candor, and goes through many triple-spaced drafts. Having worked on the 1999 Annual Report on the plane to Lakeland, Florida, in mid-December he said, “I find that 5% of the time is spent writing it and another 95% just fooling around with it” (St. Petersburg Times, December 15, 1999).

“I literally wrote ‘Dear Doris and Bertie’ to my sisters. I don’t write super technical stuff, but I don’t talk down to them either. They don’t want pictures or public relations; they want to know what the hell is going on in the business” (The Wall Street Journal, November 14, 2003). “My Annual Report is my book,” Buffett has said.

“His reports should be taught in school—not only in business school, but also in high school and, yes, Sunday school. He knows what he knows and doesn’t try to know more than that” (Time, April 26, 2004).

On an average day, the Berkshire Web site where the report is listed gets 3,000 hits. On the days after release of Buffett’s letter, the number of hits rises to about 20,000 (The Wall Street Journal, March 5, 2004).

Berkshire’s 2007 Annual Report began: “Our gain in net worth in 2007 was $12.3 billion, which increased the per-share book value of both our Class A and Class B stock by 11%. Over the last 43 years (that is, since present management took over) book value has grown from $19 to $78,008, a rate of 21.1% compounded annually.”

The 1997 report had a white cover with red trim in honor of Nebraska Coach Tom Osborne’s retirement. Here is a taste of what Buffett shared:

Given our gain of 34.1%, it is tempting to declare victory and move on. But last year’s performance was no great triumph: Any investor can chalk up large returns when stocks soar, as they did in 1997. In a bull market, one must avoid the error of the preening duck that quacks boastfully after a torrential rainstorm, thinking that its paddling skills have caused it to rise in the world. A right-thinking duck would instead compare its position after the downpour to that of the other ducks on the pond.



So what’s our duck rating for 1997? The table on the facing page shows that though we paddled furiously last year, passive ducks that simply invested in the S&P Index rose almost as fast as we did. Our appraisal of 1997’s performance, then: “QUACK.”



After the report was issued on the Internet March 14, 1998, Buffett’s daughter, Susie, in a posting on the Berkshire message board, said this: “The Head Duck just called me and asked me to pass this message on to all of you: Anyone who printed out the annual report prior to 10:15 EST today should reprint. There was an error on the first page which has since been corrected. The error is the type size for ‘quack.’ He would also like me to remind you that this error was due to the shortcomings of computers which he has long been aware of, but which seem to have escaped the mind of Bill Gates.”

The following Berkshire message posting from Jack Benvent of Haworth, New Jersey, that showed up thereafter may quack you up:

I just wanted to congratulate the Head Duck for yet another excellent letter. I spent the past few days reviewing the letter and at the risk of ruffling a few feathers, I have made the following de-duck-tions:



First it appears the Head Duck (whose initials are WEB—has anyone checked his feet lately?) made a significant re-duck-tion to his McDonald’s holding, presumably because duck soup never made the MCD menu.



Not to worry though, HD parlayed this money and bought a lot of silver duck-ats and duck-egged coupon bonds, both of which hatched earnings and goosed book value. The HD also wrote about paddling hard to keep up with the rising water. But, as we all know, you have to “float” before you can paddle. If you have any questions about this just ask WEB at the annual meeting—he never ducks questions.



Next, when I referred to my World Book encyclopedia, I learned that scientists have discovered a new genus of ducks. These ducklings are known to spend much of their time molting in front of their computers reading about their favorite company. Not surprising, these new ducks have very little “down” in their portfolios, have tiny “bills” (because they never call their broker to sell) and are easily identified by their distinctive quack, which sounds a little like “brk, brk.” No matter how many ugly ducklings (silly geese really) predict the swan song of their favorite company, and the swan dive of its stock price, these new ducks just keep waddling along in a row behind their Head Duck. And, like the swallows of San Juan Capistrano, this new genus of ducks migrates on the same date every year, flying in their famous “IV” [intrinsic value] formation, to their favorite watering hole in Nebraska—Mr. Toad’s—to have a ducky time. Some ducks are known to preen themselves famously for the occasion (I’ll be quaffing my hair in a duck-tail). Best of all, the life spans of these new ducks, (and this is especially true for the head ducks) are really, really long.



Just what are these new ducks called? The Lucky Ducks, of course. (Insert groan here.) Sorry, sometimes, I just quack myself up.



Buffett gained financial control of Berkshire in 1965, assumed policy control that May, and became chairman of the board and chief executive officer in 1970—the first year he wrote an annual letter to shareholders.

Nothing has brought Buffett more acclaim than his chairman’s letter to shareholders in the annual reports. For Berkshire aficionados and beyond, the letters are sublime reading.

The letters are quite informative and educational. Buffett used his shareholders letter in the 1983 report as a platform to clearly state Berkshire’s owner-related business principles, principles that now have their own place of distinction in the current annual reports. Here are two of the original 13 principles (two more have been added since):

• Although our form is corporate, our attitude is partnership. Charlie Munger and I think of our shareholders as owner-partners, and of ourselves as managing partners. (Because of the size of our shareholdings we also are, for better or worse, controlling partners.) We do not view the company itself as the ultimate owner of our business assets but, instead, view the company as a conduit through which our shareholders own the assets.

• In line with this owner-orientation, our directors are all major shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway. In the case of at least four of the five, over 50% of family net worth is represented by holdings of Berkshire. We eat our own cooking.

“About the time I got to, ‘We eat our own cooking,’ I was hooked,” says Berkshire shareholder Michael O’Brien of Austin, Texas. Berkshire reports are not easy to come by. If you want more than two copies, Berkshire charges $3 for each additional report. Berkshire reports have a tendency to start this way: “Our gain in net worth during 1991 was $2.1 billion, or 39.6%. Over the last 27 years (that is, since present management took over) our per-share book value has grown from $19 to $6,437, or at the rate of 23.7% compounded annually.”

The chairman’s letter for the 1995 Annual Report began: “Our gain in net worth during 1995 was $5.3 billion, or 45%. Per-share book value grew by a little less, 43.1%, because we paid stock for two acquisitions, increasing our shares outstanding by 1.3%. Over the last 31 years (that is, since present management took over) per-share book value has grown from $19 to $14,426, or a rate of 23.6% compounded annually.”

In these summaries Buffett delivers such jewels as this quote from Samuel Johnson in the 1985 Annual Report: “A horse that can count to 10 is a remarkable horse—not a remarkable mathematician.” Buffett added his own touch: “A textile company that allocates capital brilliantly within its industry is a remarkable textile company—not a remarkable business.” Then he repeats one of his most famous statements. “With few exceptions when a manager with a reputation for brilliance tackles a business with a reputation for poor economics, it is the reputation of the business which remains intact.” Also, “Gin rummy management behavior (discard your least promising business at each turn) is not our investment style. We would rather have overall results penalized a bit than engage in it.”

Through the years, the letters have blossomed in style, substance, and originality. The letters are full of humor, uncommon common sense, candor, and clarity with wit and wisdom pulled from an array of sources, including the Bible, John Maynard Keynes (rhymes with brains), Yogi Berra, and Mae “I’m-single-because-I-was-born-that-way” West. Buffett is fond of quoting John Maynard Keynes: “I’d rather be vaguely right than precisely wrong.”

In the 1987 Annual Report, Buffett referred to Mae West when he said, “Currently liking neither stocks nor bonds, I find myself the polar opposite of Mae West as she declared: ‘I like only two kinds of men—foreign and domestic.’” He again drew from “the prophetess” Mae West for her quote, “Too much of a good thing can be wonderful.”

Here’s one from Dizzy Dean that Buffett may want to borrow: “The doctors x-rayed my head and found nothing.” Dizzy made this famous statement after being hit in the head by a ball in the 1934 World Series.

Or he may invoke Oscar Wilde: “Bigamy is having one wife too many. Monogamy is the same.”

Shareholders receive the annual report every year in late March. But you cannot judge this book by its cover. The plain, bound publication’s cover simply says Berkshire Hathaway Inc. Annual Report. It includes no photo of headquarters, board members, or outstanding employees. Not even a glossy of the Ben Franklin of Omaha.

Only Wesco’s Munger rivals Buffett in frugally produced annual reports, often filling in numbers from portions of a previous year’s report. For decades Munger ran one black-and-white photo of Wesco’s headquarters, using a photo so old it had cars from the 1960s (Robert Hagstrom, The Warren Buffett Way, p. 21).

The only mystery about the report’s appearance each year is what color Berkshire has selected for its new cover. Silver was the pick for the 1989 report, teal for 1990, foreboding dark blue for 1991, burgundy red for 1992. The 1993 arrived in paperbag brown. It was described as looking like a gravy-colored school exercise-book cover by the London Independent (February 19, 1995). The 1994 report came in Husker red as though making the announcement: “We’re national champs! Go, Big Red, Go.”

A posting on the Berkshire Message Board from February 17, 1998, addressed the cover issue: “Who cares about intrinsic values or the price of Berkshire on 12/31? What I want to know is will this year’s annual report cover be yellow or silver?” The 1998 cover was dark green; the 1999, an attractive navy blue; and the 2000, ominous gray. The 2001 report cover was a patriotic red, white, and blue; the 2002 cover was gold.

Buffett turns the report over to his longtime friend Carol Loomis for editing and Berkshire’s Debbie Bosanek for typing.

Says Loomis, “Warren writes it by hand on yellow pads. I weigh in as editor. He’s smart enough to know that everyone needs an editor, though sometimes I could kill him for ignoring my suggestions. Anyway, what I do on the report a lot of people who know something about both business and writing could do, as long as they had Warren’s trust. What he does nobody else could come close to doing” (Fortune, Carol Loomis, April 11, 1988).

Buffett’s first letter of March 15, 1971 in the 1970 Annual Report is a simple summary, less than two pages, of the year’s operations. It’s a straightforward report that offers little of the brilliance in writing or wit. There are no quotes from such figures as Goethe, Samuel Goldwyn, Yogi Berra, and Ted Williams that would come later, along with possibly the most bizarre line ever to appear in an annual report.

In the 1986 report he wrote: “We bought a corporate jet last year.” It was written in just that diminutive type. Long a critic of aircraft as an example of corporate waste, Buffett followed with a quote from Ben Franklin: “So convenient a thing it is to be a reasonable creature, since it enables one to find or make a reason for everything one has a mind to do.”

The 1970 report began: “The past year witnessed dramatically diverse earnings results among our various operating units. The Illinois National Bank & Trust reported record earnings and continued to rank right at the top, nationally, among banks in terms of earnings as a percentage of average assets. Our insurance operations had some deterioration in underwriting results, but increased investment income produced a continued excellent return. The textile business became progressively more difficult throughout the year and the final break-even result is understandable, considering the industry environment.”

The following year the letter was three pages. It started off:

It is a pleasure to report that operating earnings in 1971, excluding capital gains, amounted to more than 14% of beginning shareholders’ equity. This result—considerably above the average of American industry—was achieved in the face of inadequate earnings in our textile operation, making clear the benefits of redeployment of capital inaugurated five years ago. It will continue to be the objective of management to improve return on total capitalization (long term debt plus equity), as well as the return on equity capital. However, it should be realized that merely maintaining the present relatively high rate of return may well prove more difficult than was improvement from the very low levels of return which prevailed throughout most of the 1960s.



From the early days, Buffett has hammered away at getting a good return on capital.

“Buffett’s business and investment success hinges on his dedication to return on capital rather than on mere bigness and economies of scale. This, in a nutshell, is what makes Warren Buffett a capitalist classic,” said Michael Assael.

The 1972 letter begins, “Operating earnings of Berkshire Hathaway during 1972 amounted to a highly satisfactory 19.9% of beginning shareholders’ equity. Significant improvement was recorded in all of our major lines of businesses, but the most dramatic gains were in insurance underwriting profit. Due to an unusual convergence of favorable factors—diminishing auto accident frequency, moderating accident severity, and an absence of major catastrophes—underwriting profit margins achieved a level far above averages of the past or expectations of the future.”

In the 1973 Berkshire report, Buffett notes that Berkshire earned almost $12 million and that the company’s directors approved a merger of Diversified Retailing into Berkshire Hathaway. Diversified operated a chain of retail stores and owned 16% of Blue Chip Stamps at the time.

“Diversified Retailing Company Inc., through subsidiaries, operates a chain of popular-priced women’s apparel stores and also conducts a reinsurance business. In the opinion of your management, its most important asset is 16% of Blue Chip Stamps,” Buffett wrote.

In addition, Buffett proudly reported that a minor holding, the since-defunct Sun Newspapers Inc., a group of weekly newspapers published in the Omaha area, won the Pulitzer Prize for local investigative reporting—the first time that a weekly had ever won in that category. The paper won the award for its March 30, 1972, report which uncovered the contrast between decreasing services at Boys Town versus the mounting wealth that had taken place at the home since Father Flanagan’s death in 1948.

“Our congratulations go to Paul Williams, editor, and Stan Lipsey, publisher, as well as the entire editorial staff of Sun Newspapers for their achievement, which vividly illustrated that size need not be equated with significance in publishing.”

In the horrible off-year of 1974, the stock market languished in excruciating torpor, and Buffett was forced to report what every shareholder dreads to hear. Inside that year’s royal blue cover, he broke the news: “Operating results for 1974 overall were unsatisfactory.… The outlook for 1975 is not encouraging.” From the beginning of 1973 to the end of 1974, Berkshire’s stock price took its worst beating ever, falling from $93 a share in the first quarter of 1973 to $40 in the fourth quarter of 1974. It would touch $38 a share in the first quarter of 1975 before getting back on track.

Things were unsatisfactory, and Buffett explained that the insurance and textile businesses had subpar years; nevertheless, the operating business year, comparatively speaking, was fine. Buffett reported that shareholders’ equity was up 10.3%, the lowest return on equity realized by the company since 1970. It was actually a stunning performance in a year in which few companies reported any progress at all.

Relatively speaking, Buffett’s performance was splendid for 1974. Buffett kept a string of increases in stockholders’ equity alive, going back to his start in 1956. (Through 2000, the record was intact, but it was broken in 2001 with a 6.2% decline.)

Vintage Buffett shown through in the 1974 report:

Our stock portfolio declined again in 1974—along with most equity portfolios—to the point that at yearend it was worth approximately $17 million less than its carrying value. Again, we are under no pressure to sell such securities except at times that we deem advantageous and it is our belief that over a period of years the overall portfolio will prove to be worth more than its cost. A net capital loss was realized in 1974, and very likely will again occur in 1975. However, we consider several of our major holdings to have great potential for significantly increased values in future years; and, therefore, feel quite comfortable with our stock portfolio. At this writing, market depreciation of the portfolio has been reduced by half from yearend figures, reflecting higher general stock market levels.



Although his holding in The Washington Post Co. sank from about $10 million to about $8 million in the first few years after the 1973 purchase, the Post Co. has grown 100-fold since.

For the 1975 year, Buffett reported that the property and casualty, and textile businesses were awful. He wrote:

The property and casualty insurance industry had its worst year in

history during 1975. We did our share—unfortunately, even somewhat more. Really disastrous results were concentrated in auto and long-tail (contracts where settlement of loss usually occurs long after the loss event) lines.



Economic inflation, with the increase of cost of repairing humans and property far outstripping the general rate of inflation, produced ultimate loss costs which soared beyond premium levels established in a different cost environment. “Social” inflation caused the liability concept to be expanded continuously, far beyond limits contemplated when rates were established—in effect, adding coverage beyond what was paid for. Such social inflation increased significantly both the propensity to sue and the possibility of collecting mammoth jury awards for events not previously considered statistically significant in the establishment of rates.



Of Berkshire’s textile interests, Buffett wrote, “During the first half of 1975 sales of textile products were extremely depressed, resulting in major production curtailments. Operations ran at a significant loss, with employment down as much as 53% from a year earlier.” There was a rebound in textiles in the second half of the year.

During that year, Buffett bought more textile operations—Waumbec Mills Inc. and Waumbec Dyeing and Finishing Co. Inc., of Manchester, New Hampshire—only to report the following year that they had not performed well.

“Our textile division was a significant disappointment during 1976,” he wrote. Inside the 1976 report, in a five-page letter, he listed main stockholdings of Berkshire at year-end 1976:

141,987 shares

California Water Service Co. Cost $ 3,608,711

1,986,953 shares

Government Employees Insurance

Company Convertible Preferred Cost 19,416,635

1,294,308 shares

Government Employees Insurance

Company Common Stock Cost 4,115,670

395,100 shares

Interpublic Group of Companies Cost 4,530,615

562,900 shares

Kaiser Industries, Inc. Cost 8,270,871

188,900 shares

Munsingwear, Inc. Cost 3,398,404

83,400 shares

National Presto Industries, Inc. Cost 1,689,896

170,800 shares

Ogilvy & Mather International Cost 2,762,433

934,300 shares

The Washington Post Co. Class B Cost 10,627,604

Total: $58,420,839

All other holdings 16,974,375

Total equities: $75,395,214

He praised chief executive Eugene Abegg of Illinois National Bank Trust Co., who, in 1931, opened the doors of the bank Berkshire later bought.

Buffett wrote: “Recently, National City Corp. of Cleveland, truly an outstandingly well-managed bank, ran an ad stating ‘the ratio of earnings to average assets was 1.34% in 1976 which we believe to be the best percentage of any major banking company.’ Among the really large banks this was the best earnings achievement, but at the Illinois National Bank earnings were close to 50% better than those of National City, or approximately 2% of assets.”

By statute, the bank was divested in 1980, the same year Abegg died. Buffett described him as a man who put all the negative factors face up on the table during Buffett’s purchase of the bank but said as years went by, undiscussed items of value popped up. That’s quite different from business transactions where the good points are touted up front, and negatives surface only after the check crosses over.

Toward the end of the 1976 letter, Buffett said Berkshire had boosted its stake in Blue Chip Stamps to 33% of the company’s stock. Also, he devoted two sentences to K&W Products, an automotive products company. In its first year with Berkshire, Buffett said K&W had performed well with sales and earnings up moderately.

In 1976, there were 2,000 Berkshire Annual Reports printed. By 1985, there were 15,500 with a second printing of 2,500 more. Now, more than 325,000 a year are printed. By 1977, Buffett was copyrighting the annual reports and eventually, in response to an increasing demand for back Berkshire reports, the company compiled Buffett’s letters into bound volumes. In the 1977 report, a small position in Cap Cities Communications popped up. The following year, that position was gone, but there was a new holding: American Broadcasting Companies. GEICO and The Washington Post Co. were mainstays, as they always would be.

Buffett continued to educate his shareholders about Berkshire’s holdings and about the intricacies of accounting and insurance. But it was not until the middle of the 1979 report that he delivered his first real effort at humor: “Overall, we opt for Polonius (slightly restated): ‘Neither a short-term borrower nor a long-term lender be.’ ”

He never looked back.

In subsequent years, he got funnier and funnier (as he got richer and richer), quoting pithy, applicable remarks, always with the purpose of helping shareholders better understand their investment.

In later years, the letters accompanying the annual reports have turned into

20-page documents with profound observations and witty asides about everything from the intricacies of accounting to insurance, from the stock market to the fear and greed infecting human nature itself. The reports have become a kind of Prairie Home Companion in which Wall Street is a Lake Wobegon, and Buffett sets out to tell what awful truths are there.

“MR. MARKET”

The 1987 report was in full bloom with a description of “Mr. Market” he picked up from Ben Graham. Buffett says anyone in the stock market should imagine the daily stock quotations coming from a remarkably accommodating fellow named Mr. Market who is your partner in business. Mr. Market flashes you stock quotes for businesses constantly, but there is one thing you need to know about this character: Mr. Market has an emotional disorder.

At times, Mr. Market feels good and offers high buy-sell prices in the stock market. At other times he is depressed and offers only low buy-sell prices.

You are free to (and often should) ignore Mr. Market and his prices, analogous to the specialist on the market floor and the buyers and sellers, in aggregate, who dictate a stock’s price.

Mr. Market will be back tomorrow with another price that may interest you. The trick is to know the difference in Mr. Market’s emotional offerings—to buy when he is sad and sell when he is happy—and operate on your own and not under the influence of Mr. Market’s manic-depressive personality. Buffett counsels that Mr. Market is there to serve you, not guide you. It is Mr. Market’s pocketbook, his money—not his wisdom—that the true investor is interested in.

Various people, including Adam Smith, have said that reading the Berkshire Annual Report is a better education than business school itself. “An investor who reads the letters Buffett has written over the last 16 years will have taken in perhaps the single best ‘textbook’ that’s available on the stock market, corporate finance and investing” (Forbes, July 19, 1993).

Former Younkers department store chairman Joseph Rosenfield once said: “He [Buffett] sends me some annual reports every year and I give them to my friends. Everything’s in there.”

Berkshire Annual Reports usually carry this explanation about why Berkshire doesn’t comment about its market activities: “Despite our policy of candor, we will discuss our activities in marketable securities only to the extent legally required. Good investment ideas are rare, valuable, and subject to competitive appropriation just as good product or business acquisitions are. Therefore, we normally will not talk about our investment ideas. This ban extends even to securities we have sold (because we may purchase them again) and to stocks we are incorrectly rumored to be buying. If we deny those reports but say ‘no comment’ on other occasions, the no-comments become confirmation.”

It’s all akin to the following divorce court proceeding:

Q: Did you spend the night with this man in Chicago?



A: I can’t comment.



Q: Did you spend the night with this man in Detroit?



A: I can’t comment.



Q: Did you spend the night with this man in Miami?



A: No.



Any student of Buffett should start with the annual reports. “For the millions of investors who don’t come to Omaha [to the Berkshire annual meeting], it [the report] is by far the best window into the way Buffett’s mind works” (Money, July, 1998). Buffett was honored for his writing in 2005 by the National Commission on Writing for America’s Families, Schools, and Colleges for his folksy and easy-to-understand annual reports.

“No annual report has had a greater impact on American business,” said Bob Kerrey, the commission chairman and former Democratic senator from Nebraska. Kerrey was quoted as saying, “With clarity, insight, and wit, each year Buffett advises countless leaders of business and industry, scholars of commerce, public officials, and investors from across the spectrum.” Kerrey is president of New School University in New York.

––––––––––––––––––––

Berkshire’s report won the Best Annual Report prize two years in a row (2006 and 2007) from IR Magazine, going up against the likes of reports from GE and other giants. Business Wire CEO Cathy Baron Tamraz accepted the award for Berkshire both years.

Buffett is well aware of the plethora of books written about him, but he does not play any deliberate role in the development of their content.

“There are so many books [about me]. I don’t cooperate with them, and I don’t put up roadblocks. I’m not part of the act.” He has said, “My annual report is my book. I’m at 13,700 words” (BusinessWeek, February 12, 2007).

––––––––––––––––––––

Occasionally a reader will spot a small error in the annual report. For example, once upon a time vocal “cords” was spelled “chords.” After writer Nancy Friedman pointed it out, Buffett wrote: “Dear Nancy: I enjoyed your letter. What we tell people is that we put one mistake in each annual report to encourage annual reading. But if you believe that …”

The Story of Warren Buffett



Duckman:

Jack Benvent

(Photo by John Gartmann)

Of Permanent Value The Book of Revelations



Duckling

Jack Benvent’s son, David, may be the youngest reader of OPV.

The Book of Revelations The Story of Warren Buffett

Professor West:

Buffett’s Other Teacher

Mae “Too Much of a Good Thing Can Be Wonderful” West has been one of Buffett’s main teachers.



(AP/Wide World Photos)



One Editor, One Writer

Carol Loomis and Buffett are

pictured during Berkshire’s shareholder weekend in 1995.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value The Book of Revelations

The Book of Revelations The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Book of Revelations



(Photo by Mary Porter)

Authored by Mae “Between Two Evils, I Always Pick the One I’ve Never Tried” West

Mae West’s book She Done Him Wrong, was released to coincide with the Paramount film, which contained the famous line delivered by West to Cary Grant: “Why don’t you come up sometime and see me?” The jacket blurts, “Sexuality rampant, ferocious gayety, drunken hilarity, bleak tragedy, weary souls, nameless horrors, heartless inhumanity—they are all here in full strength, licking the lips of lust.”

Hot Type

In the movie Night After Night in 1932, a hatcheck girl said to Mae West, “Goodness, what beautiful diamonds.” Mae West purred: “Goodness had nothing to do with it, dearie.”



(AP/Wide World Photos)

The Book of Revelations The Story of Warren Buffett



“Our Gain in Net Worth...”

William Larsen, son of Berkshire shareholders Lars and Paula Larsen of Pewaukee, Wisconsin, reads a signed annual report. William is a Baby Berkshire in training for the big league.

(Photo courtesy of Lars Larsen)



Buffett’s Gray Matter

This is the cover of Berkshire’s 2007 Annual Report, the holy scripture of business. In 2001, the color was red, white, and blue. The white cover with blue lettering included a small American flag. The 2002 report had a gold cover. The 2005 report cover was bright purple with the chairman’s letter running 12,500 words and 21 pages. The purple color caused Fortune’s Andy Serwer to write (April 5, 2004): “WARREN BUFFETT & THE COLOR PURPLE: You know with all the hoopla over Warren Buffett’s annual letter to shareholders, one important point has been lost. Most people, of course, especially the Buffett freaks—you know who you are!—read the letter online these days. Hell, these are people who mark down the hour the dang letter goes up in their calendars (not a Palm crowd). So what’s the rub? Well, I just got Berkshire’s annual report for 2003 and guess what. IT’S PURPLE! Not the language, the color of the cover! (Or is it violet, or lavender, or simply ghastly?) Now as any Buffett freak—you know who you are!—can tell you, Berkshire annual covers have come in a wide array of usually bright, strong colors, but this is the first one in PURPLE! What do I think of this? Pretty shocking, I say. And Warren, I will tell you Marshall Loeb would not approve! Also, has anyone done a study on performance of Berkshire correlated to cover color? Especially performance the following year (so that it can be predictive)—you know who you are! With this purple thing, who knows?.” The 2004 report sported a bright yellow cover. Yellow BRKers, take note. The 2005 cover faded to black. The 2006 report was in some brown paper bag color and the 2007 cover was a sort of pea-soup green, well, maybe money green.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value The Book of Revelations



218





ANNUAL REPORT WHOPPERS


Internet poster “Russ” concluded from Berkshire’s 2003 Annual Report that Buffett and his insurance guru Ajit Jain together pulled in $11 billion in 2003. Here’s his post of March 9, 2004:

I love the battle between Warren and Ajit. They HAVE to be keeping score, don’t they? From the letter, you’d think Ajit was winning!



Ajit in ’03. $1,434M pre-tax profit excluding retro contracts. Plus $552M of new float (at VERY negative cost.) Also, Ajit earned $99M pre-tax from the life and annuity operation WEB says Ajit started. (Annuity revs from $0 in ’02 to $700M in ’03.) So, $1,533M in pre-tax profits and $522M new float. Pretty good year!



Warren absolutely blew him away!



• Foreign currency: $825M in realized pre-tax gains in ’03 (p. 20). Also, he had $193M after-tax gains in ’02 (p. 62) on the same kind of FX contract bet (or about $290M pre-tax). In addition, Warren had $640M in UNrealized pre-tax currency gains at 12/31/03 (p. 67). Total? WEB +$1,755M on currency bet as of 12/31/03.



• Junk Bonds: Realized cap gains = $1,138M pre-tax (p. 20). ALSO, on page 37 you’ll see “unrealized gains in corporate bonds and redeemable preferred stock” = $2,449M! So, as of 12/31/03, WEB was up $3,587M on his junk bond bet. That doesn’t include the dividends, which must be over 10%. We’ve probably earned $1B+ in dividends on junk bonds assembled in ’02. And only $1.5B of the $8B junk had been sold as of 12/31/03! The $6.5B that’s left is probably kicking out more than $650M/yr in dividends.



Next we have “Berkshire Finance” —WEB’s proprietary bond trading strategy. He made $379M on this in ’03 (p. 17). “It was nice while it lasted.”



Don’t forget PetroChina. On p. 20: Cost $488M. Value at 12/31/03 = $1,340M. PTR also paid BRK about $50M in dividends. Total: +$902M.



(I won’t include the $273M unrealized gain on HCA because I don’t know when it was bought.)



• U.S. Government Bonds = Pre-tax cap gain of $1,485M. Buffett dumped all our long-term U.S. treasuries when the 10-year bond bottomed near 3% last spring.



WARREN’S TOTAL



• Foreign currency gains: $1,755M (pre-tax).



• Junk bonds: $3,587M (pre-tax).



• Dividends from junk bonds (pre-tax): about $1B.



• BKFinance: $379M (pre-tax).



• PetroChina (including divs): $902M (pre-tax).



• Long-bond sales: $1,485M (pre-tax).



Warren’s contribution to Berkshire pre-tax comprehensive income from all these activities is about $9.108 billion. Time period: ’03 and (in some cases) parts of ’02. He also bought Clayton and McLane last year. Both already appear to be great ideas. For this we pay him $100K/yr. If he ever shoots an elephant with that $31B in cash, can you IMAGINE how BIG that sumbich will be? Cheers.



2006 ANNUAL REPORT

Another whopper from Buffett: “Our gain in net worth during 2006 was $16.9 billion, which increased the per-share book value of both our Class A and Class B stock by 18.4%. Over the last 42 years (that is, since present management took over) book value has grown from $19 to $70,281, a rate of 21.4% compounded annually.

“We believe that $16.9 billion is a record for a one-year gain in net worth—more than has ever been booked by any American corporation, leaving aside boosts that have occurred because of mergers (e.g. AOL’s purchase of TimeWarner). Of course, ExxonMobil and other companies earn far more than Berkshire, but their earnings largely go to dividends and/or repurchases, rather than to building net worth.”

So that’s how the chairman’s letter in the 2006 Annual Report began. In little more than four decades, Berkshire had grown from a small textile firm to one of the most profitable of all U.S. corporations.

The news in the letter was almost all good.

• GEICO had a tremendous year.

• Berkshire’s overall sales approached $100 billion.

• Per-share investments were $80,000.

• Non-insurance businesses did well. NetJets was at last quite profitable although business was slowing at The Buffalo News.

• The new purchase of Iscar had turned out well.

• Float of the insurance business rose to $50.9 billion.

• The huge reinsurance contract with Equitas was on track.

• Berkshire’s MidAmerican Energy had a solid year, earning $885 million for Berkshire.

• The Financial Products business had a strong year as well, with increased financings from Clayton Homes.

• Buffett’s trading operations earned hundreds of millions of dollars.

• Berkshire made new investments in foreign stocks such as Tesco and POSCO.

• Long-faltering operations of the Gen Re derivatives units were basically all closed.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Annual Report Whoppers



219





CAVEMAN NEEDED, CAVEMEN FOUND


Buffett, looking for an understudy, said in Berkshire’s 2006 Annual Report that he wanted to hire a younger person, or perhaps more than one, to be a possible successor in managing Berkshire’s investments. Within minutes of the issuance of the report, Berkshire was flooded with job applications. The first arrived six minutes after the report was released!

So the search was on for a man or woman “with the potential to manage a very large portfolio” to succeed Buffett as Berkshire’s chief investment officer (CIO) if the need should arise.

Originally, Buffett had wanted Charlie Munger, who is older than Buffett, to be the successor as CIO; then as years passed, Lou Simpson, who is six years younger than Buffett, became the man of choice. However, as the three of them aged, Buffett had to look toward the future.

Buffett acknowledged in the 2006 report that picking the right person would not be easy; the candidate would need certain characteristics: “Over time, markets will do extraordinary, even bizarre, things. A single, big mistake could wipe out a long string of successes. We, therefore, need someone genetically programmed to recognize and avoid serious risks, including those never before encountered.”

Retention was also a concern that Buffett addressed. If someone could list Berkshire on their resume, they would immediately become attractive to other firms where they could likely make much more money.

Lou Simpson, at the time of the 2006 report, had managed GEICO investments for more than 25 years and was also serving as the current backstop. According to Buffett, Simpson could have left that arrangement to manage greater sums of money and make more for himself by working somewhere else “if money alone had been the object.” Simpson never considered such a move. “We need to find a young person or two made of the same stuff,” Buffett said.

Although looking for a potential replacement, Buffett offered two assurances that the bases were covered for the time being: he himself was feeling terrific; and Lou Simpson, 70, would be well able to fill in magnificently for a short period should he be needed.

Munger and Simpson were slated to help Buffett find the right person to manage Berkshire’s wealth, which includes $61 billion in stocks, $28 billion in fixed-income securities, and $43 billion in cash. That person would not be required to live in Omaha.

Hundreds of applications flowed in to Berkshire. “I’m a little overwhelmed,” Buffett said, adding that applicants should not be intimidated handling Berkshire’s $61.5 billion investment portfolio or its $38 billion in cash. “I’ve always said my job is so easy a caveman [or cavewoman] could do it” (Associated Press, March 8, 2007). Buffett later said a lot of cavemen were applying (CNBC, March 13, 2007).

Buffett said GEICO’s gecko may be getting jealous of all the attention the caveman is getting. Maybe Buffett will get a caveman and a gecko to run the investments. “We’re going to run this like American Idol in the end,” Buffett quipped in an interview with Karen Richardson of the The Wall Street Journal (April 28–29, 2007).

More seriously, Buffett said that he was looking for another Bill Ruane, his longtime friend who died in 2005 at age 79.

The understudy will not come from Berkshire’s ranks. The Wall Street Journal story made note of a pile of 600 applications: “Pointing to three crates of laminated folders, scrawled notes, and colored envelopes bearing the hopes of hundreds of aspirants, [Buffett] says, ‘there’s one in there.’”

According to The Wall Street Journal story, the plan of action went like this: Buffett, with Munger’s help, would whittle down the contenders to about 20 “real possibilities.” He would then ask them for personal investment records, going back at least 10 years. Upon selection, the one or two candidates would be handed up to $10 billion to manage until time for them to take over the entire portfolio. According to Buffett, the purpose of the trial run, was “to see if their decision-making apparatus works out.” Hopefully while Buffett is still alive.

Absent from the list of applicants were some big-name money managers. “There’s no word from Edward S. Lampert, the 44-year-old chairman of Sears Holdings Corp. and head of Connecticut-based hedge fund ESL Investments Inc.” Another name The Wall Street Journal story noted as missing was Thomas Gayner, chief investment officer of Markel Corp., a specialty insurer based in Richmond, Virginia. Gayner, 45, manages a $1.7 billion stock portfolio for Markel. He had not applied for the job, but three supporters wrote in on his behalf, the story said.

Gayner, who serves on the board of The Washington Post, has been quoted as saying, “It would be arrogant of me even to comment on such a possibility. He’s the master, and we are his students.”

Among the applicants were a Rhodes scholar; a Talmudic scholar; a yoga enthusiast; a person willing to work for free; a 4-year-old who came highly recommended by his lawyer father who characterized his son as “‘a great negotiator’ on issues such as ‘bedtime, chores, allowance, baths, etc.’”; and Mohnish Pabrai, a hedge-fund manager in Irvine, California, who wrote that the job would be a “call to duty.”

One possibility is Michael Larson, the head of Cascade Investments which invests money for Bill Gates and has a hand in the investments for the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Larson, who went to work for Gates in 1993, earned an economics degree from Claremont (Calif.) College at age 19 and earned an MBA from the University of Chicago at 21.

Buffett planned to pay the understudy “a certain percentage, say, 10%, of his or her outperformance of the S&P 500 over a five-year rolling average.” He said, “They’ll make a lot of money if they’re good, but not as much as if they ran a $20 billion hedge fund” (The Wall Street Journal, April 28–29, 2007). Lou Simpson himself, after all these years, has been paid 10% of the amount he beat the S&P over a rolling three-year average.

Wally Weitz, a respected investor in Omaha as well as Buffett afficionado, said he would not seek the job. “Imagine trying to fill those shoes,” he said (Omaha World-Herald, May 23, 2007).

FOUR CAVEMEN FOUND

In an October 18, 2007, interview with co-anchor Liz Claman of Fox Business, Buffett said that in addition to having settled on the names of three possible choices for CEO within Berkshire, he had also given Berkshire’s board the names of four people outside Berkshire who could serve as chief investment officers. No names were given, but Buffett said the board can choose whomever it sees fit.

Here’s how the important conversation went with Claman:

BUFFETT: That’s all taken care of. The chief investment officer was a function that we hadn’t taken care of, although if something happened tonight, both Charlie Munger, my partner, and Lou Simpson would be fine.



But what’s happened is we’ve gotten hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of applications. We now have four people that are managing a lot of money themselves now, doing very well, are happy in their job, but all would like to come to Berkshire if something happened to me tonight, and they would all be good. So the board will know the names of those four people.



If something happens to me tonight, they can pick all four, perhaps, to come. There’s no reason for them to come now. [This differs from the original plan of action: to hire one or two persons, handing over $10 billion to them to manage so their decision-making skills could be evaluated.]



CLAMAN: Are these people mutual fund managers?



BUFFETT: They’re managers of money in different ways, yes.



CLAMAN: Money managers, hedge funds?



BUFFETT: And they all would—they’d be happy to come to Berkshire now, but there wouldn’t be anything for them to do now. But they have all said that, if something happens to me, when something happens to me, they would be ready to come the next day. And the board can pick among them.



CLAMAN: So you’ve got the four names?



BUFFETT: Yeah, I’ve got the four names.



Little attention was given this big Berkshire movement in the news media, but it remains that there are now four cavemen, or cavewomen, identified who know who they are and are ready to serve at a moment’s notice.

One of the cavemen appears to be Li Lu, a Chinese-American investor who brought Munger the idea of investing in Chinese car and battery maker BYD. Munger has said it’s likely that Li will be chosen to have a role in the investment side of Berkshire. (See the Li Lu chapter.)



Warren Buffett Protégé

(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Caveman Needed, Cavemen Found



220





APPASSIONATTA VON CLIMAX


In Berkshire’s 1993 Annual Report, Buffett told a tale that says a lot about love, money, and taxes:

Through my favorite comic strip, Li’l Abner, I got a chance during my youth to see the benefits of delayed taxes, though I missed the lesson at the time. Making his readers feel superior, Li’l Abner bungled happily, but moronically, through life in Dogpatch. At one point he became infatuated with a New York temptress, Appassionatta Von Climax, but despaired of marrying her because he had only a single silver dollar, and she was interested solely in millionaires. Dejected, Abner took his problem to Old Man Mose, the font of all knowledge in Dogpatch. Said the sage: Double your money 20 times, and Appassionatta will be yours (1, 2, 4, 8 . . . . 1,048,576).



My last memory of the strip is Abner entering a roadhouse, dropping his dollar into a slot machine, and hitting a jackpot that spilled money all over the floor. Meticulously following Mose’s advice, Abner picked up two dollars and went off to find his next double. Whereupon I dumped Abner and began reading Ben Graham.



Mose clearly was overrated as a guru: Besides failing to anticipate Abner’s slavish obedience to instructions, he also forgot about taxes. Had Abner been subject, say, to the 35% federal tax rate that Berkshire pays, and had he managed one double annually, he would after 20 years only have accumulated $22,370. Indeed, had he kept on both getting his annual doubles and paying a 35% tax on each, he would have needed 71/2 years more to reach the $1 million required to win Appassionatta.



But what if Abner had instead put his dollar in a single investment and held it until it doubled the same 271/2 times? In that case, he would have realized about $200 million pre-tax or, after paying a $70 million tax in the final year, about $130 million after-tax. For that, Appassionatta would have crawled to Dogpatch. Of course, with 271/2 years having passed, how Appassionatta would have looked to a fellow sitting on $130 million is another question.



What this little tale tells us is that tax-paying investors will realize a far, far greater sum from a single investment that compounds internally at a given rate than from a succession of investments compounding at the same rate. But I suspect many Berkshire shareholders figured that out long ago.



The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Appassionatta Von Climax



221





BERKSHIRE’S WEB SITE


Launching into cyberspace, Berkshire issued its 1996 Annual Report on the Internet.

“Though it was a close decision, Charlie and I have decided to enter the 20th century. Accordingly, we are going to put future quarterly and annual reports on the Internet, where they can be accessed via www.berkshirehathaway.com. We will always post these reports on a Saturday so that anyone interested will have ample time to digest the information before trading begins,” Buffett wrote in the 1996 Annual Report.

Berkshire announced the report would be on Berkshire’s Web site March 15, 1997. And it was—precisely at midnight. Hard-core Berkshire shareholders were up between midnight and 4 a.m. getting copies. Other shareholders, who couldn’t access the report, let fire some foul language.

The new system went fairly smoothly. One hitch: The day before the announced availability day, The Wall Street Journal Interactive Edition got a copy of the report that had been posted on the World Wide Web but not yet linked to Berkshire’s home page.

The Berkshire site offers annual and quarterly reports, press releases, and information and ads about Berkshire’s operating businesses. One wag, who praised Berkshire’s entry into the electronic age, said, “But how will I know what color the annual report is?”

With the advent of the Berkshire Web site, the world had been invited to look in on Berkshire, and occasionally Buffett could communicate to his visitors through Berkshire’s Web site. Here’s one message from the Oracle of Omaha:

Thanks for visiting our Web site. Being a lifelong technophobe, I tiptoed into the computer world only a few years ago. If you have any ideas about how we can make these pages more useful, just drop me a line.



You probably know that I don’t make stock recommendations. However, I have two thoughts regarding your personal expenditures that can save you real money. I’m suggesting that you call on the services of two subsidiaries of Berkshire: GEICO and Borsheims.



I estimate that about 40% of auto drivers in the country can save money by insuring with GEICO. The figure is not 100% because insurers differ in their underwriting judgments, with some favoring drivers who live in certain geographical areas and work in certain occupations more than GEICO does. I believe, however, that GEICO more frequently offers the low price than does any other national carrier selling insurance to all comers. You can quickly find out whether you can save money by calling 800-555-2756.



Fine jewelry, watches, and giftware will almost certainly cost you less at Borsheims. I’ve looked at the figures for all publicly owned jewelry companies and the contrast with Borsheims is startling. Our one-store operation, with its huge volume, enables us to operate with costs that are fully 15–20 percentage points below those incurred by our competitors. We pass the benefits of this low-cost structure along to our customers.



Every year Borsheims sends out thousands of selections to customers who want a long-distance opportunity to inspect what it offers and decide which, if any, item they’d like to purchase. We do a huge amount of business in this low-key way, which allows the shopper to conveniently see the exceptional values that we offer. Call Scot Caniglia, Marvin Cohn, or Missy Linhart at Borsheims (800-642-4438) and save substantial money on your next purchase of jewelry.



Sincerely,



Warren E. Buffett



The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Web Site



“

222





2010 ANNUAL REPORT


The per-share book value of both our Class A and Class B stock increased by 13% in 2010, the 2010 report began.. Over the last 46 years (that is, since present management took over), book value has grown from $19 to $95,453, a rate of 20.2% compounded annually.”

Continuing the upbeat tone of the whole report, Buffett next wrote, “The highlight of 2010 was our acquisition of Burlington Northern Santa Fe, a purchase that’s working out even better than I expected ...”

The first time he’s ever predicted Berkshire’s earnings appeared in the third paragraph: “I can estimate that the normal earning power of the assets we currently own is about $17 billion pre-tax and $12 billion after-tax, excluding any capital gains and losses.”

The conditions to that prediction were stated: “envisioning a year free of a mega-catastrophe in insurance and possessing a general business climate somewhat better than that of 2010 but weaker than that of 2005 and 2006.”

Then, in a patriotic note, Buffett said Berkshire had spent $6 billion in capital investments in 2010 and would spend $8 billion in 2011, almost all in the U.S.

Sticking with his patriotic and optimistic themes, he said, “America’s best days lie ahead.”

Further striking high notes, he said that Berkshire’s investments in stocks, bonds, and cash were $158 billion and that “float” was $66 billion which was being held at a negative cost because the insurance units were collecting more in premiums than they were paying in claims. Indeed, Berkshire was being paid to hold $66 billion.

The operating businesses earned nearly $6 billion pre-tax during the year.

Further, Buffett pointed to vastly improving results at some of the operating businesses although the ones relating to housing remained sluggish. But he said investments were being made with an eye toward an eventual housing recovery.

Berkshire’s MidAmerican unit, he said, had kept energy costs in Iowa constant since 1999 and had invested $5.4 billion into wind energy, making MidAmerican the largest wind generator of any regulated utility in America.

Berkshire’s auto insurer, GEICO, had grown to become the third-largest auto insurer with 8.8% of the industry market share. Its value had risen by billions since Berkshire bought the half of the company it didn’t already own in 1996.

Buffett pointed out that Ajit Jain’s insurance operation had created $30 billion of float, “a feat that no CEO of any other insurer has come close to matching.”

Berkshire’s stock holdings showed a position of 359 million shares of Wells Fargo, worth more than $10 billion.

To the relief of many investors, Berkshire’s position in derivatives was far more in its favor at the end of 2010 than at the beginning.

Last, and not least, Berkshire held $38 billion in cash, a kitty that was quickly replenished from the time of Berkshire’s large buyout of the Burlington Northern railroad.

As for future acquisitions, Buffett said his “elephant gun” was reloaded and his trigger finger was “itchy.”

THE ANNUAL REPORT IS IN THE MAIL

Each year, there is a crisis, of sorts, about receiving the Annual Report, particularly for those planning to attend Berkshire’s annual meeting. A form in the report must be sent to headquarters so that credentials for the meeting can be mailed back to the shareholder. When the reports are late, the shareholder may be waiting right up to the meeting wondering if his credentials will reach him in time.

Also, there is a lot of banter on the AOL Berkshire board about which broker is the best and which one is the worst at mailing out the reports. Berkshire and brokers take heat for the late reports.

Because of the flap over the mailings, Berkshire’s Chief Financial Officer Marc Hamburg posted the following message to the board on April 12, 2001:

The Real Facts Re Annual Report Mailings:

I hope by now all of our shareholders have received their annual reports and proxy statements. I have recently read on this board and other various statements which apparently are being made by brokers regarding how we mail our reports. For the most part everything I have read and heard is erroneous. Berkshire mails annual reports and proxy statements etc., directly only to its shareholders of record. This year such reports were mailed on March 20, 2001. Berkshire does not send annual reports and proxy statements etc., directly to street name holders. Rather they are delivered to a mailing house which more than 90% of all brokers/banks have designated as their mailing agent. The agent’s name is ADP. They are based in New Jersey and of our roughly 310,000 street name holders, they are responsible for mailing approximately 305,000 of the reports. We began shipping material from Omaha to New Jersey beginning on about March 22, 2001, and completed the shipping on March 24, 2001. All reports were received by ADP by March 27, 2001, and were mailed by them during the period between March 27, 2001, and April 2, 2001. We do request that the reports be sent out using Bulk Mail Rates. This saves us over $1.50/report or close to $500,000. The bulk mail should be delivered within seven business days from when it is mailed (although often it is delivered sooner and unfortunately occasionally later). I understand that many shareholders are anxious about receiving credentials and we make every effort to get them delivered prior to the meeting. So far this year, we have been able to turn requests around within a day of receiving the request and most times the same day. Many of you know that last year and this year we had to move the date of the meeting up one week—which gives us one less week to process requests. Next year our meeting will again be held on the first Saturday in May and thus we will have an additional week to process requests for credentials. Finally, if a shareholder has not received his credential prior to the meeting he can obtain them on Friday night near Borsheims or Saturday prior to the meeting at the ticket booths at the Civic. I hope this clears up the confusion.



The Story of Warren Buffett



The Red-Covered 2010 Annual Report

(Photo by

Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value 2010 Annual Report



We Mailed It, I Tell You.

Berkshire’s Chief Financial Officer Marc Hamburg is in front of the Shaw Industries booth at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2001.

(Photo by

Andrew Kilpatrick)



223





MARS TO WRIGLEY


Over the years, Berkshire shareholders have traded jokes that end with, “Well, one day Buffett will buy Mars.” Sometimes the idle chatter has referred to the candy company and sometimes to the planet.

In 2008, with a slightly different twist, Mars, the candy company, bought Wrigley, the chewing gum company, with a lot of help from Mars’ friend Buffett. Mars is a low-profile, private company still owned by descendants of Forrest Mars, Sr.

Mars Inc., maker of Snickers and M&Ms candy and pet food (Pedigree) agreed on April 28, 2008 to buy Wrigley Jr. Co., maker of Juicy Fruit, Doublemint gum, and Life Savers. The cost to Mars was $23 billion in cash or $80 a share, a 28% premium to the stock price before the deal was announced.

So at a time when many investors were being burned by exotic mortgage stew products, Buffett was buying chewing gum.

Berkshire pledged to make a $2.1 billion minority equity stake in Wrigley when the deal was completed. Further, it offered $4.4 billion of subordinated debt to fund the deal (at 11.45%), meaning Berkshire’s stake in the deal is about $6.5 billion for about 15% of Wrigley. Buffett said at the time, “The $6.5 billion will be available whether a nuclear bomb goes off in New York City or whether Ben Bernanke runs off with Paris Hilton.”

In December 2009, Berkshire also bought $1 billion of Wrigley senior notes due in 2013 and 2014.

Goldman Sachs was in on the deal with $5.7 billion invested in Wrigley. Mars itself put in about $11 billion, which it borrowed from JP Morgan from a syndicate of banks it formed, making the deal a large leveraged buyout of Wrigley.

The combined Mars-Wrigley company will have about 15% of the confectionary market in 180 countries. Competitor Cadbury Schweppes has about 10% of the market. Cadbury was the subject of a bid from Berkshire-investee Kraft foods in 2009.

“A good time to buy a really great business is when you can do it,” Buffett said (CNBC, April 28, 2008). He also joked that he had given Wrigley a “70-year taste test.” Buffett sold gum as a child and sometimes chews it as well.

Reports said the deal was instigated when Mars officials approached Wrigley’s Bill Wrigley, Jr. to request a meeting on April 11, 2008. He met with Mars CEO Paul Michaels and CFO Olivier Goudet at Michaels’ home in McLean, Virginia. Over sandwiches at the kitchen table, they began to hammer out the transaction that created a colossal candy-and-gum company.

In the question of financing, Goldman Sachs partner Byron Trott (who brought Buffett the Marmon Holdings deal as well as others in the past) was a key figure. Trott, representing Wrigley, approached Buffett about joining with Mars. Family-owned Mars of McLean, Virginia, is the world’s largest chocolate company and will operate Wrigley as a unit of Mars.

The deal expanded Mars’ global reach and could spark further consolidation in the global candy business. Mars tried to buy Hershey Co. for $12 billion in 2002.

Wrigley’s products include Extra, Eclipse, Orbit, Hubba Bubba, and Big Red gums, as well as Doublemint and Juicy Fruit, since 1893. By 1920, Wrigley had become the world’s largest advertiser of a single product.

Founded by William Wrigley, Jr., in 1891, Wrigleys originally made soap and baking soda in Chicago. It offered free packs of chewing gum with every purchase only to find the gum was more popular than the other products. In 1911, Spearmint gum went on sale in Britain.

In 2004, Wrigley paid Kraft $1.4 billion for its candy division, giving Wrigley ownership of Altoids, the UK breath mint, and LifeSavers.

As stated, Wrigley’s products are sold in 180 countries, with 60% of sales coming from outside the U.S. The company had sales of $5.4 billion in 2007. Mars has annual sales of $22 billion in more than 60 countries. The combined Mars-Wrigley company will have $27 billion in annual sales and 64,000 employees.

For decades, Buffett has praised Wrigley’s as a valuable brand name. Buffett’s affinity for brand names is well-known.



Wrigley Booth at the 2008 Annual Meeting

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



M&Ms

(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Story of Warren Buffett

The Wrigley name is highly visible in Chicago. The Wrigley Building serves as the William Wrigley Jr. Company headquarters in central Chicago. The baseball stadium, Wrigley Field, is home of the Chicago Cubs. It was there, at the age of 9, that Buffett saw his first baseball game in May 1939. The game with the Brooklyn Dodgers played to a 9-to-9 tie over 19 innings and was called because of darkness. Buffett’s grandfather Ernest had taken young Buffett to the game and they watched as during the first nine innings the teams scored 18 runs, but neither team was able to score after that.



(Photo by

Mary Porter)

Wrigley’s Juicy Fruit and Doublemint Gum

Of Permanent Value Mars to Wrigley



224





ACQUISITIONS IN 2100


A small boy who wanted to know about the current evolution at Berkshire raised his hand at the annual meeting in 2100; he wanted to know the history of Berkshire’s evolution.

Buffett skipped lunch to take the question from the four-year-old who wanted to know about Berkshire’s intergalactic mergers and acquisitions strategy. Buffett paused for a moment, drank a whole can of Coke, chewed a peanut brittle bar, and then answered the boy, “Well, OK. Here we go:

“Our Wells Fargo unit bought the Anglo-Irish Bank in Ireland, which is in the process of buying Bank Un, Deux, and Trois in France as bolt-on acquisitions. Also, I wanted Royal Bank of Scotland, and Charlie wanted HSBC, so, in this new era, we merged those two giants, and Charlie named the new bank Big Bang Bank without Black Holes. That resulting conglomerate will be making subsequent purchases not only in foreign lands but also deep into the cosmos. Charlie, you know, studied the cosmos at CalTech and is more up on all this than I am.

“Also, the Burlington Northern buyout of the Canadian National Railway has been approved and is wrapping up its buys of two Chinese railroads.

“Berkshire’s CTB unit bought six irrigation companies in the Negev Desert and figured out a way to raise its chicks and pigs through a variety of new technologies. Observers keep saying we’re not a technology company but we are now.

“I wanted to buy Mars and Charlie opted for Wrigley, so we compromised and bought both. Eat either, and Berkshire profits.

“We unwound that last damn 100-year-duration derivatives contract at Gen Re. Our investment understudy got a good look at what a disaster that was. Charlie and I each bought a Dilly Bar with the proceeds and have noted this on page 500 of the annual report.

“Here’s the real news: We culminated years of top-secret activity and can now say we are huge in the book business. Everyone knows it’s a terrible business, but we assigned the task to board members Charlotte Guyman and Susan Decker, our high-IQ techies, and they came up with a way to deliver any book through the Internet. The book moves electronically through the Internet and then comes out as a hard copy through that slit in your computer. It’s amazing what they’ve done. As an aside, and you may not know this, but Al Gore and Charlie invented Amazon’s Kindle.

“So, by eliminating shipping costs, we have an entirely electronic business with no delivery costs. We started this years ago by buying Berky Bookseller which was selling books at the annual meeting. It was stupid to let those profits fly out the door. Several years later, Berky Bookseller merged with the Jim Ross Airport Book Shop. The two did OK, and then we put some of Berkshire’s billions behind their purchase of the Library of Congress from the federal government. In the meantime, the Library of Congress had bought the libraries of Stanford, Michigan, Harvard, and Oxford—all from Google.

“It was then that Charlotte and Susan went to work on this book delivery breakthrough. I still don’t really understand. Anyway, for the few folks who don’t yet have computers (they can buy one, you know, at the Nebraska Furniture Mart), our Wal-Mart/UPS/FedEx distribution service will be glad to ship any book for a small charge.

“We are now, and will remain, the low-cost provider of books to the entire cosmos. We intend to be very big in books.

“So, young man, in 2100, our strategy was simple. It was B&B: banking and books with a bit of ‘busyness’ in between.”

The Story of Warren Buffett



Cosmos by Carl Sagan (1980)

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Mergers and Acquisitions in 2100



225





WHAT YOGI TOLD MICKEY MANTLE


Mickey Mantle

In 1956, Mickey Mantle won the Triple Crown, leading the league in batting (.353), home runs (52), and runs batted in (130). With an unforgettable running catch in center field, he preserved Don Larsen’s perfect game. It would have been an even better year for Mantle, however, if he had put his World Series winnings into the Buffett Partnership.



(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Yogi and Mick

Here Yogi (No. 8) greeted Mantle (No. 7) in 1956, saying, “Great going, Mickey, but have you invested in the Buffett Partnership yet?”

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Mantle said: “Having the

dangerous Yogi Berra (Number 8) batting behind me for most of my career meant I got a lot of [“FAT”] pitches to hit.”

A less modest Mantle could have quoted Joe Torre: “Speed has no slump.”

Of Permanent Value What Yogi Told Mickey Mantle



226





TORCHMARK


In late 1986, I wrote Buffett suggesting he look at the stock of Torchmark, an insurance and financial services company located at that time in Birmingham, Alabama. (The company moved to Texas in 2006.)

Several days later, I received a note dated December 1, 1986:

Thanks for the nice comments—and I’ll look at Torchmark. I’m glad you are a shareholder, but you are right—I’m not keen on margin buying. However, we’ll try to keep you out of trouble.





Sincerely,

Warren E. Buffett





His reply about margin buying came in response to my noting that I liked Berkshire so much that I had margined things for more of its shares. He was right about being cautious about margin, and although he tried to keep me out of trouble, even he could not swim against the tide. During the crash of 1987, Berkshire stock fell from about $4,000 to under $3,000 a share over a several-day period. This fall was consistent with the rest of the market.

Before that disaster, I was surprised when Dan Dorfman reported in August 1987 that Berkshire had amassed a small stake—by Berkshire standards—in Torchmark, a stake not even announced publicly by Berkshire other than through the briefest sort of filings.

Torchmark officials confirmed such a stake, and Berkshire filed forms with the SEC acknowledging ownership. I was surprised to learn he was in the stock.

I have no proof that my letter influenced Buffett’s purchase but I do know that when I later had lunch with the Oracle of Omaha himself—he did not ask me for my best investment idea. As of September 30, 2009, Berkshire owned 2.82 million shares of Torchmark.

Torchmark is the parent firm of a battery of insurance companies, the largest of which is Liberty National Life Insurance Co., which employs agents who in some cases still go door-to-door, selling insurance policies, seeking a niche market of customers at the modest end of the income scale.

Torchmark spun off part of Waddell & Reed, a financial services company that manages a group of mutual funds. Waddell & Reed representatives sell life and health insurance policies from a Torchmark subsidiary, United Investors Life; and oil and natural gas partnerships are managed by another subsidiary, Torch Energy.

Torchmark’s other main subsidiaries are United American Insurance, which sells Medicare supplemental insurance, and Globe Life and Accident Insurance, which sells life and health insurance.

In the past few decades of rocky times for financial services firms, Torchmark has set a record as a model of consistent profitability. For the past 40 years, it has compiled both per-share earnings and dividend increases every year, a record unmatched by any other company listed on the New York Stock Exchange.

The company has a reputation for tight control over expenses, and its investments appear solid.

Fewer than 3% of the company’s fixed-maturity investments are in securities of less than investment grade, and three-fourths of the investments are in short-term investments or government securities. Only slightly more than 2% of total invested assets are in mortgages or real estate. Since 1986, Torchmark has bought back more than a third of its outstanding stock.

Torchmark’s 1990 bid to buy much larger American General Corp. for $6.3 billion did not come off.

Berkshire’s stake in Torchmark has made nice, steady progress as Torchmark’s businesses have made nice, steady progress. In the mid-1990s, the stock price suffered in connection with litigation over cancer policy replacements.

“It appears that Mr. Buffett sold approximately a third of his holdings in the fourth quarter of 1993. Nevertheless, Torchmark continues to have many of the characteristics that he looks for in a business: a high return on equity, a low cost structure and cost-conscious management, highly predictable earnings, and a company that repurchases its own stock,” said investor Giri Bogavelli.

In 2000, Buffett was back, revisiting Torchmark by raising his stake to 2,073,462 shares. The stake at the end of the first quarter of 2004 was about 1.9 million shares, but, as mentioned, was back up to 2.03 million shares at the end of 2004.

In 2005, Berkshire requested confidentiality for its Torchmark position. Investors with portfolios of more than $100 million are required to file a quarterly form but may also petition the Securities and Exchange Commission for confidentiality for certain transactions.

At the end of the third quarter of 2011, Berkshire owned 4.2 million shares of Torchmark.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Torchmark



227





TIME WARNER


Still intrigued by media franchises in 1982, Buffett bought shares of Time Inc., at a cost of $45 million. By the end of the year, the investment was worth $79 million.

Over the next several years, he lowered, then raised, then again lowered his investment. In 1986, he sold out completely. That was the year he also sold a stake in Affiliated Publications, the parent of the Boston Globe, for a $51 million profit.

J. Richard Munro, the former chairman of Time, said he believes Buffett sold his Time stake to help finance his stake in the Cap Cities purchase of American Broadcasting Cos. in early 1986. Munro spearheaded its merger with Warner Communications in 1989, creating the media giant Time Warner.

“I can tell you I have respect for him far beyond the business aspect. It’s as a human being. He’s one of the more interesting people of our time. It’s his no-nonsense, Midwestern thing. There are just no affectations. He is a legendary figure.… What you see is what you get,” Munro said.

“When he became a shareholder of Time, the company did not know it.… His timing of buying and selling the stock was perfect,” he said.

Buffett would drop by Munro’s office at the Time-Life Building in New York about once a year for a chat. “We’d talk about everything. He wanted to know what we knew, and, of course we wanted to know what he knew. We’d talk about the world and exchange views. He was an admirer of Time,” Munro said.

A couple of years after Buffett sold his Time shares, he approached the board for permission to make a major investment in the company, according to Munro. “He came to us wanting to become a big investor on the order of 5 to 10%,” Munro reported.

Buffett’s overture was rejected. Munro said he and Nick Nicholas were for it, “but the board rejected it.”

“As I recall it was big shareholders who just didn’t want it,” said Munro, adding that it was something that was considered very quickly and dismissed as something Time didn’t need.

Laments Munro, “If he had become a major shareholder, we probably would not have gone through what we did.” What Time soon went through was a $200 a share unsolicited offer for Time from Paramount Communications.

The bid was finally beaten back as Time and Warner agreed to a high-debt

merger. The combined Time Warner became the largest media and entertainment company in the world. Not only did Time Warner become owner of CNN, with huge stakes in magazine publishing such as Time magazine and Sports Illustrated, but also is in books, cable television (including HBO), and films, such as Batman.

However, the combined company wound up with a debt of more than $10 billion. Buffett didn’t think much of that.

“I do not think he [Buffett] approved of the merger, but I will be convinced until I go to my grave that it was right. We would have been acquired or become a second-rate company,” Munro said.

In 2000, America Online announced a mega-monster marriage with Time Warner, and by 2001, the companies were one. But the merger was a mistake and AOL’s net worth and stock plunged, and in hindsight the merger was an obvious mistake. The much-heralded merger resulted in a $98 billion writeoff in 2002—the largest in U.S. history.

The amount of discussion about the writeoff in the 2002 AOL TimeWarner Annual Report was zero.

In 2003, the company took back its old name of Time Warner.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Former Time Warner Chairman

J. Richard Munro

(AP/Wide World Photos)

Of Permanent Value Time Warner



228





“AREN’T YOU WARREN BUFFETT?”


In 1986, Peter Kenner, president of Kenner Printing Co. in New York City, saw a man he believed to be Buffett at the intersection of Madison Avenue and 55th Street.

“Excuse me. Aren’t you Warren Buffett?” asked Kenner.

“Yes. How did you know?” replied Buffett.

When Kenner told him that his father, Morton Kenner, had been an investor since the days of the Buffett Partnership and that he himself was a longtime Berkshire shareholder, Buffett invited Kenner to accompany him on the plane to the upcoming annual meeting. “It was Buffett’s first plane, and it had the image of E.T. on it from the movie,” Kenner said.

In actuality, four generations of the Kenner family had invested with Buffett. “I met Buffett in 1964 through Henry Brandt,” said Morton Kenner, the former Shearson Lehman executive. “I put $80,000 into the partnership at a time you needed to have $100,000, and I got my father [Marcus Kenner] to invest the other $20,000.” Incidentally, Morton Kenner’s wife was a friend of Ben Graham’s.

By 1990, Peter Kenner’s nine-year-old son, Nicholas, a third-generation Berkshire shareholder, was pleading to go with his dad to the annual meeting. “He had been asking me about going to the meeting,” said Kenner, who thought it a bit odd. Nicholas explained that if this was his investment for a college education, he wanted to go.

Kenner warned his son that the meeting was a grown-up affair, and he’d have to be quiet and not ask questions. Young Kenner said he wanted to ask why Berkshire’s stock price had dropped from $8,900 to $6,700 a share. His father gave in.

Father and Son Kenner ran into Buffett just before the meeting, and Buffett encouraged young Kenner to ask whatever question he wanted. So Nicholas, posing the first question at Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 1990, asked the ultimate question of Buffett: “Why did Berkshire’s stock go down?”

Buffett, feigning anger, replied, “You’re underage! Throw him out!” The greatest financial mind of our time finally replied that he really did not know—that he had no good answer to that question. Young Kenner had stumped the master.

After explaining how Berkshire usually trades near its intrinsic value, Buffett ended by saying, “Hold it for your old age.”

After the meeting, Buffett and the Kenners again happened to run into one another, and Buffett asked Nicholas Kenner if he could pose for a picture with him. That photo ran with the Omaha World-Herald’s story about the annual meeting.

Posing for the picture, Buffett said, “Let’s do this right,” and handed the youngster his wallet. “Can I keep it?” asked Nicholas.

A short time later, Buffett sent Kenner a copy of the photo with a letter inviting him to future annual meetings and encouraging him to ask more questions.

“He’s a nice guy; he’s very funny,” young Kenner said of Buffett. “I just wanted to ask him why the stock price was down. You know, if it’s fallen from over $8,000, you want to know why. I definitely want to hold it unless something absolutely amazing happens, and it goes down thousands of dollars,” he added.

Young Kenner was such a hit at the annual meeting in 1990 that Buffett wrote in the annual report the lad would again get first crack at Charlie and him at the upcoming meeting, should he attend: “Last year the first question at the annual meeting was asked by 11-year-old Nicholas Kenner, a third-generation shareholder from New York City. Nicholas plays rough: ‘How come the stock is down?’ he fired at me. My answer was not memorable.

“We hope that other business engagements won’t keep Nicholas away from this year’s meeting. If he attends, he will be offered the chance to again ask the first question: Charlie and I want to tackle him while we’re fresh. This year, however, it’s Charlie’s turn to answer.”

The youngster did, indeed, attend the 1991 meeting. He began by telling Buffett that he owned 10 shares of Berkshire. Buffett interjected, “I’d like you to meet my granddaughter.” Nicholas quickly followed up with two questions: First, why did Buffett pick Coke instead of Pepsi as an investment? Second, seeing as Buffett listed Kenner’s age as 11 in the Berkshire Annual Report when he was actually nine, why should he trust Berkshire’s financial numbers in the back of the report? The latter question sent Berkshire shareholders into convulsions of laughter.

Calling on the help of then Coca-Cola president, Don Keough, Buffett took on Kenner’s first question explaining that Coke is a superb business, serving soft drinks in 170 (now almost 200) countries where consumption is increasing. Keough said that consumption internationally was 59 servings per capita a year compared with 300 in the United States, suggesting Coke’s enormous growth potential.

Buffett went on to say he drinks five Cokes a day himself and noted that Munger drinks diet Coke “for obvious reasons.”

As for young Kenner’s second question about the age discrepancy, Buffett started out with, “Charlie wrote that section,” and then ducked it with, “That is a very good question. I look forward to seeing you again next year.”

Kenner said, “I’ll be back!” drawing a big laugh.

“I know!” Buffett replied.

Buffett later said he planned to follow with “a written response” (Fortune, June 3, 1991).

The repartee was becoming part of Berkshire lore, and Buffett wrote about it at the end of his letter in the 1991 Annual Report: “Nicholas Kenner nailed me—again—at last year’s meeting … Nicholas will be at this year’s meeting—he spurned my offer of a trip to Disney World on that day—so join us to watch a continuation of this lopsided battle of wits.”

In the summer of 1999, Nicholas Kenner worked at the Henderson Brothers post, which trades Berkshire’s stock on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange. Later he went to Colgate University, then worked for a hedge fund in New York for two years before he started to run Just Salads restaurants.

Peter Kenner died in 2010 of pancreatic cancer, marking the first time in decades that a Kenner family member had not attended the Berkshire annual meeting.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Aren’t You Warren Buffert?



Lopsided Battle

Buffett and Nicholas Kenner have engaged in a battle of wits at annual meetings; here they playfully fight over Buffett’s wallet in 1990.

(Omaha World-Herald)



229





LOW-INCOME HOUSING


In 1990, Berkshire invested $25 million in the nonprofit National Equity Fund to help finance low-income housing. In 1991, it again invested in low-income housing efforts, this time with $20 million which was split evenly between the National Equity Fund and the Enterprise Fund. By 1994, Berkshire had invested more than $80 million in low-income housing efforts, including small amounts in the Equity Fund of Nebraska. The money went toward creating low-income housing in several cities, including Houston, Los Angeles, Detroit, Chicago, and Buffett’s hometown of Omaha.

“I look at it as an investment with pro-social aspects,” he said at a press conference in 1991. “I don’t view it in a philanthropic context.”

The investment that Buffett termed “financially and socially responsible” should earn 15% to 20% a year for over a decade in the form of tax credits created through the federal Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Program, part of the 1986 tax law revision.

In its first four years, the fund raised $620 million to build more than 14,000 affordable housing units in 62 cities. Buffett’s investment is believed to be the largest made in the fund.

He made the investment in part to prod other firms to make such investments. Salomon has pledged a similar $10 million to the program, and American Express also made a small investment.

Berkshire’s investment was made through its World Book subsidiary; those encyclopedias, Buffett said, are “in the homes of millions of Americans” in all income groups.

Of the law providing for the tax credit, Buffett said, “It seems to me to be a fine marriage between the corporate community and the local community development organizations. The marriage should provide affordable housing for low-income groups.” The tax credit was assured when President George Herbert Walker Bush signed the new housing bill into law at the White House on November 28, 1990.

Before the signing, Bush and Buffett had a private chat. While the details were not disclosed, we do know that the discussion was about business, not politics. The President of the United States peppered Buffett with questions about the economy.

Let’s hope the President’s secretary didn’t erase these White House tapes.



All The Best by George Bush

(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Former President

George Bush

(AP/Wide

World Photos)

Of Permanent Value Low-Income Housing



230





WHAT WILL THE MARKETS DO?


On June 16, 1993, Buffett and eight other CEOs met with President Bill Clinton for a two hour private lunch. Buffett advised Clinton that raising taxes and cutting spending were the only practical ways to reduce the deficit.

Interviewed by reporters on the White House lawn afterwards, Buffett said reducing the deficit was important for the economy and for the stock and bond markets. He added that he voted for Clinton and backed his plan to reduce the deficit.

Buffett said the after-lunch discussion was “quite uninhibited” and the president is articulate and he listens very well. He gets very engaged in the conversation, and he is a very engaging person to be with.”

Buffett said he endorsed Clinton’s proposal to reduce the deficit by $500 billion over five years through a combination of new taxes and spending cuts. The $500 billion figure was significant, although Buffett added he would like to see an even greater reduction via a significant energy tax.

When asked how he felt about the way the White House was functioning under Clinton, Buffett said, “I’ve been a little disappointed in the way Congress has functioned. I think that maybe it has lost sight of the ultimate goal, which is major deficit reduction.”

On this issue, it sounds as though Buffett might agree with Mark Twain: “Suppose you were an idiot. And suppose you were a member of Congress. But I repeat myself.”

Buffett said, “Wall Street will evaluate the whole deficit-reduction package. In the end, it will look at how business will do five to 10 years out, what interest rates are going to do, the credibility of the administration, the ability of Congress to act. There’s a whole host of variables it’ll be looking at.”

When asked what he thought the markets would do, Buffett replied, “Well, the President didn’t tell us anything about what the markets will do.”

Asked if the markets were overvalued, Buffett said, “I’ve never been a good judge of the markets. I try to evaluate specific businesses. If I could evaluate a few specific businesses every year halfway correctly, I’d look at it as a successful year. I’ve never made any money guessing which way the market’s going.”

Questioned about whether it was harder at that time (1993) to find undervalued investments, he acknowledged it to be harder, but said, “It always seems hard at the present time.”

In response to a rumor that he was buying Time Warner stock, he said, “I never comment on rumors, particularly my own.”

A reporter asked, “Let me ask you outright if you are buying Time Warner stock.”

Buffett replied, “I never comment about whether we’re buying or selling anything. The only thing I will comment about is that I own Berkshire Hathaway.”

To a final question about the possibility of a stock split, Buffett said people shouldn’t hold their breath.

With this discussion of Clinton and good versus bad years, an old anecdote about Babe Ruth comes to mind. Ruth was once asked about his salary being more than the President’s. Ruth replied, “I had a better year.”

Clinton’s salary is higher than Buffett’s, but in 1998, Clinton had a bad year. Summing it up at the Gridiron dinner in 1999, Clinton said the previous year had been “awful” then deadpanned: “Let me tell you, through it all, I still believe in a place called … hell.”

The Story of Warren Buffett



Former President

Bill Clinton

(AP/Wide

World Photos)

Of Permanent Value What Will the Markets Do?



231





ABOUT $60 BILLION IN STOCKS


Berkshire owns not only whole businesses but also a good amount of significant stocks, including its own. Berkshire held the following major stock positions at the end of 2009, amounting to about $60 billion stocks.

(Source: Berkshire’s 2009 Annual Report)

The fact that Berkshire owned some Berkshire stock was disclosed on October 15, 2004. At that time, press reports said that with the exception of about $99 million, all the companies named in a new list of holdings were minor amounts of shares of companies Berkshire already owned as of June 30, 2004.



As of June 30, 2004, Berkshire owned 1,106 Berkshire Class A shares and 281 Class B shares.



As of September 30, 2007, Berkshire owned 14 million shares of CarMax Inc., the biggest U.S. used-car dealer, and increased stakes in J&J, U.S. Bancorp, UnitedHealth, and Wells Fargo.

Berkshire had raised its stake in Minneapolis-based US Bancorp to 65.5 million shares by late 2007 and in Bank of America to 9.1 million shares by the end of the third quarter of 2007. The US Bancorp was 67 million in late 2004, a 30% of the bank which in 2004 bought nine failed banks surged by the FDIC.

Berkshire’s top 25 holdings are listed below in order of dollar value as of September 30, 2011.

Entity Market Value Shares

American Express (AXP) $6,807,319,000.00 151,610,700

Bank of New York Melon Corp (BK) 33,349,000.00 1,793,915

CVS Caremark Corp (CVS) 190,153,000.00 5,661,000

Coca Cola (KO) 13,512,000,000.00 200,000,000

Comdisco Holding (CDCO) 9,384,000.00 1,538,377

ConocoPhilips (COP) 1,842,671,000.00 29,100,937

Costco Wholesale (COST) 355,899,000.00 4,333,363

Directv (DTV) 179,622,000.00 4,249,400

Dollar General (DG) 169,816,000.00 4,497,247

Exxon Mobil (XOM) 30,635,000.00 421,800

Gannett Inc (GCI) 16,584,000.00 1,740,231

General Dynamics (GD) 174,335,000.00 3,064,422

General Electric (GE) 118,380,000.00 7,777,900

GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) 62,369,000.00 1,510,500

Ingersoll-Rd (IR) 17,865,000.00 636,600

Intel Corp (INTC) 199,167,000.00 9,333,000

International Business Machines (IBM) 10,028,617,000.00 57,348,984

Johnson & Johnson (JNJ) 2,384,985,000.00 37,446,788

Kraft (KFT) 3,067,695,000.00 89,746,708

M & T Bank (MTB) 376,204,000.00 5,382,040

Mastercard Inc (MA) 128,450,000.00 405,000

Moody’s (MICO) 865,245,000.00 28,415,250

Procter & Gamble (PG) 4,850,077,000.00 76,766,036

Sanofi Aventis (SNY) 133,289,000.00 4,063,675

Torchmark (TMK) 147,660,000.00 4,235,818

US Bancorp (USB) 1,625,188,000.00 69,039,426

USG Corporation (USG) 114,896,000.00 17,072,192

United Parcel Service (UPS) 90,254,000.00 1,429,200

Verisk Analytics (VRSK) 146,112,000.00 4,202,250

Visa Inc (V) 196,445,000.00 2,291,708

Walmart Stores (WMT) 2,026,027,000.00 39,037,142

Washington Post (WPO) 564,928,000.00 1,727,765

Wells Fargo & Co (WFC) 8,716,240,000.00 361,369,808

(Source: SEC 13F-HR)

12/31/09

Percentage of

Shares Company Company Owned Cost Market

(in $ millions)

151,610,700 American Express Company 12.7 $ 1,287 $ 6,143

225,000,000 BYD Company, Ltd. 9.9 232 1,986

200,000,000 The Coca-Cola Company 8.6 1,299 11,400

37,711,330 ConocoPhillips 2.5 2,741 1,926

28,530,467 Johnson & Johnson 1.0 1,724 1,838

130,272,500 Kraft Foods Inc. 8.8 4.330 3,541

3,947,554 POSCO 5.2 768 2,092

83,128,411 The Procter & Gamble Company 2.9 533 5,040

25,108,967 Sanofi-Aventis 1.9 2,027 1,979

11,262,000 Swiss Re 3.2 773 530

234,247,373 Tesco plc 3.0 1,367 1,620

76,633,426 U.S. Bancorp 4.0 2,371 1,725

39,037,142 Wal-Mart Stores Inc. 1.0 1,893 2,087

334,235,585 Wells Fargo & Company 6.5 7,394 9,021

Others 6,680 8,636

________ _________

Total Common Stocks $ 34,646 $ 59,034

________ _________

________ _________

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value About $60 Billion in Stocks



232





PS GROUP / J. P. GUERIN


By the end of 1990, Berkshire owned about 20% of PS Group—later reorganized as PS Group Holdings—a San Diego-based enigma long headed by J. P. “Rick” Guerin. In 2000, PS Group merged into Heritage Air Holdings Statutory Trust.

For nearly 30 years, Guerin has been a disciple and friend of both Buffett and Munger. Their connection is both financial and emotional. In 1980, Munger took Guerin and Buffett fishing at Munger’s Star Island retreat on Cass Lake in northern Minnesota. “I went up with Rick Guerin,” Buffett said. “His wife had died. He had a boy. We thought it would be a good idea if they got away” (Janet Lowe, Damn Right! p. 17). They borrowed a small ski boat to go fishing. Trying to get in a better casting position, Munger put the throttle in reverse. The craft, not designed for operation in reverse, took on water and sank.

Tall and lean, Guerin (swimmer, tennis player, pilot, sky diver, skier, auto racer, bicyclist, and marathoner), by far the most athletic of the trio, dove down and freed some life vests from the sunken boat, allowing all three men to swim ashore with ease. Since then, he has called Charlie “Admiral Munger.”

Munger said in an interview on May 21, 1997, that the incident was never life-threatening, but that during the accident, Guerin “had the most presence of mind.” Of the three men, Guerin is the most “Hollywood.”

For years, Charlton Heston had told the Los Angeles investor to stay out of show business. Guerin listened and did well by heeding his advice.

“But in 1986, Guerin was dating an aspiring actress, and he wanted to indulge her. He shelled out $1 million to finance something called The Killing Time—don’t look for it at your local Blockbuster—created expressly to star her. Though Guerin managed to make a $100,000 profit by selling the film to a distributor, it was still a costly experience: Guerin’s girlfriend left him for one of her co-stars” (Forbes, June 12, 2000).

Berkshire accumulated about 11% of PS Group in 1990, paying about $32 a share for many of its shares. That same year, Buffett gradually raised his stake to about 20% largely by buying a big block of stock from the Tweedy Browne investment firm.

“Warren bought his shares—about 20% of PS Group—because a broker called from New York and said he had them,” said Guerin. “They looked cheap. He trusted me to be sensible. But PS Group is a meaningless asset to Berkshire, only about $20 million on the books. You cannot even find it. It’s been one of his worst investments, and mine, for various reasons” (Janet Lowe, Damn Right! p. 183).

What intrigued Buffett appears to be a hard-to-understand firm with a strange mix of businesses.

PS Group traces its roots to Pacific Southwest Airlines. After being sold to USAir in 1987, PS Group was left with an aircraft leasing operation, a fuel distribution unit, and oil and gas operations. Many of the oil and gas operations were sold in 1989, and the remaining operations suffered write-downs in 1998. The company’s largest investment is in aircraft leasing to US Airways. PS Group also has leased aircraft to a number of airlines that landed in bankruptcy court.

Buffett said Guerin was “a pal of Charlie Munger’s—another non-business school type—who was a math major at USC. He went on to work for IBM after graduation. After I got to Charlie [about investing for a living], Charlie got to him. Rick, from 1965 to 1983, against a compounded gain of 316% for the S&P, came off with 22,200%; which, probably because he lacks a business school education, he regards as statistically significant” (Hermes, Columbia Business School alumni magazine, 1984).

PS Group came into 5,750 shares of Berkshire in 1986 at a cost of $27.6 million as a result of a pension plan reversion. They were sold in 1991 for $47.8 million when PS Group, too leveraged, ran into trouble with its banks, a result of losses in its airplane leasing business in the early ’90s. The airlines were losing planeloads of money, cutting back on flights and filing for bankruptcy.

The sale of Berkshire stock, in a private transaction to Ruane, Cunniff & Co., of New York, was made at Berkshire’s market price. Rick Guerin felt he had to sell, and Bill Ruane wanted to buy.

Such was the story of PS Group.



J.P. Guerin

in 1985

(The San Diego Union-Tribune/Rick McCarthy)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value PS Group/ J. P. Guerin



233





WELLS FARGO


October 24, 1990, Wells Fargo, the California bank that once owned the Pony Express, announced that Buffett had bought five million shares of its common stock, thus becoming its largest stockholder.

The company’s trademark, the Concord stagecoach, is an enduring symbol of reliability, of “coming through.” Wells Fargo has been profitable every year of its existence since its inception during California’s Gold Rush.

Wells Fargo came through in a big way for Buffett. Since Berkshire’s first stake, bought through Salomon, Berkshire has raised its position steadily in the bank. By the end of 2005, Berkshire held about 5.7% of the shares.

By the end of 2006, Berkshire had raised its Wells Fargo stake to 218 million shares. At the end of 2010, Berkshire owned 359 million shares, about 6.8% of the company worth more then $10 billion. The stake was raised to 361 million shares in 2011.

Buffett’s original investment came, when there was a stigma surrounding the purchase. Because 1990 was a terrible time for banks, the very idea of buying a bank stock seemed outrageous at the time. What the word bank meant in that day was layoffs, real estate loan write-offs, slashed dividends, and some smear by association with the S&L crisis. Some pundits were suggesting that rapidly declining real estate prices could bring down the banking system.

The price-to-earnings ratio of Wells Fargo on the day of Berkshire’s original investment was a minuscule 3.7! Mr. Market was in a crummy mood.

Wells Fargo Bank is deemed by Moody’s to have a triple-A credit rating, making it the only U.S. bank to carry the top rating.

Wells Fargo has long enjoyed a good reputation. Henry Wells and William Fargo founded the company as an express delivery service and banking operation in 1852, just two years after American Express was founded. Today the company serves one in every three Americans and has 1% of the nation’s assets.

In the past, the company provided banking services as well as an express stagecoach and rail line, which transported passengers, mail, gold, silver, and currency throughout the western United States, Canada, and Mexico. Though holdups were frequent, the company earned an important spot in the commercial development of the West.

Wells Fargo separated its banking business from its express business in 1905, and the bank established a history of buying other banks. Its management was so well-respected that a number of other bankers trained under it.

Wells Fargo continued to grow, buying Crocker National in 1986, Barclays Bank of California in 1988, the California branch network of Great American Bank in 1990, and others along the way. In all, Wells Fargo has made more than 150 mergers in the last 45 years.

Today, the bank is making a big push toward electronic banking transactions and has made an effort to enter California’s supermarkets, opening small branches staffed with a few tellers and an ATM. Through the use of laptop computers, Wells Fargo has also streamlined the loan application process for small businesses.

SHORTING IT

At the time Buffett was buying Wells Fargo stock—he started with a tiny stake back in 1989—any number of bright investors, including the well-known-for-short-selling Feshbach Brothers, were shorting the stock; that is, betting it would drop. In recent years the stock has been fought over by both short sellers and value investors. “Wells Fargo’s a dead duck,” said Tom Barton, a money manager for the Feshbach Brothers. “I don’t think it’s right to call them a bankruptcy candidate, but I think it’s a teenager,” he said, meaning the stock price could fall to the teens. “It has one of the highest exposures to real estate of any bank” (The Wall Street Journal, November 1, 1990).

In one way, the short sellers were right. Soon the dividend was slashed, and reserves for bad real estate loans increased dramatically. Barron’s John Liscio weighed in saying Buffett “won’t have to worry about who spends his fortune much longer, not if he keeps trying to pick a bottom in bank stocks” (Barron’s, October 29, 1990).

George Salem, at the time an analyst with Prudential Securities Inc., was quoted in the same piece: “He picked the management that underwrites real estate the best. But one thing he didn’t realize is that even Mark Spitz [the former Olympic star] can’t swim in a hurricane in the middle of the ocean.”

So, how were Wells Fargo’s earnings at the time? Doing quite nicely, really. However, as commercial real estate prices continued to decline in 1991, Wells Fargo’s loan loss provisions rose. “Despite this extremely difficult environment, Wells Fargo remained profitable, as it has in every year this century, even during the depths of the Great Depression,” said Jim McCluskey, an investor in San Francisco.

Just what tide did Buffett see? Buffett often kids about how little he thinks about macroeconomics, but Berkshire shareholder Yves Mojonnet thinks that in the case of Wells Fargo, Buffett made macroeconomic decisions.

“I think he sees California as one of the largest industrial powers in the world, and I think he saw bank consolidation,” Mojonnet said. The “Country of California”–oriented bank is, as is any bank, heavily dependent on the local economy. California’s $750-billion economy accounts for about 13% of the nation’s gross national product and employs almost 14 million people, about 12% of the nation’s workforce. California, the world’s sixth-largest economy, is now vastly larger than the economy of France.

Some also see Buffett’s Wells Fargo stake as a Pacific Rim economic boom play.

Mojonnet also thinks Buffett saw good management, which Buffett has acknowledged. “Wells Fargo was the first to recognize bad loans to the Third World in 1986-87. Management was on top of it then and is on top of it now, cutting the dividend and increasing loan loss reserves,” Mojonnet said soon after Buffett’s purchase. Now the dividend is being increased. Buffett had once again taken an important stake in a major American enterprise, a strong franchise headed then by Buffett’s friend, bank chairman Carl Reichardt, and later by Reichardt’s successor, Paul Hazen.

Somehow, during the worst of times, as in the recession of 1990, Buffett always manages to generate the cash to become a major shareholder in the country’s best businesses. But the Wells Fargo investment did carry with it plenty of risk, plenty of exposure to commercial and real estate loans, as well as highly leveraged transactions (HLTs), during a virtual depression in real estate in the Golden State.

[EXPLETIVE DELETED] WARREN BUFFETT

In 1991, Wells Fargo stock recovered. The recovery flew in the face of the shorts, burned in part because of Buffett’s heavy buying. It was little wonder that in certain short-seller circles, T-shirts proclaimed, “[Expletive deleted] Warren Buffett.”

One more time, while almost everyone else was panicking, Buffett struck gold, this time out on the West Coast.

Regarding the Wells Fargo purchase, Forbes (April 15, 1991) quoted Munger as saying: “It’s all a bet on management. We think they will fix problems faster and better than other people.”

When cost-conscious Reichardt found out one of his executives wanted to buy a Christmas tree for the office, Reichardt told him to buy it with his own money, not the bank’s. “When we heard that, we bought more stock,” Munger said at the Berkshire annual meeting in 1991. The interest in Wells Fargo continued.

In 1991, Wells Fargo announced that Buffett was seeking permission from the Federal Reserve Board to more than double his stake to as much as 22%. Federal change-of-control laws require the Federal Reserve Board to review purchase requests if a buyer intends to acquire more than 10% of a bank holding company stock. In early August, Buffett got the approval. One reason Buffett wanted more Wells Fargo was that he knew he could buy at bargain prices.

Prudential’s George Salem kept up his sell pitch in late 1992, saying what a terrible stock Wells Fargo was: “When Warren Buffett runs out of money, the stock will plummet,” he said, adding that Buffett might as well make “donations to a good cause.”

The following item appeared in the the Atlanta Journal/Atlanta Constitution on April 30, 1993:

Calling it the “strangest stock I have ever covered,” Prudential’s Salem dropped coverage of Wells Fargo. A vociferous critic of the San Francisco–based bank, Mr. Salem has been bedeviled for years by Wells Fargo.



The analyst has carried a sell recommendation on the stock since December 1989...



Mr. Salem, an often-quoted 25-year industry veteran, insists he isn’t giving up on a bad call. “This is not a surrender of any kind. … It was a business decision based on where I thought I could spend my time more profitably. Wells Fargo is overpriced, volatile, and unpredictable and not many people from investment-land care about it.”



Buffett shared his thoughts on Wells Fargo with Forbes (October 18, 1993): “I don’t want to start touting Wells Fargo stock or anything. I just think it is a very good business, with the best management, at a reasonable price. And usually when that is the case, there is more money to be made.”

For Buffett, the stagecoach delivered. And kept delivering.

On October 18, 1995, with Buffett’s approval, Wells Fargo launched a hostile takeover of rival First Interstate Bancorp of Los Angeles. Why was this attempted, when Buffett normally doesn’t care for hostile takeovers? Probably because Buffett doesn’t control Berkshire’s investees. Buffett, except in cases of moral turpitude, backs management, which has an overriding responsibility to its owners.

The unsolicited bid offered about $10 billion in Wells Fargo stock, the biggest price in banking history at that time.

Buffett was in on the failed negotiations between leaders of Wells and First Interstate. “Mr. Buffett stated that he had studied both companies in some detail. He also stated that one could come up with positives and negatives of one company compared to the other, but in the end when evaluating each company, one would conclude that they were about equal and that accordingly the exchange ratio of .625 [of a Wells share for each First Interstate share] made sense to him.”

Wells Fargo said it could eliminate duplicate California operations and save $800 million in expenses. Indeed, it made huge cuts of First Interstate branches and personnel. First Interstate Chairman William Siart said: “I am deeply disappointed that Wells Fargo would take this uninvited action.”

First Interstate rejected the Wells Fargo offer and agreed to merge with smaller First Bank System of Minneapolis.

Gradually, as Wells Fargo stock rose faster than First Bank’s, the Wells’s offer became more attractive.

Soon thereafter, the First Interstate board told Siart to begin merger talks with Hazen. On January 24, 1996, Wells won the hostile fight for First Interstate. Wells planned to cut 7,000 jobs at First Interstate, including Siart’s. First Interstate sent letters to shareholders announcing on November 6, 1995 that it had entered into an agreement to merge with First Bank System. Indeed, Wells Fargo made huge cuts of First Interstate’s branches and personnel. In the end, 8,900 jobs were slashed.

The banking combination of Wells Fargo and First Interstate created the nation’s eighth-largest bank, with more than $100 billion in assets. Wells Fargo was the No. 3 bank in California and First Interstate was No. 2, after Bank of America. Big First Interstate had the largest multistate branch network, operating almost 1,200 branches. It had a large presence in the West and in Texas. The bank had about 26,000 employees before being bought out by Wells Fargo.

Wells Fargo paid two-thirds of a share of its stock for every First Interstate share. The final acquisition price was $11.3 billion in stock. The integration and conversion of First Interstate into Wells Fargo was completed on schedule in late 1996—one of the fastest completions of large bank mergers.

But not everything went perfectly: “Two-hundred fifty-seven California locations were closed over two weekends in July and August. To add to the logistical challenge, more than two dozen of those moves had to be completed in total darkness, with only flashlights, candles, and generators because the largest power outage ever to hit the West Coast struck on Saturday, August 10.”

The merger triggered account errors, long lines, and employee defections. Paul Hazen finally said of the merger: “It has not been a pleasant year for me and not one that I’ve enjoyed” (Business Week, June 9, 1997).

On August 21, 1997, reports made national television news that Berkshire had sold its entire stake in Wells Fargo, sending the stock down sharply. (Talk about managing your own impact!) It turned out, however, that Berkshire had not sold its whole stake but had received permission from the SEC to keep its holdings of Wells Fargo confidential. Berkshire remained a substantial investor in Wells Fargo.

On June 8, 1998, Wells Fargo and Minneapolis-based Norwest Corp. agreed to a merger which formed one of the largest banking giants in the western U.S. Paul Hazen became chairman of the combined banks and Norwest’s Richard Kovacevich became president and CEO. He had been a star pitcher on the mid-1960s Stanford University baseball team. (He was recruited by the New York Yankees, but a torn rotator cuff ended his baseball career.) At Stanford he was tied for number one in the business school in 1967.

Norwest bought Wells Fargo, but the Wells Fargo name remained.

Buffett later told Kovacevich he hadn’t thought that Wells and Norwest were an ideal fit, but the merger went smoothly (Forbes, August 16, 2004).

The new Wells Fargo, now the nation’s fourth largest bank and the number one mortgage originator, has about 160,900 employees, assets of more than $600 billion, 23 million customers, and more than 3,000 branches. It serves 23 states from Ohio to California. Wells Fargo is the No.1 Internet bank, with five million online accounts.

Wells, estimated to finance one of every nine homes in the U.S., has a large home-equity loan business and owns Acordia, one of the nation’s largest independent property-and-casualty insurance agencies.

The 1998 Wells Fargo Annual Report projects that 50% of the U.S. population growth in the next decade is expected to come from the states it serves. The report said, “California alone is the world’s seventh largest small business market and the nation’s largest farm economy.” California is home to one of every nine Americans.

In 1999, acquisition-minded Wells Fargo arranged to buy National Bancorp of Alaska, the largest bank in Alaska, for about $907 million in stock. In 2000, Wells Fargo also bought First Security Corp. of Salt Lake City for about $2.9 billion in Wells Fargo stock. It has continued expanding by buying a string of banks in recent years.

In 2003, Wells Fargo bought Seattle-based Pacific Northwest Bancorp for about $591 million in stock to expand its business in Washington and Oregon, and Two Rivers Corp., a private bank based in Grand Junction, Colorado. In addition to these, in 2004, Wells Fargo also agreed to buy the Strong Financial mutual fund company in a private transaction following a mutual fund trading scandal at Strong.

In 2005, Berkshire again requested confidentiality for its Wells position. In 2006, Wells Fargo bought Washington Mutual’s entire portfolio of government mortgage servicing and a portion of the fixed-rate servicing portfolio, totaling about $140 billion and representing 1.3 million customers. As part of the transaction, Washington Mutual transferred its Milwaukee servicing operations to Wells Fargo. The price of the deal was not disclosed.

As banking stocks were being slaughtered in 2008, Wells Fargo shocked Wall Street on July 16, 2008, when it reported surprisingly strong earnings and increased its dividend. The stock soared 33% from its lows of about $21 a share, which bolstered the entire stock market that day. The well-run bank had all along limited its exposure to subprime loans.

WELLS BUYS WACHOVIA CORP.

Wells announced on October 3, 2008, that it would buy embattled Wachovia Corp. for about $15 billion, sweeping by an earlier offer from Citigroup for Wachovia’s banking interests. The buyout was completed at the end of 2008.

The Citigroup offer had come via a letter of intent signed at 4:30 a.m. on September 28. Citigroup was left at the altar by a 2 a.m. call on October 3 from Wachovia CEO Robert Steel to Citigroup CEO Vikram Pandit. Citigroup said it planned to challenge the Wells deal which had the stamp of a signed definitive contract.

As an aside, that week Buffett solved the riddle he had earlier posed by saying that he had been recently buying the stock of either American Express or Wells Fargo.

Answer: Wells Fargo.

Wells Fargo and most all bank stocks dropped sharply in the months afterwards. However, the Wells-Wachovia merger created a giant bank with 276,000 employees, 48 million customers, 11,005 banking stores, 12,260 ATMs, $774 billion in deposits, and $1.4 trillion in assets.

There is a song from a Meredith Wilson 1951 musical, The Music Man,” entitled, “The Wells Fargo Wagon.” The first line is: “O-ho the Wells Fargo wagon is a-coming soon, oh please let it be for me.”

The Story of Warren Buffett



The Wells Fargo Stagecoach

(Courtesy of Wells Fargo Bank)

Of Permanent Value Wells Fargo

Stagecoach Gift

Richard Kovacevich and Paul Hazen gave Buffett a hand-carved 2-foot-high stagecoach which he keeps in his office. Wells now serves one-third of the nation’s households, 10% of its small businesses, and 70% of it Fortune 500 companies.



(Courtesy of Wells Fargo Bank)



Carl Reichardt

Former Wells Fargo Chairman Carl Reichardt came out of retirement in 2001 to head Ford Motor Co.’s financial operations.

Paul Hazen

Longtime CEO Paul Hazen retired from Wells Fargo in 2001.



(Photos courtesy of

Wells Fargo)

Wells Fargo The Story of Warren Buffett



(AP Photo/Stuart Ramson)

Receiving Merger News

Chairman and CEO of Wells Fargo Paul Hazen, left, and Chairman and CEO of Norwest Richard M. Kovacevich, look over The Wall Street Journal after announcing a merger between their two companies. The announcement was made in New York on Monday, June 8, 1998. Wells Fargo & Co. and Norwest Corp. agreed to a $34-billion merger that would create one of the largest banks in the United States. Hazen retired in 2001 and Kovacevich became chairman in addition to already being CEO of Wells Fargo. He gave up the CEO job in 2007 to John Stumph.

Of Permanent Value Wells Fargo



John Stumph

Stumph tells a story of having dinner at Gorat’s in Omaha in 2007 and that Buffett poured salt on his food vigorously with “each hand” so that it was coming down like snow. Stumph asked him what his doctor thought. Buffett joked that he doesn’t see doctors. Then Buffett said he did see a doctor once about his colon, part of which was removed, and he came out “a semicolon.”



Locked and Loaded

Buffett loading about 300 million shares of Wells Fargo into the company’s transportation system

(Courtesy of Wells Fargo)



Wells Fargo Logo



234





SUNTRUST BANKS


For years Berkshire has been an investor in the stock of SunTrust Banks, a

well-regarded bank based in Atlanta, but some shares were sold in 2007. Berkshire’s 3.5 million shares in this bank amounted to roughly a $200

million stake. By the end of 2009, the position had been lowered to 2.4 million shares.

SunTrust, the eighth-largest U.S. bank, ended 2004 with assets of about $159 billion and had profits of $1.6 billion. The bank holding company has more than 1,700 retail branches and 2,500 ATMs located mainly in Florida, Georgia, Maryland, Tennessee, Virginia, and Washington, D.C.

SunTrust has a long-standing relationship with the Coca-Cola Company and has held about 8% of its stock: owning about 2% of the stock and holding in fiduciary accounts approximately 6%. SunTrust came by its Coke stock for $110,000—less than half a cent a share—in 1919 when the old Trust Company of Georgia took stock for its services to help underwrite Coke’s first stock offering. SunTrust owned about 48 million Coke shares before it sold 4.5 million in 2007. Rumor had it that more would be sold in 2008.

SunTrust’s other long-term relationships with Coca-Cola are board member connections and formula security issues. Coke’s CEO Neville Isdell sits on SunTrust’s board and former SunTrust CEO James Williams sits on Coke’s board. As for formula security, a vault in one of SunTrust’s Atlanta offices contains the only written copy of Coca-Cola’s formula. Supposedly, the handwritten sheet is not available to anyone except by vote of the Coca-Cola board. Only a few employees, who never travel together, know the secret formula.

In 2003, SunTrust bought Lighthouse Financial Services and SunAmerica Mortgage Corp. In 2004, SunTrust agreed to buy Memphis, Tennessee–based National Commerce Financial Corp. for nearly $7 billion.



SunTrust Logo

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value SunTrust Banks



235





GANNETT


On December 15, 1994, Gannett—the nation’s largest newspaper publisher—announced that Berkshire owned 4.9% of its stock.

Buffett had returned to a large media concern as the stock traded near a low after years of sluggishness in the newspaper industry. Buffett’s $335 million investment buffed up his stake in media company holdings, which includesThe Buffalo News and The Washington Post.

Arlington, Virginia-based Gannett publishes USA Today, the largest newspaper in the country as of 2007, with an average daily circulation of 2.3 million and more than 25 print sites. USA Today has been dubbed “McPaper,” by some, a newspaper offering news “McNuggets.” The newspaper is known for short stories with short items set off by bullet marks. “Many critics, however, thought it simply dumbed down the news. Former editor John Quinn once joked that USA Today had become famous for ‘bringing new depth to the definition of shallow’ and that if it ever won a Pulitzer Prize, it would be for ‘best investigative paragraph’” (The Washington Post, August 11, 1997).

Gannett also publishes 85 daily newspapers and almost 900 nondaily publications. In addition, it operates 23 television stations.

Long headed by John Curley until Douglas McCorkindale took over in 2000 and then Craig Dubow in 2006, the company has about 46,100 employees and 8,000 stockholders. Berkshire is the biggest stockholder.

Again, Berkshire had another toehold in a major media business which buys back its own stock.

So what’s the strategy here? Maybe it’s to buy all companies beginning with G. Maybe Berkshire’s next annual report will be in green.

In 1995, Gannett bought Multimedia of Greenville, South Carolina; and in 1999, Gannett paid $1.5 billion to buy Newsquest, Britain’s third-largest newspaper publisher, with a portfolio at the time of the purchase of about 180 titles. Publications included 17 daily newspapers with a combined circulation of about 460,000. One of its nondaily publications, Berrow’s Worcester Journal, is the oldest continuously published English-language newspaper in the world.

Now Gannett also owns News Communications & Media, a regional U.K. chain; the U.S. papers once owned by Thompson Corp. of Canada; and Central Newspapers, a U.S. chain which includes the Arizona Republic and Indianapolis Star.

Gannett owns a 42.5% stake in CareerBuilder.com, the largest online job site in the U.S., and has stakes in ShopLocal.com and Topix.net.

A 1996 filing for 1995 showed Berkshire owned 6.9 million shares of Gannett. A 1997 filing showed Berkshire had reduced its Gannett stake in 1996 to 2.4 million shares and, by the fourth quarter of 1997, to 4.3 million shares on a split-adjusted basis.

Berkshire owned 3.4 million Gannett shares at the end of 2003, which is close to Berkshire’s 2008 holdings. Gannett stock fell terribly in the financial meltdown of 2008, hit also by the rapid deterioration of the newspaper industry to online outlets.

By the end of 2009, the stake in Gannett had been reduced to 2.2 million shares.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Read All About It

USA Today, which came into being September 14, 1982, has had its backers and critics, but its influence has been great. Shown above are weather pages of USA Today, The Washington Post, and The Washington Times, right, which are similar, thanks in part to USA Today’s original design.

(Photo courtesy of AP/Wide World Photos)

Of Permanent Value Gannett



236





MOODY’S


By early 2000, Berkshire had accumulated an almost 15% stake in Dun & Bradstreet, which separated into two companies on September 30, 2000, through a tax-free distribution to shareholders. Thus Moody’s and Dun & Bradstreet became stand-alone companies.

The split was designed to bring in more value for shareholders as the two enterprises worked on their own futures with their own money.

Moody’s, the world’s second-largest credit-rating agency, has been around since 1900. That’s nine years before founder John Moody invented the famous AAA to C ratings, which are still used in assessing creditworthiness in 100 countries. Moody’s is a leading provider of credit ratings, research, and analysis of debt instruments and other securities in the capital markets. It is a direct beneficiary of the long-term growth in the capital markets. Investing in Moody’s is a bet on the growth of debt capital markets.

Moody’s has enjoyed a monopoly-like position since 1975, when the SEC worried that unreliable rating agencies could hurt the markets. Strict regulations essentially allowed only Moody’s, S&P, and Fitch to be in the business.

The ratings on credit reports are a major item in determining if a company or government can sell bonds and what the interest rates will be for investors.

Moody’s ratings cover an estimated $30 trillion of debt securities globally. According to Moody’s 2003 Annual Report, that includes ratings of some 150,000 corporate and government securities; 75,000 public finance obligations in the U.S.; 10,000 corporate and financial institutional relationships; and 100 sovereign nations.

Moody’s 3,500 employees have client relationships with 4,500 of the world’s largest corporations, and its operating margins had run until recent years at a steady 48%.

As of 2008, Berkshire owned 48 million shares, or 19%, of Moody’s but sold some of its stake in the business information company Dun & Bradstreet in 2001. Dun & Bradstreet has the largest commercial global database in the world, which contains data on more than 62 million businesses in more than 200 countries—for 150,000 customers. The database is updated a million times a day.

Moody’s most direct competitor is Standard & Poor’s, a division of McGraw-Hill. S&P claims about 41% of the market. Moody’s has about a 38% share, and Fitch about 14%. The rest of the market includes research firm A. M. Best and foreign rating services. Munger said at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2000 that “Moody’s is like Harvard, a self-fulfilling prophecy,” meaning the brand name is strong enough to assure success.

Well, not quite. With the housing collapse and the credit crunch, all rating agencies came under fire for placing top ratings on many securities which ultimately plummeted in value because of questionably high ratings on various financial products.

With the housing slump and subsequent credit crisis, all ratings agencies came under fire. At Moody’s, some top officers handling structured debt were let go.

The crisis became full-blown in 2008, when billions of write-downs credit

losses, and ratings became increasingly suspect.

Moody’s chairman and CEO Raymond McDaniel said (BusinessWeek, May 25, 2007) he underestimated losses in subprime loans in 2006, but that the company was quick to adjust its ratings criteria. Still, Moody’s shares plummeted in 2007 as a credit crisis threatened the most lucrative part of its business. Moody’s earnings headed lower in late 2007.

After the third quarter earnings were released, Moody’s was quoted: “There continues to be significant stress in some important sectors of the debt market. The clarity we have around likely debt market activity is not high right now, particularly for the structured finance business, which has been the high growth business.”

Back at Wesco’s Annual Meeting in 2002, Munger said regarding Moody’s:

Most of the bonds that Berkshire buys, Warren Buffett is picking himself. Warren does not need Moody’s to buy bonds. He does not rely on the Moody’s rating when he buys the bond. But he also said he thought that Moody’s ratings were very useful to the world. And I would agree. And that’s because not everybody is a Warren Buffett.



I sat down once with Louie Vincenti. And we wrote the regulations for the state of California that governed the investment in preferred stocks by savings & loans. We wanted to write regulations that were foolproof, under which no savings & loan could get in trouble if it stayed within the regulations. That we did. And we specifically referred to Moody’s ratings in defining what was permissible. This example shows that we regard the ratings services as very useful in places. We’re glad they exist. And we’re glad we own part of Moody’s. But that doesn’t mean that Warren Buffett looks at the Moody’s rating in deciding which bond to buy.



Buffett was criticized in a piece in The New York Times (March 18, 2009) for not speaking out more against Moody’s during the credit crisis when many of the agency’s ratings were called into question.

After Moody’s downgraded Berkshire’s AAA, Buffett said at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2009, “I was disappointed when Moody’s downgraded us … we think we’re AAA, and we run it so nobody is stronger than us. We treat our obligations as sacred. I would say that Moody’s downgrade won’t be material for Berkshire, but still it irritates me.”

Munger said, “At least they showed some independence. I think the next change at Moody’s will be in the opposite direction because we deserve it, and they are smart.”

In July 2009, Berkshire began selling its Moody’s stake and by December 2009, had reduced its holdings to 31.8 million shares. In 2010, Berkshire continued the selling of Moody’s bit by bit.

On June 3, 2010, Buffett was forced to testify before the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission about Moody’s and the credit-ratings industry.

Buffett said the agencies were overwhelmed by the “greatest bubble I’ve seen in my life.” Buffett said about everyone, including himself, believed that housing prices—couldn’t fall. “I was wrong on it, too,” he added (The Wall Street Journal, June 3, 2010).

The Story of Warren Buffett



Raymond W. McDaniel, Moody’s Chairman and CEO

Of Permanent Value Moody’s



237





COSTCO AND ITS FISH SUPPLIER


Berkshire disclosed on April 2, 2001, that as of September 30, 2000, it owned 24.1 million shares of Costco, or 5.4% of its stock.

Berkshire did not list any Costco shares as of December 31, 2000, possibly making use of an SEC waiver that allowed Berkshire to report the Costco year-end holdings on a confidential basis. Costco was not listed in Berkshire’s 2001 Annual Report, where equity positions of more than $500 million were listed.

A delayed filing showed that Berkshire had lowered its stake to 5.3 million shares by the end of 2002. The stake was still 5.3 million shares as of September 30, 2003.

Costco CEO Jim Sinegal was quoted in Money (August 2002): “I believe they bought some and sold some within a relatively short period. I think it was the good old-fashioned profit motive. The American Way.”

Shares of Costco fell 22% on May 24, 2000, after it missed its quarterly earnings forecasts for the first time (BY A PENNY!) since 1955.

Costco is the largest U.S. warehouse-club retailer. It is the sixth-largest retailer in the U.S. and the ninth-largest in the world. Berkshire Vice Chairman Charles Munger is not only a fan and investor of Costco, but also a customer (golf balls, meats, wines, and clothes), and board member. Munger said at Berkshire’s 1999 Annual Meeting: “I’m such an admirer of the Costco culture and the Costco system that I’m not sure I’m totally rational. I love the place. That isn’t so bad in life—to find a couple of things you love.” Bill Gates’ father, William H. Gates II, is also on the Costco board.

Munger said, “I’m a big admirer of Wal-Mart, but I admire Costco even more. Virtually none of the sins of modern capitalism are at Costco” (USA Today, September 24, 2004).

Buffett said Munger urged him to buy Costco shares, but the price rose and he missed out. Clearly the price came back in Buffett’s range because Berkshire loaded up.

Costco is the result of the 1993 merger between the Price Club, founded in 1976, and Costco Companies founded in 1984. Sol Price, a legendary leader in the warehouse shopping concept, managed Price Company. The idea behind Costco is to sell a large volume of goods and achieve a high inventory turnover.

Costco does not advertise, has no public relations department, pays top wages and offers good benefits. Members renew their memberships at a rate of 86%.

The main competitors for Costco are Sam’s Club, owned by Wal-Mart, and BJ’s Wholesale. Wal-Mart may rule retailing, but in the niche of warehouse clubs, Costco is king. In 2008, Costco had sales of about $70 billion, which was considerably more than Sam’s Club. Costco stores reaped almost double the amount of Sam’s Club.

The company operates about 550 warehouses in the United States, Europe, Asia, and Mexico. The chain is the United State’s largest wine retailer, selling $100 million of wine a year, not to mention 55,000 rotisserie chickens a day. Even chef Julia Child bought meat at Costco.

COSTCO BY THE NUMBERS

• Sells enough toilet tissue daily to supply the total U.S. population for 14 days

• Sold more than 18 million pounds of salmon last fiscal year

• Is the largest purveyor of USDA Choice beef in U.S

• Sold 217 million bananas last fiscal year

• Averages $100 million in sales per year per warehouse (twice the industry average)

(Anchorage Daily News, January 6, 2002)

“I like bargain securities. Why shouldn’t I like bargain golf balls?” says Munger. “Here’s the difference between Sam’s and Costco,” says Munger. “We have a live Sam Walton [James Sinegal] who’s still there and Wal-Mart doesn’t” (Fortune, November 24, 2003).

The gods do not deduct from man’s allotted span the hours spent in fishing.

(Babylonian Proverb)



The Costco Experience

(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Move over Wal-Mart

This is the first Costco store in Omaha, located at 120th Street and Dodge.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Costco and Its Fish Supplier



The Old Man and the Sea

by Ernest Hemingway

(Photo

by Mary

Porter)



Costco’s Fish Supplier

(Photo by Paul Chesley)



238





A BONANZA FROM PETROCHINA


In April 2003, reports from Hong Kong indicated Berkshire had raised its stake in shares of PetroChina, China’s largest oil producer. PetroChina puts out about two-thirds of China’s crude oil production reserves and sells 80% of its natural gas. Beijing-based PetroChina (also Asia’s biggest oil company) is the world’s sixth-largest oil company.

Buffett told Liz Claman, the daytime anchor of Fox Business Network that the 11% stake was sold entirely in a series of sales in 2007 [for a $3.5 billion profit], (October 5, 2007). He said his decision to sell was based “100 percent” on the share price, not that human rights groups had been calling for him to sell the stake because PetroChina’s parent company develops oil fields in Sudan, which the United States condemned for supporting genocide in the African nation’s Darfur region.

After Buffett sold, PetroChina stock continued to soar. “I sold a little too soon,” Buffett lamented to Claman.

Buffett also told Claman about his decision to buy PetroChina stock: “I sat there in my office and read the annual report, which fortunately was in English, and I decided it was a very good company.... I sat there and thought to myself, ‘This company is worth about $100 billion,’ and it was trading for about $35 billion.

“Berkshire Hathaway invested in PetroChina because it was cheap, not because it was ‘China,’” Buffett said. Of interest, a good portion of the investment was made during the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) epidemic in China.

PetroChina’s P/E ratio when Buffett bought in was 6.3. Exxon and BP were trading at 17 times estimated earnings at the time. Buffett said PetroChina, having a similar profile to Exxon, was producing about 80% as much oil as Exxon but was selling far more cheaply.

Berkshire’s cost basis was reported to be $1.65 a share in Hong Kong dollars or under $500 million. At the end of 2003, PetroChina’s stock traded at about HK$4.32. By that time, the stake had already more than doubled, and also provided a hefty dividend. As the price of oil rose and PetroChina’s operations flourished, the stock continued to rise mightily through 2007 and beyond.

With its deep pockets, PetroChina has purchased oil and gas assets overseas as China tries to diversify its supply away from the Middle East, which has accounted for about half of the country’s oil imports. PetroChina has a handful of major projects with multinationals, including Royal Dutch/Shell Group, Russia’s Gazprom, and ExxonMobil.

The People’s Republic of China uses more than 5 million barrels of oil a day, a figure that is bound to rise. As a buffer for that need, PetroChina has proven reserves of more than 11 billion barrels of oil and 22/57 trillion cubic feet of natural gas. It owns 55% of a huge West-to-East pipeline and $2.5 billion Russia-China oil pipeline. PetroChina operates 29 refineries, 17 chemical plants, and 17,400 gas stations. It has about 400,000 employees. PetroChina had a net income of $16 billion in 2005, and paid out $7 billion in dividends.

At Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2003, Buffett said of the investment: “We think we understand the oil business in China reasonably well. We don’t make any great judgments about China.”

Berkshire sold some of its PetroChina holdings in the second quarter of 2003. A PetroChina spokesman was quoted as saying the sale of the American Depository Receipts occurred before Buffett doubled his holdings in the company’s Hong Kong–listed shares to 13.35%, a stake worth [in August 2003] $692 million.

China is no exception. “You have to be right on 20 things for China to be profitable,” he told a group of Wharton business students on October 10, 2003. So why did Buffett invest in PetroChina? Buffett said, “We bought PetroChina because it was extremely cheap.”

Buffett later said he saw that PetroChina was committed to paying out 45% of earnings in cash dividends. “You could tell by the way they wrote about it in the annual report that it was a serious commitment. They quoted the dividend payout to 12 decimal points.”

Unfortunately, a well blowout at a PetroChina plant, in southwest China on December 23, 2003, spewed toxic fumes and killed 243 people and injured many more. Investigators blamed the disaster on a negligent drilling crew who broke open a gas well and dismantled safety equipment that might have been used.

Even in the aftermath of that catastrophe, PetroChina produced huge profits and a higher stock price. After glowing results in early 2005, the company’s CFO read a message from Buffett: “As you know, Berkshire Hathaway owns over US$1 billion worth of PetroChina shares. Other than PetroChina, my company does not hold shares of any other oil company. PetroChina has fully fulfilled its promises made to investors during its listing. I’d like to give you my special congratulations.”

At Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2005, Buffett offered a short report on PetroChina: “I read the [PetroChina’s] annual report. They produce 3% of the world’s oil, about 50% as much as ExxonMobil. Last year, it [PetroChina] earned $12 billion in profit—only maybe five U.S. companies earned as much last year.

“The total market value when I bought it was around $35 billion, so I only paid three times last year’s earnings. The company does not have unusually large amounts of leverage and—this is unusual—has a stated policy of paying out 45% of its earnings in cash...

“The Chinese government owns 90% and we own 1.3%, so if we vote with them, together we control the business.... I simply read the report. I had no contact with management nor did I attend any management presentation. I just sat in my office and invested $400 million, which is worth $1.2 billion in 2006.”

Buffett told the story of his PetroChina investment in January 2007 to a group of University of Georgia’s Terry School of Business students including Sham Gad, who made the following notes:

Buffett continued:

“I was considering buying [PetroChina], but was also looking at Yukos in Russia. I decided I’d rather be in China than Russia. I like the investment climate better in China. In July [2002], the owner of Yukos, Mikhail Khodorkovsky (at the time the richest man in Russia) had breakfast with me and was asking my consultation if they should expand into New York and if this was too onerous considering the SEC regs. Four months later, Khodorkovsky was in prison. Putin put him in. He took on Putin and lost. His decision on geopolitical thinking was wrong and now the company is finished. PetroChina was the superior investment choice. Forty-five percent was a crazy amount of dividends to offer but China kept to its word. I’m never quite as happy as I am in the U.S. because the laws are more uncertain elsewhere, but the point is to buy things cheap.”



Buffett added,

“It’s impossible to grade marketable securities on moral activity. Berkshire Hathaway has and will buy what trades, but will not buy companies that engage in certain behaviors. PetroChina owns 40% of the oil in the Sudan that is government-owned. If they did not own it, someone else would. Also, you have to keep in mind, if PetroChina did not buy it, it’s possible the Sudan would own 100% of the oil rights, and that’s not so good either.”



After the sale of Berkshire’s entire stake in PetroChina, Buffett wrote about it in Berkshire’s 2007 Annual Report: “We paid the IRS tax of $1.2 billion on our PetroChina gain. The sum paid all costs of the U.S. government—defense, social security, you name it—for about four hours.”

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value A Bonanza from PetroChina



239





ANHEUSER-BUSCH INBEV


“Beer is proof that God loves us and wants us to be happy.” (Ben Franklin)

After a protracted battle, Anheuser-Busch announced on July 14, 2008, that it would sell to Belgium beer maker InBev for $52 billion, the largest cash buyout in history. This buyout was of particular interest to Berkshire shareholders because just a few years earlier, Anheuser-Busch had been added to Berkshire’s portfolio. In a decided move toward beverages other than Coke products, Berkshire bought a sizeable chunk of another branded consumer products company.

Anheuser-Busch, home to the “King of Beers,” announced on April 21, 2005, that it had learned that Berkshire had become a “significant shareholder” in the company. The stake, revealed on November 21, 2005, turned out to be 44.7 million shares, or approximately $2 billion. Later the stake was lowered.

The history of Anheuser-Busch extends back to the 19th century. In 1860, Eberhard Anheuser bought the Bavarian Brewery in St. Louis; and after 16 years, renamed it E. Anheuser and Co. His son-in-law, Adolphus Busch, helped create Budweiser. The company’s name was changed again in 1879 to Anheuser-Busch, and a series of Busches led the company throughout the 20th century. In 2002, a non-Busch, Patrick Stokes, was named president and CEO; but in 2006, a Busch again took the reins: August Busch IV was named president and CEO.

Budweiser and Michelob are the company’s main products. Budweiser accounts for one of every five beers sold in the United States. In all, Anheuser-Busch products account for 48% of the U.S. beer market, with shipments of 102.3 million barrels in 2006.

Anheuser-Busch, which recently found success with Bud Light Lime, was dubbed by Fortune in March 2008 as America’s and the world’s number one most-admired company in the beverage industry for the fifth straight year. At the same time, the company was America’s number one brewer and held a 50% share of Grupo Modelo, Mexico’s leading brewer. Modelo makes Corona, the number one import brand in the United States.

International in scope, Anheuser-Busch sells beer in more than 30 countries and holds a strong position in China with 10,000 employees (of its total 31,435) and 64 breweries. Thirteen of these breweries came through the acquisition of Harbin, whose flagship brewery in China makes Budweiser. Also, Anheuser-Busch owns 27% of China’s Tsingtao Brewery.

As of 2006, Anheuser-Busch owns Rolling Rock Beer and has agreements to import Grolsch and Tiger beer as well. In addition, there are also agreements for importing InBev’s European brands including Beck’s, Bass, Stella Artois, and Hoegaarden lines. InBev, operating from Belgium and Brazil, was the world’s largest brewer by volume and by stock market value even before the buyout.

Beer is not the only beverage interest of Anheuser-Busch. In the last two decades, the company began to dabble in the energy drink realm. As of 2007, it also owns a 20% stake in Icelandic Water Holdings, a distributor of spring waters bottled in Iceland.

Anheuser-Busch is also one of the largest theme park operators in the United States, owning SeaWorld, Busch Gardens, and other adventure park operations. More than 22 million people visited the family adventure parks in 2007.

On the more practical side, Anheuser-Busch is a major maker of aluminum cans, lids, glass bottles, and labels. With a strong environmental focus, it is the world’s largest recycler of aluminum containers.

Through the years, the company has established a tradition of helping communities cope with natural disasters. The company donated more than 6 million cans of drinking water to hurricane victims in 2005. In May 2008, the company announced it would be donating more than $1.6 million in aid to victims of the devastating earthquake that took place earlier that month in China. The donation was to include $500,000 financial assistance and 425,000 cases of bottled drinking water.

Anheuser-Busch spends more than $400 million a year on advertising to keep its main products before the consumers with successful and memorable ads, including the “Whassup!” campaign and those featuring Bud Light party animal Spuds McKenzie; talking lizards, Louie and Frank; and the famous Clydesdale horses.

Buffett’s choice to buy into this solid company was not a spur-of-the-moment decision. He had read the Anheuser-Busch annual reports for the previous 25 years before investing in the recession-proof company with steady dividends and a strong record of share buybacks. Buffett’s purchase came at a time when Anheuser-Busch’s beer sales in the United States were sluggish and earnings estimates were being cut as the industry faced a shift to wine and distilled spirits and competition from Miller Brewing Company. Indeed, SABMiller beefed up its competitive edge in 2007 when it and Molson Coors Brewing combined their U.S. divisions to form a joint venture called MillerCoors with 30% of the U.S. market.

Although Berkshire’s initial stake in Anheuser-Busch, taken in 2005, was 44.7 million shares, Buffett soon began to lower it. At year-end 2005, Berkshire’s stake was down to 43.9 million shares, which was still 5.6% of the company’s shares (more than the Busch family owned); but by the end of 2007, the stake had been lowered to 4.8%. In 2007, Anheuser-Busch had sales of $19 billion and net income of $2.1 billion, up 5.7% and 7.6%, respectively, from 2006 figures.

Buffett sold all but 13 million shares in the second quarter of 2008, reaping about $61 a share, but not getting the full value of the later takeover offer. Afterwards Buffett said he sold early because he was not certain the deal would go through.

On June 12, 2008, InBev launched an uninvited bid to buy Anheuser-Busch for $46.4 billion. The combination would create a brewer with annual sales of $36 billion. Right after the InBev offer, Anheuser-Busch opened talks with Grupo Modelo about a possible combination that might ward off the InBev bid.

The bid itself naturally raised opposition in the Gateway City, home of the St. Louis Cardinals, with some protesters chanting, “Hell, no, Bud won’t go.” Missouri Senator Claire McCaskill said she opposed the deal. InBev CEO Carlos Brito tried to soothe the city’s concerns by indicating St. Louis would likely be the combined company’s U.S. headquarters.

Reports surfaced that Buffett was backing the InBev offer, but Buffett told CNBC’s Becky Quick (June 25, 2008) that he had not talked with either side about the bid. Anheuser-Busch rejected InBev’s first friendly offer of $65 a share; InBev then turned around with a hostile offer. Both sides then began talks, and ultimately InBev bought Anheuser-Busch for $70 a share.

CEO Brito was at the New York office of Sullivan & Cromwell, which represented InBev, when he learned the Anheuser board had approved the deal. The Wall Street Journal (July 15, 2008) reported this reaction: “Everyone in the room cheered. Mr. Brito cracked open a cold bottle of Budweiser.”

TIn St. Louis the response was not quite as jovial. The headline in the St. Louis Post-Dispatch on the day the deal went through (July 14, 2008) sadly blared, “Farewell to the King,” even though by that time InBev had clearly stated plans to use St. Louis as its North American headquarters.

Carlos Brito was slated to head the combined company, whereas Anheuser-Busch CEO August Busch IV was to step back to a non-executive role but remain on the board.

The deal created the combined company of Anheuser-Busch InBev, the world’s largest brewer (now by far), and the third largest consumer products company after Procter and Gamble, and then Nestle. The deal closed by the end of 2008, and brought Buffett some beer money.

“Good puzzle would be cross Dublin without passing a pub...”

(Leopold Bloom in James Joyce’s Ulysses)



Anheuser-Busch

2007 Annual Report

(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Travels with Barley

Anheuser is a valuable

trademark.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Anheuser-Busch InBev



Irish Pub

This pub was made famous through its mention in James Joyce’s novel Ulysses: “He entered Davy Byrne’s Moral pub. He doesn’t chat. Stands a drink now and then.” Irish author Samuel Beckett once lived upstairs.

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)



240





DIAGEO


With reports that Berkshire bought 15 million shares of European liquor company Diageo in August 2005, Buffett had apparently returned to a company he has long tracked—Guinness.

Back in 1991, Buffett bought 31.2 million shares, or about $265 million, of London-based Guinness, one of the world’s largest purveyors of liquor. That was Buffett’s first significant direct investment and his first major brand-name purchase since Coke and Gillette.

Guinness started in 1759 when Arthur Guinness leased a small brewery in Dublin, Ireland, and began making ales. Guinness is known for beer, particularly Guinness Stout and Harp beers worldwide and Budweiser and Carlsberg beers in Ireland. Guinness is also well-known for its Bailey’s Irish Cream; Scotch whiskey brands, such as Johnnie Walker, Bell’s, and White Horse lines; Gordon’s vodka and gin; and Tanqueray gin.

The company has grown steadily, riding the trend of mixed drinks. Also, the sales of such brands as Johnnie Walker have boomed in Asia.

Guinness is also recognized for publishing the Guinness Book of Records. This giant tome contains a multitude of facts ranging from trivia about the first ladies of the United States to such records as who has won the most Tony Awards and the world’s largest octopus, paper clip, and watermelon (268.8 pounds as of 2006). Guinness has been slow to deliver the goods some years, and it is not known whether Buffett sold his stock at some point and re-entered at a later time.

In any case, by 2005, Buffett held 15 million shares of Diageo, the company that was formed by the merger of Guinness and consumer products giant Grand Metropolitan in 1997.

Grand Met owned such high-profile businesses as Burger King, Pillsbury, Haagen-Dazs, J&B Rare Scotch, and Smirnoff. Several of the nonbeverage businesses were sold off after the merger, as Diageo decided to focus solely on premium drinks.

The name Diageo was made up from the Latin word dia (day) and the Greek word geo (world) and was chosen to reflect a company whose products are consumed every day throughout the world. And indeed, the combined Diageo has become the world’s leading premium drinks business.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Diageo



241





USG


Berkshire has been a longtime shareholder of USG Corp., the building-materials maker known for its Sheetrock brand which it invented. In early 2006, Berkshire revealed it owned about 6.5 million shares of that company. Berkshire more than doubled its stake later that same year and ended 2006 with 17 million shares, 19% of USG Corp.

USG, the modern version of U.S. Gypsum founded in 1901, is North America’s largest maker of drywall, and it also produces finishers, floors, ceilings, and roofs. Its building materials include gypsum wallboard, ceiling grid, and ceiling tile for residential and commercial construction. USG dominates the wallboard industry with a 25% market share.

USG, having used asbestos in some of its products from 1930 to 1972, had long been mired in lawsuits as a result of huge asbestos claims. In the face of such claims, the company filed for bankruptcy protection in 2001.

As many investors began short-selling the stock, Berkshire actually made a little extra cash on USG, loaning some of its shares to those shorting the stock. From August 2001 to February 2003, Berkshire earned $901,244 in interest in 20 short-term stock loans at 4% to 6% (The Wall Street Journal, February 15, 2006). USG continued to operate under the protection of Chapter 11 until presenting its reorganization plan in 2006. The company had already weathered two bankruptcies, one in 1993 and another in 2001.

As a part of the plan in 2006, USG proposed to raise $1.8 billion in an equity rights offering. In this offering, shareholders would be provided transferable rights to double their share of ownership at a price of $40 per share, which was considerably less than the going rate at the time.

Berkshire agreed to backstop the offering with a hell-or-high-water commitment. Berkshire committed to escrow $1.8 billion to absorb any unexercised rights, agreeing to buy no less than 6.5 million shares of USG common stock and up to 44.9 million more shares. Even if industry conditions changed or the stock market took a dive, Berkshire was prepared to take what exiting shareholders might reject. Berkshire was paid a fee of $67 million for backstopping this rights offering.

Berkshire upheld its guarantee but ended up having to purchase only 6.97 million shares in its role as backup buyer. That raised Berkshire’s ownership stake in USG to 15%. Before the end of 2006, Berkshire bought more shares, bringing its total to 17 million shares, as mentioned, amounting to ownership of almost one-fifth of USG.

The 2006 proposal for the rights offering allowed USG to emerge from bankruptcy without taking on more debt and with its reputation well intact. The settlement of about 250,000 asbestos claims was financed by that sale of $1.8 billion in shares.

The landmark bankruptcy settlement preserved shareholders’ equity, and allowed the company to shed its bankruptcy status and emerge with investment-grade ratings. All creditors except asbestos claimants were paid in full with interest, and a sizeable amount ($900 million with plans for as much as $5 billion) was allotted for USG’s asbestos claimants and leaders. Asbestos-related lawsuits have forced more than 75 businesses into bankruptcy since 1982, which show that USG’s emergence from bankruptcy in such good standing was an amazing accomplishment.

“ELEPHANTS IN THE CORN”

Just as USG emerged successfully from bankruptcy, demand for its wallboard faded as the housing market chilled.

“As soon as we got rid of one elephant in the corn, another appeared,” USG CEO at the time William Foote said. “But I’ll tell you, compared to Chapter 11, this new elephant is a mere pygmy” (Chicago Tribune, November 11, 2006).

In USG’s 2007 Annual Report, Foote wrote the following:

Our pessimistic outlook for 2007 was fully justified. The year brought one of the worst housing markets we have seen in decades. The sub-prime mortgage meltdown and a credit crunch that affected the availability of conventional mortgages slammed the brakes on home sales, put large numbers of homeowners at risk of losing their homes to foreclosure and threatened the general economy. Housing starts dropped by close to 25% and have continued to fall in 2008.



All of this has hurt our results. Wallboard prices fell more than $70 during the year and our production volumes fell by 17%, to 9 billion square feet, over the same period.



Lower wallboard prices and volumes substantially reduced our sales and earnings. Net sales fell to $5.2 billion in 2007, down more than half a billion from 2006 sales. Net earnings for the year were $76 million, down 212 million from previous year.



This pygmy elephant arrived hungry and ate a lot of USG’s corn.

Berkshire had bought much of its USG stock at about $15 a share in the early 2000s, so it was looking like a big winner when the price went soaring to close to $107 in 2006. But with Berkshire holding on to its 17 million shares as of year-end 2007, and with the price falling fairly consistently since that 2006 peak (down to $27 as of July 2008); the jury is still out.

Things got even worse. On November 26, 2008, USG raised money by selling $400 million of 10% convertible senior notes—$300 million to Berkshire and $100 million to Fairfax Financial Holdings. The notes mature in 2018.

USG has lost money in recent years as U.S. housing starts fell to a low of 477,000 in April 2009 from a record 2.27 million in early 2006.

On January 1, 2011, James S. Metcalf, a 31-year veteran of the company, took over as CEO.

USG has cut its work force by about one-third, to about 9,250 employees since its peak and also has shrunk wallboard production capacity by about 30%, closing eight wallboard plants and idling others. USG is trying to gain market shares with a new type of wallboard called UltraLight that weighs about 30% less than standard boards. UltralLight reduces shipping costs and helps customers install wallboard faster (The Wall Street Journal, June 14, 2011).

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value USG



242





CONOCOPHILLIPS


Berkshire started buying shares of ConocoPhillips in the fourth quarter of 2005, and owned up to 17.5 million shares as of March 2006. The stake was raised substantially between March and September of 2008 to nearly 84 million shares, or 6% of the company’s stock.

Houston-based ConocoPhillips is an oil and natural-gas producer known for its technical expertise in deepwater exploration, its 3-D seismic technology, and other innovations. It operates in more than 40 countries around the world, has nearly 33,000 employees, and reported assets of $178 billion in 2007. The ConocoPhillips stock, as had the PetroChina stake, appeared to be dirt cheap at 6 times earnings, the lowest at that time among the seven members of the Standard & Poor’s Integrated Oil and Gas sub-industry index.

Shortly after Buffett’s investment became known in 2006, ConocoPhillips and the state-run Saudi Aramco agreed to build a $6-billion refinery in Saudi Arabia designed mainly for exports. The full-conversion refinery is expected to start operations in 2011, and to process 400,000 barrels of oil per day. This plan to build the refinery came amid a global shortage of refining capacity. Lack of refining capacity, more than a lack of oil, was a reason for the surge in oil prices.

On April 8, 2008, ConocoPhillips and BP announced the start of construction on a $30-billion natural-gas pipeline that would add to the total North American gas supply. It would extend 2,000 miles from Alaska’s North Slope on through to Alberta, Canada, and possibly 1,500 miles further to Chicago to serve the lower 48 states. Initial plans were to have the pipeline moving four billion cubic feet of gas a day by 2018. The proposed project was slated as the largest construction project ever in North America.

Conoco was founded by Isaac E. Blake in 1875, as the Continental Oil and Transportation Co. in Ogden, Utah. Thirty years later in 1905, Frank Phillips and his brother, L. E., after searching for two years, hit their first gusher—the first of 81 wells in a row without a single dry hole. In 1917, these successful brothers founded the Phillips Petroleum Company and established its headquarters in Bartlesville, Oklahoma.

The two companies, Conoco and Phillips, became one in a 2002 merger, bringing it into national standing in two energy categories. The newly combined company, ConocoPhillips, became the third-largest energy company in the United States, behind only ExxonMobil and Chevron. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) approved the merger in a 5–0 vote, but the companies were required to sell refineries in Colorado and Utah. Also, they had to unload some operations in Missouri, Illinois, New Mexico, Texas, and Washington state. Even after the sale of some refineries, the merger produced the second-largest refiner in the United States, after Valero; the combined company has reported a capacity of 2.2 million barrels a day.

ConocoPhillips has also claimed a national first-place ranking. With its March 2006 purchase of Burlington Resources for $35 billion, ConocoPhillips became the largest natural-gas producer in the United States.

In the midst of ConocoPhillips’ expansion in the United States, a September 2004 deal revealed the company was also looking to grow internationally. Its purchase into LUKOIL, the Russian oil and gas concern, gave ConocoPhillips greater reach into Russia’s vast oil and gas potentials as well as those of some 30 other countries with which LUKOIL had ties. As of the end of 2006, ConocoPhillips owned 20% of LUKOIL, a $7.5-billion stake.

In 2007, it announced plans to repurchase up to $15-billion worth of its own stock, beginning with $2-billion to $3-billion worth of shares in both the third and fourth quarters of 2007, and another roughly $10 billion by the end of the following year.

At the end of 2009, Berkshire held 37 million shares of ConocoPhillips, and by the end of 2010, the position was lowered to 29 million shares.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value ConocoPhillips



243





RAISING THE TESCO STAKE


According to Berkshire Hathaway’s 2006 Annual Report, by year-end it owned about 230 million shares of U.K. retailing giant Tesco.

The Tesco investment, amounting to 2.9% of that company, was bought at a cost of $1.3 billion and worth about $2.2 billion at the close of 2007. By mid-2010, Berkshire had raised its stake to 242 million shares, just over 3% of the company. The purchase seemed a further effort by Berkshire to buy undervalued assets outside the United States. The stake was raised to 5.08% in early 2012.

Tesco is the largest international supermarket chain in Britain and the fourth largest in the world. Based near London, Tesco controls about one-third of the British food market. One of every eight British pounds is said to be spent at this grocery and nonfood giant known for its wide, glossy stores. It operates some 2,000 stores in the United Kingdom, with a total of more than 4,800 stores worldwide. It had pre-tax profits of 3.4 million pounds in 2009. Although Tesco is only one-fourth the size of Wal-Mart, it has caused that America-based retailer to take notice.

Tesco got its start in 1919 as a grocery stand in East London. It came by its name when owner Jack Cohen bought a large shipment of tea and created a label for it using the three initials of the supplier’s name (T. E. Stockwell) and the first two letters of his name (Cohen): TESCO, Cohen’s first store brand item.

Throughout the years, Tesco has been known for its innovation. It had the first modern food warehouse in its home country and introduced new ideas for central stock control. After World War II, Tesco grew into a supermarket chain. It opened a self-service supermarket in 1956 and its first superstore in 1968. Originally specializing in food, Tesco moved into such areas as clothing, consumer electronics, consumer financial services, Internet service, and consumer telecommunications.

The 1990s saw Tesco branching out and flourishing. Having worked its way to the top status in the British food retailer market, Tesco entered other European markets, such as Hungary, Poland, and the Czech Republic; followed by Asian markets such as Taiwan and Thailand. In order to make better connections with its customers, Tesco initiated the Clubcard program.

This Clubcard program, which provides information about the customers, has turned out to be one of Tesco’s main advantages. Tesco has signed up 12 million Britons for the program, giving cardholders discounts in exchange for their names, addresses, and personal information (The Wall Street Journal, June 6, 2006).

To help keep up with and analyze the mountains of information Tesco would be gathering about its customers, the giant retailer turned to consultant Dunnhumby. Tesco is part owner of Dunnhumby, which was founded in 1989 by Clive Humby and his wife, Edwina Dunn.

Procter & Gamble, Coca-Cola, Kimberly Clark, Home Depot, and Best Buy are among the consumer product firms that have also been known to use an array of data from Dunnhumby. The consulting firm keeps its different clients separate.

For Tesco, the early 2000s were marked by further international expansion: Malaysia, Japan, Turkey, and China were targeted countries. The continued expansion paid off. In the first half of 2006, Tesco’s international sales jumped 21%, twice the rate of its domestic sales.

That same year, Tesco announced plans to sell some of its real estate to finance an ambitious international growth strategy, particularly in the United States and South Korea, as well as to pay for higher dividends and share buybacks.

In July 2006, Tesco bolstered its international portfolio by buying some of Poland’s Leader Price stores. Headed by chief executive Terry Leahy, Tesco already had 107 outlets in Poland at the time of the Leader Price purchase, but through that purchase added another 220 convenience stores. Since starting trade in Poland in 1996, Tesco has built up its business there, employing more than 24,000 people.

In 2006, Tesco launched Tesco Direct, an online and catalog business that sells nonfood items. In late 2007, Tesco branched out in the United States, opening stores in California, Arizona, and Nevada. One batch of 48 stores was slated for staggered openings from 2007 through 2009 in California’s Inland Empire region located 40 miles east of Los Angeles. The U.S. store chain is called Fresh & Easy Neighborhood Market.

In reaction to the successful launch of its stores in the United States, Tesco announced in April 2008 that it planned to open 160 more Fresh & Easy stores. These U.S. stores are being watched closely to see how they compete with Wal-Mart.

The Tesco stores on the West Coast had a rough go of it encountering a severe recession and heavy competition. Tesco rang up losses of almost $900 million over a 3-year period.

“They’ve had a real problem in California,” Buffett said at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2011. Munger added, “Tesco is God Almighty in England. But you come into southern California, and you have Trader Joe’s and Costco. That’s tough competition. It’s a different world.”

Tesco earned $4 billion in 2007. With Tesco’s focus on international growth in the last two decades, non-U.K. sales now account for about one-fourth of Tesco’s total sales. Outside the United Kingdom, Tesco now operates in 12 international markets.

In 2008, Tesco agreed to a deal with Indian conglomerate Tata Group to build warehouses in order to tap into India’s middle-class consumers. The first warehouse, full of Tesco’s groceries, opened in Mumbai at the end of 2009.

The international operations have had mixed results. Operations in Japan were shut. Korea, Thailand, and Hungary have been moderately successful, but losses continue in the U.S. and China.

Tesco warned on January 12, 2012 of minimal profit growth in fiscal 2013 as sales in the U.K. continued to falter, forcing the company to invest hundreds of millions of dollars to shore up business.

Reports on January 19, 2012 said Berkshire had raised its take from 3.21% to 5.08%, a stake of 407.6 million shares.

After the stock plunged about 15% after the profit warning, Buffett reportedly quickly added about $600 million to Berkshire’s position in the company.

The Story of Warren Buffett





Sir Terry Leahy was CEO for 13 years before being succeeded by Phillip Clarke.

Of Permanent Value A Big Stake in U.K. Retailer Tesco



244





JOHNSON & JOHNSON


Berkshire disclosed on October 30, 2006, that it owned 24.59 million shares of health care giant Johnson & Johnson. Although Berkshire sold 3.2 million shares before the end of 2006, its 2007 Annual Report showed that Berkshire owned 64.3 million shares, worth more than $4 billion at year-end 2007. But with that stake being only 2.2% of the company, Johnson & Johnson had not yet been renamed Johnson & Johnson & Buffett. In 2008, the J&J stake was lowered to 28.6 million shares; but by mid-2008, the stake was up to 38.3 million shares, but lowered to 27 million shares by the end of 2009 to help pay for the purchase of Burlington Northern railroad. By late-2010, the position was boosted by more than $1 billion to more than 42 million shares.

Johnson & Johnson is the maker of the world’s most comprehensive health care products. These include Tylenol, Motrin, Reach toothbrushes, Band-Aid bandages, Acuvue contact lenses, surgical instruments, joint replacements, and the anemia drug Procrit. The company offers an array of brand-name products for baby care and drugs to fight against the flu, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. The company also makes Neutrogena skin products, as well as Splenda, the no-calorie sweetener.

In 2006, Johnson & Johnson paid $16.6 billion for Pfizer’s consumer health care unit, which incorporated brands such as Listerine mouthwash, Sudafed cold medicine, Bengay, and Rolaids.

Based in New Brunswick, New Jersey, and headed by William Weldon, Johnson & Johnson has 250 operating companies, employing about 120,500 people in 57 countries.

The company, which has increased dividends for the past 40 years, had 2007 sales of more than $61 billion and profits of about $11 billion.

Around the time of Buffett’s purchases, Johnson & Johnson’s stents (a tube that keeps open previously blocked passages, such as arteries) had come under regulatory clouds, putting a pall over the stock. Also Johnson & Johnson had failed to buy Guidant Corp., a maker of cardiac devices, but did buy the Pfizer consumer unit shortly thereafter.

Johnson & Johnson continues to offer a large array of new products, notably “the pink line”—baby potions that come in pink bottles.

Founded in 1887 by Robert Wood Johnson and his two brothers, J&J began

making surgical dressings based on the work of the English surgeon Sir Joseph Lister.

On July 31, 2007, Johnson & Johnson announced plans to reduce its workforce by up to 4%, or up to 4,820 jobs, in order to cut costs due to a slump in sales of its heart stents and looming expirations for some drug patents. Its actions were projected to cut costs by more than $1 billion.

In addition to the big stake in Johnson & Johnson, Berkshire owns about 17

million shares (worth $1.5 billion in 2007) of Sanofi-Aventis, the big French pharmaceutical company, and also has a small stake in GlaxoSmithKline, the U.K. health care company with the mission to improve the quality of human life by enabling people to do more, feel better, and live longer.



2010 Johnson & Johnson Annual Report

(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Johnson & Johnson



245





POSCO


Not many readers of Berkshire’s 2006 Annual Report recognized the name of POSCO when they came across it in the stock listings. But there it was, more than $1 billion of it.

At the time, Berkshire had accumulated 3.5 million shares, or a 4% stake, in the largest steel company in South Korea and the fourth largest in the world. Berkshire paid $572 million for its position, which grew to more than $2 billion by the end of 2007. By the end of 2009, some 2.9 million shares of POSCO were worth more than $2 billion and amounted to 5.2% of the company.

Formed in 1968, POSCO makes hot- and cold-rolled steel, steelplate, stainless steel and wire rod products that are sold primarily to the auto and shipbuilding industries. A POSCO Engineering and Construction unit builds steel plants and energy plants.

Berkshire made its investment as steelmakers became more subject to consolidation and mergers. In 2006, Mittal Steel bought Arcelor SA for $38 billion, forming ArcelorMittal. In addition, Tata Steel of India purchased Britain’s Corus Group for $12 billion in 2007. Both are European steel firms.

POSCO has a global approach to the business with strong ties to Nippon Steel Corp. The two companies have cross investments in one another. Japan’s Nippon Steel, the world’s second-largest steelmaker, and POSCO have announced they would spend more than $900 million to increase the stakes. POSCO owned 5% of Nippon Steel as of 2007.

Reports said POSCO shares trade at 1.3 times the company’s book value, which is cheaper than the 2.5 times for Nippon and the 2.4 times for Japan’s JFE Steel Corp.

POSCO produced 30 million metric tons of products in 2006. Its plants in Korea and China alone have a production capacity of 32 million tons a year. It also boasts a debt-free balance sheet.

Rising steel demand and cost-cutting efforts (such as using more low-priced iron and coal) helped boost profits in early 2007. However, the cost of iron ore went up significantly in 2008 (65%). POSCO raised its stainless steel prices seven times in 2006, and raised them again in 2007. A virtual monopoly in the fast-growing South Korean market, POSCO also has strong demand from China. POSCO is also exploring other international venues as well.

The company plans to invest more than $1 billion in two Vietnemese steel plants by 2012 in order to sell steel there locally. POSCO is also planning

a 12-million-ton-a-year plant in Orissa, India, with the intention of investing $12 billion to complete the plant by 2016—which will make POSCO the largest single foreign investor in India.

The company is listed on the New York Stock Exchange (PKX), meaning it must adhere to U.S. accounting standards. POSCO’s stock soared in 2007, amid rising global demand for steel, higher prices, strong earnings, and stock buybacks. It then faltered in 2008, as world markets declined. POSCO, nonetheless, stuck to its practice of keeping prices for its steel products lower than its competitors.

In 2008, Berkshire raised its stake in POSCO to 13%, to nearly 4 million shares.

At Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2009, Buffett said that POSCO remains the best steel company in the world and that Berkshire had bought the company’s five-year dollar bonds issued on March 2009.

POSCO was formed in South Korea in 1968 and has grown into one of the largest steel companies in the world, making about 28 million tons of steel products a year—enough to produce about 100,000 compact cars a day.

Buffett, as well as others reportedly called for a review of a bid POSCO was considering for shipbuilder Daewood (The New York Times, March 24, 2010).

In the end, POSCO scraped its plan to bid for Daewood. Reports said the change of heart was believed to have occurred after Munger attended an investment relations seminar of the steelmaker in early 2010, and warned that the ship-building business had no long-term competitiveness.

The Story of Warren Buffett



POSCO Steel Plant

Of Permanent Value POSCO



246





TASTE OF KRAFT


In mid-2007, Berkshire owned less than 5% of Kraft Foods Inc. However, by the end of the first quarter of 2008, Buffett had beefed that up to a 9% stake worth about $4 billion.

Rumors spread in spring 2007 that Buffett was buying shares of the world’s second-largest food company. The rumors made more sense than most because Buffett had been in a smaller version of the company back in the 1980s when he had a position in General Foods. General Foods owns Oscar Mayer, which sells meats, including hot dogs. As you know, Buffett knows hot dogs.

General Foods was bought by Philip Morris Cos. in 1984. In 1988, Philip Morris bought Kraft Inc., making it the world’s largest consumer-products company as a purveyor of cigarettes and food. Kraft is the largest food and beverage firm in North America and second only to Nestle in the world market.

In 2000, Philip Morris bought Nabisco and merged it with Kraft.

On March 30, 2007, Philip Morris (now Altria Group) spun off Kraft; and it quickly drew the attention of big investors, such as Carl Icahn and Nelson Peltz. Peltz owns about 3% of the company and has advocated selling off some of the food lines, such as Maxwell House coffee and Post cereals, then using the money to buy back shares.

Bowing to pressure from activist investor Peltz, Kraft named two people backed by Peltz to the board: Lois Juliber, retired vice chairman of Colgate-Palmolive Co.; and Frank Zarb, managing director of private-equity firm Hellman & Friedman.

Buffett’s investment, apparently made before the Peltz stake was disclosed in May 2007, fits with his longtime affinity for brand names such as Coca-Cola, Procter & Gamble, Anheuser-Busch, and Johnson & Johnson.

Kraft’s CEO, the returning Irene Rosenfeld, who left long-term employment with Kraft and served as CEO of PepsiCo’s Frito-Lay division for two years, has made a push to boost marketing spending, keep current brands, and expand overseas. For example, under her leadership, Kraft bought the biscuit operations of France’s Groupe Danone SA for $7.2 billion.

As of year-end 2007, Kraft of Chicago-suburb Northfield, Illinois, had nine $1-billion brands, including Kraft, Nabisco and its Oreo brand, Philadelphia, and Oscar Mayer. Kraft makes many known consumer food products under the label of these brands and others, including Velveeta (a processed cheese), Jell-O, Cool Whip, Kraft Macaroni & Cheese, Kool-Aid, Tang, Grey Poupon, Shake ’n Bake, Cheez Whiz, Ritz Crackers, Planters nuts, and A1 steak sauce. Kraft is the well-known maker of cookie and cracker brands such as Chips Ahoy, Fig Newtons, Wheat Thins, and Triscuits.

In 2007, Kraft had sales of $37 billion and earnings of $2.6 billion.

In 2008, Kraft sold its Post cereal unit to Ralcorp Holdings.

On September 7, 2009, Kraft made a $16.8 billion bid for Cadbury, the British gum-and-candy maker. Buffett called the offer a “pretty full price.”

Reportedly, Hershey contemplated a bid and after consulting with former Goldman Sachs executive Byron Trott, who has his own consulting firm which has a modest investment from Berkshire.

In the end, on January 19, 2010, Cadbury agreed to the Kraft purchase for $19.5 billion.

Buffett said (CNBC, January 20, 2010) that he thought Kraft’s purchase of Cadbury was a bad deal because it sold the good pizza business on the cheap and took a big tax hit and then paid dearly for Cadbury with a large amount of undervalued Kraft stock. Buffett sold a big slice of this Kraft stock in the first quarter of 2010, lowering his stake from 138.3 million shares to 106.7 million shares and lowered it to 105 million shares by mid-2010.

With the acquisition of Cadbury, Kraft became the world’s second-largest food company.

Reportedly, Buffett is holding two greeting cards, one expressing condolences and the other congratulations, for Kraft’s CEO and plans to wait five years before deciding which one to send.

In the meantime, sales of Kraft’s Miracle Whip took a leap after pop music star Lady Gaga was featured in a video holding a jar of Miracle Whip.

KRAFT TO SPLIT INTO TWO BUSINESSES

In August 2011, Kraft announced it planned to split the company into two parts in 2012 with a global snacks business and a North American grocery business in separate baskets.

The move came after Kraft had become the second largest global food business with its acquisition of Cadbury.

Kraft said it will separate its faster-growing global businesses like Oreo, Cadbury, and Trident Gum from the slower-growing U.S. grocery business which includes Oscar Meyer, Philadelphia cream cheese and Jell-O.

The grocery business was to be spun-off to shareholders in a tax-free transaction.

Buffett was quoted as saying he was fine with Kraft’s breakup plan. He told CNBC’s Becky Quick (August 4, 2011) that Kraft CEO Irene Rosenfeld had visited him in Omaha two days before the announcement to tell him about it and he said he didn’t “see any negatives” to splitting the company into two parts.

Further, Buffett told Liz Claman of Fox Business Network (August 4, 2011), when she asked if he planned to keep his Kraft stock, “Listen, I have Oreos for breakfast so I’m in the stock with both feet.”



Kraft CEO

Irene Rosenfeld

The Story of Warren Buffett



Kraft Foods

Kraft carries dozens of brand name food staples as shown in its 2007 Annual Report.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value A Big Bite of Kraft Foods



247





DOW CHEMICAL


Dow Chemical agreed to buy rival Rohm and Haas in an all-cash $15-billion takeover with the help of Berkshire, which put up $3 billion in an equity stake. This made Berkshire the largest shareholder of the combined company.

Announced on July 20, 2008, the deal closed in 2009. It brought together under one roof the Dow Chemical company of Midland, Michigan, and Rohm and Haas of Philadelphia, a maker of specialty chemicals used in the tech industry. For Dow, the deal meant broader offerings in higher-margin markets, such as paints, coatings, and electronic materials. “The transaction delivers on the promises we have made to our shareholders about transforming our earnings profile to one of high-growth and less cyclicality,” said Dow’s CEO Andrew Liveris (Reuters, July 10, 2008).

Liveris said in a statement: “The acquisition of Rohm and Haas is a defining step in our transformational strategy to shape the ‘Dow of Tomorrow’—a high value, diversified chemicals and materials company, creating the largest specialty chemicals company in the United States with a leading global position in performance products and advanced materials.”

Liveris also complimented Buffett when he told CNBC that Buffett had been easy to work with and that although talks had started two months earlier than the deal’s finalization, Buffett never wavered, even though by the time of the announcement stock prices for Rohm and Haas and most everything else had dropped significantly while prices surged for the oil and gas components of Dow’s products.

From mid-2008 to early 2009, Dow’s stock dropped 80%; and yet the Rohm and Haas deal was completed and looked better as the economy slowly bounced back. Products such as solar shingles, SmartStax biotech corn and the company’s new electronics and coatings portfolio began to deliver a dramatic rebound for Dow.

Financing for the acquisition included Berkshire’s $3-billion investment in the form of convertible preferred securities. Also, the Kuwait Investment Authority invested $1 billion in convertible preferred securities much as Berkshire did years ago with investments in Salomon, Gillette, and US Airways. The preferred has an annual dividend of about 8.5% and is convertible at $41 a share. If converted, Berkshire would own 72.6 million shares, or a stake of 7% of the combined Dow company.

For Berkshire, the deal is similar to the role it played in the Mars candy company purchase of Wrigley.

Dow is a diversified specialty chemical, advanced materials, agro sciences, and plastics company. It planned to pay down some of its debt quickly after getting proceeds from a planned joint venture with Kuwait Petroleum Corp.

Back in 2001, Dow bought Union Carbide which is known for its deadly 1984 chemical leak in Bhopal, India.

In late 2007, Dow announced that it would receive $9 billion from Kuwait Petroleum to form a 50-50 joint venture in plastics and chemicals. But Kuwait scuttled the deal in late 2008, complicating the works since Dow had intended to use the Kuwait money to help finance the Rohm and Haas purchase.

The company said it planned to create an advanced materials unit at the Rohm and

Haas headquarters in Philadelphia with yearly sales of about $13 billion. Dow said it expected to carve out annual savings of $800 million a year as a result of this merger.

In 2011, Dow formed a partnership with Saudi Arabia Oil Co. to build and operate a $20 billion Saudi Arabian complex. All 26 manufacturing units are expected to be operational in 2016.



Dow CEO Andrew Liveris

(Photo courtesy of Dow Chemical)

The Story of Warren Buffett

One of Dow’s Many Products

(Photo courtesy of Dow Chemical)





Dow Chemical Logo



Cover of the Dow 2010 Annual Report

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Dow Chemical



248





BILLIONS INTO GOLDMAN SACHS


Berkshire invested at least $5 billion in the heart of faltering Wall Street—in the form of Goldman Sachs—according to an announcement from Goldman on September 23, 2008.

Berkshire bought $5-billion worth of perpetual preferred stock with a 10% dividend. Berkshire also received warrants to buy $5 billion of common stock at $115 a share anytime within five years. Goldman’s common stock closed that day at $125.05, giving Buffett an instant paper profit of $437 million. Unfortunately, on November 21, 2008, it dropped to $47.44 before gradually recovering.

It was no plus later that it was reported that Goldman director Rajat Gupta took 16 seconds after a conference call meeting about Buffett’s investment to alert Raj Rajaratnam of the Galleon Fund who bought Goldman stock and was later convicted of securities fraud.

Goldman’s CEO Lloyd Blankfein turned to Berkshire to boost market confidence at a time of an unprecedented housing crisis and credit crunch as many other investment and commercial banks tottered in the midst of an overall financial crisis which included a call by federal officials to pass a $700-billion rescue for financial institutions to offload their bad debts.

Supporting the proposed federal bailout, Buffett was quoted as saying to CNBC, “I am to some effect betting on the fact that the government will do the rational thing and act properly.”

The decision to seek a cash infusion marked a reversal for Goldman, which during the previous week had transformed itself from the biggest and perhaps most respected U.S. securities firm to the nation’s fourth-largest bank holding company, thus subjecting itself to greater capital requirements. However, the conversion allowed Goldman to have access to borrowing from the Feds and permitted more flexible accounting for some assets.

Goldman, hugely profitable in previous years, began to suffer a decline in trading and investment banking numbers in the midst of the crisis, which saw huge writedowns at such rivals as Citigroup, Merrill Lynch, Morgan Stanley, and Wachovia. Goldman Sachs surely was one beneficiary of the Lehman demise in 2008. Still, Buffett has always been leery of investments in Wall Street firms.

The last time one of the big U.S. securities firms received a stake from Buffett was in 1987, when Salomon turned to him for a $700-million infusion to stave off an unwanted takeover. The investment led to huge headaches later for Buffett, who stepped in to save the firm after a bond-trading scandal in the early 1990s.

Buffett, a frequent critic of Wall Street, offered this statement: “Goldman Sachs is an exceptional institution. It has an unrivaled global franchise, a proven and deep management team, and the intellectual and financial capital to continue its track record of outperformance.”

When asked by CNBC (September 24, 2008) if this was the right deal and the right time to buy into Goldman, Buffett replied: “Well, I can’t tell you it’s exactly the right time. I don’t try to time things, but I do try to price things. And I’ve got a formula that says bet on brains, and bet on them when it’s the right type of deal. And in this case, there’s no better firm on Wall Street. We’ve done business with them for years, with Goldman, and the price was right, the terms were right, the people were right. I decided to write a check.”

Buffett and Goldman have ties that are long standing. Byron Trott, the former head of Goldman’s Chicago office, has brought four deals to Buffett. These deals include Marmon Holdings and the Mars purchase of Wrigley.

Indeed, it was Trott who called Buffett on September 23, 2008. Buffett was sitting with his legs propped up on his desk, drinking a Cherry Coke and munching on mixed nuts (The Wall Street Journal, September 25, 2008). Trott asked Buffett what kind of investment in Goldman Sachs he’d consider and said that Goldman wanted to hammer out a deal. The transformative, multi-billion-dollar investment was announced after the market closed that same day following a talk between Buffett, Trott, and Lloyd Blankfein, the CEO who was born poor in the South Bronx and put himself through Harvard Business School. “I’m taking my grandkids out to Dairy Queen,” he told the Goldman officers. “Call me and let me know what you want to do” (Vanity Fair, December 2009). Goldman accepted Buffett’s terms.

In March 2009, it was reported that Trott was planning to leave Goldman to start his own merchant-banking firm called BDT Capital Partners. Buffett was quoted as saying that Berkshire planned to invest in Trott’s firm. “We’ll have a modest partnership interest. We will not be the big dog,” Buffett said, adding that Goldman would not lose any business as a result of Berkshire’s investment in the Trott firm except for the business going to Trott. Buffett said he would have two companies “birddogging” for Berkshire (The Wall Street Journal, March 30, 2009).

So what about due diligence? Buffett told The Wall Street Journal (September 25, 2008), “I didn’t see a book, I just made a judgment.” He cited Goldman’s quality of management and its franchise as factors that sealed the deal for him.

After Buffett spent 15 minutes with Goldman’s chief financial officer, he

concluded, “They asked me about this or that. It sounded fair.”

In Berkshire’s 2003 Annual Report, Buffett wrote that Trott “understands Berkshire far better than any investment banker with whom we have talked and—it hurts me to say this—earns his fee.”

FLASHBACK

When Buffett turned 10 in 1940, his father took him to New York where he asked to visit the Scott Stamp and Coin Company, the Lionel Train Company, and the New York Stock Exchange.

On their way to Wall Street, Warren’s father dropped by Goldman Sachs, one of the city’s largest brokerage firms. They met with the head of the firm, Sidney Weinberg, who joined Goldman as a janitor in 1907. “For 45 minutes, Weinberg talked to me as if I were a grown-up,” Buffett has said. “He was the most famous man on Wall Street,” Buffett recalled (Alice Schroeder, The Snowball: Warren Buffett and the Business of Life, p 62). “As I went out, he [Weinberg] put his arm around me and said, ‘What stock do you like, Warren?’” Buffett added, “He’d forgotten it the next day, but I remembered it forever.”

Now Buffett has an answer to the Weinberg question of decades ago: Goldman Sachs.

IN THE MONEY

Goldman’s stock advanced strongly in 2009; and Buffett’s stake had risen about $2 billion by July when he told Fox Business Network, “We’re getting almost $1,000 [or $15 a second] a minute on preferred stock dividends, so I try not to answer the phone if I think Goldman’s calling. Every instinct in my body tells me that we will want to hold those warrants until they’re very close to their expiration date. The preferred pays us the dividend, and the warrants are going to make us money.”

GOLDMAN TO HELP SMALL BUSINESSES

With Goldman CEO Lloyd Blankfein saying the firm had a role in the financial crises, Goldman announced a $500 million effort to help small businesses. Further, Buffett and Harvard Business School’s Michael Porter were named to help lead the effort.

GOLDMAN CHARGED BY THE SEC

On April 16, 2010, the SEC charged Goldman with fraud over how it handled mortgage-backed securities transactions. The news sent Goldman and Berkshire stocks plummeting.

Buffett had recently told CNBC’s Becky Quick that, yes, criticism of Goldman’s ways had been mounting.”They’re going to rewrite Genesis and have Goldman Sach’s offering the apple.”

Buffett spent the first 30 minutes of the annual meeting in 2010 in a spirited defense of Goldman, saying its business practices were solid.

Buffett, addressing a charge that Goldman had not disclosed the names of the other parties with a short position in a home mortgages contract, said it made no difference who was on the other side of the trade. Buffett said that companies, including Berkshire, that make such deals, don’t expect to know the names of the other parties.

Munger said of the 3-2 vote of the SEC Commission to charge Goldman, if he had been able to vote, he would have voted against bringing the charges.

GOLDMAN SETTLES

In the end Goldman paid $550 million to settle the charges of defrauding investors. It was the largest penalty a Wall Street firm has paid, but still short of $1 billion that some reporters had suggested.

Goldman acknowledged it misled investors with incomplete information when it failed to disclose that Paulson & Co. had interests that were adverse to investors, that the Paulson role in the selection process of the securities was not made known.

GOLDMAN PAYS BUFFETT BACK

After approval from the Fed in 2011, Goldman paid off the $5 billion loan Buffett made in the height of the financial crisis in 2008. In addition to the $5 billion cash, Berkshire, with all dividends and an early payment fee, got $6.7 billion in all, not to mention the right to buy Goldman stock at $115 a share. The paper gain on those warrants came to almost an extra $2 billion.

Buffett joked that he was going into hiding so Goldman couldn’t find him to pay back the high-paying investment. “I’m going to be the Osama bin Laden of capitalism. I’m on my way to Asia where I’m going to look for a cave. If the U.S. Armed Forces can’t find Osama in ten years, let Goldman Sachs try to find me” (CNBC, March 20, 2011).

Berkshire received the unwelcomed check for more then $5.5 billion on April 18, 2011. It was unwelcome because the loan was paying 10%, or more than $1.3 million a day. Berkshire actually received a check that day of about $5,644,000, which included $149 million in additional dividends occrued since the deal’s September anniversary date.



Goldman Sachs Logo

The Story of Warren Buffett



Byron Trott

Ties with Buffett go back to 1982 when Trott, a University of Chicago grad, joined Goldman. In 2009, Trott formed his own firm of BDT Capital Partners in which Berkshire has a modest interest. Trott refers to his 38-member company as: “The Merchant Bank to the Closely Held.” (Wall Street Journal, May 16, 2011) BDT quickly raised $2 billion during a time when money was hard to raise. Trott turned up as a leading banker in the $3.7 billion deal for Unilever to buy hair products maker Alberto Culver. Previously, he was one of the advisers to Hershey when it contemplated making a bid for Cadbury.

Of Permanent Value Billions into Goldman Sachs



249





BUFFETT TRIES TO BRING GE TO LIFE


Industrial giant General Electric, the company founded by Thomas Edison that brings good things to light, agreed to sell $3 billion of perpetual preferred stock to Berkshire on October 1, 2008.

The private offering of the stock will pay a 10% dividend and is callable after three years at a 10% premium, meaning after three years GE could buy the shares back for $3.3 billion. GE paid back $3.3 billion on October 17, 2011. Berkshire also received warrants for the right to buy $3 billion worth of GE’s common stock at $22.25 a share for five years.

The deal was similar to one arranged just eight days previously between Berkshire and Goldman Sachs. And guess who brokered the GE deal.… Goldman’s Byron Trott who once again brought an elephant-size deal to Buffett.

Berkshire already owned 7.8 million shares of G.E.

In a statement, Buffett said, “GE is the symbol of American business to the world. I have been a friend and admirer of GE and its leaders for decades. They have strong global brands and businesses with which I am quite familiar. I am confident GE will continue to be successful in the years to come.”

GE CEO Jeff Immelt said in a statement: “This action does two things for GE investors. First, it enhances our flexibility and allows us to execute on our liquidity plan faster. Second, it gives us the opportunity to play offense in this market should conditions allow. In addition, we remain committed to the triple-A rating; and in recent market volatility, we continue to successfully meet our commercial paper needs.”

The deal came during the nation’s credit crunch which was hurting GE’s finance businesses including leasing, commercial real estate, and credit cards such as Home Depot’s. GE was vulnerable to its loans to industrial buyers of its airplane engines, turbines, windmills, and train locomotives. Indeed, GE Capital Service accounts for about half of GE’s profits. GE shares plunged as the company lowered earnings expectations of its financial arm. GE’s real estate unit, one of the largest in the country, also suffered during the credit crunch.

As a result of this deal, investment strategist Edward Yardeni said, “Warren Buffett has become the new triple-A credit rating system.”

In a time of financial crisis, major corporations were turning to Buffett, with his buckets of cash, looking for a lifeline. One big problem that GE faced was that its credit default swaps—lenders’ insurance—on GE Capital bonds, had soared even though GE is one of a handful of triple-A credit companies. GE lost that rating during the financial crisis as did Berkshire.

GE has a range of interests in media, lighting, energy, water, transportation, healthcare, jet engines, and finance. It operates in more than 100 countries with more than 300,000 employees.

GE now earns about $10 billion a year on sales of $150 billion, a far cry from the $22 billion earned from $173 billion in sales in 2007.

On October 17, 2011, GE paid back the loan with Berkshire getting $3.3 billion. This ended a chapter when GE needed a lifeline which was tossed out at a time GE’s finance arm was in deep trouble.

Still, the warrants for Berkshire to buy GE stock remained under water, but still had two years to be worth something.

GE’s stock at the time of the preferred redemption was trading at about $16 a share, far below the conversion price of $22.25 for Berkshire’s warrants.

Berkshire owned 7.8 million shares of GE common stock as of mid-2011.



GE CEO Jeff Immelt



General Electric Logo

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Buffett Tries to Bring GE to Life



250





$5 BILLION INTO BANK OF AMERICA


Berkshire made a $5-billion investment in the country’s largest bank, Bank of America, whose units include Merrill Lynch. The preferred stock investment, announced on August 25, 2011, came when the bank’s stock was sagging badly amidst an uncertain global economy and its own extensive mortgage problems.

The investment called for Bank of America, based in Charlotte, North Carolina, to sell 50,000 shares with a liquidation value of $100,000 a share. The private placement pays 6% a year, payable in equal quarterly installments, and is redeemable by Bank of America at any time at a 5% premium.

Also, Berkshire received warrants to buy 700 million shares of Bank of America common stock at an exercise price of $7.142857 a share. The warrants can be exercised in whole or in part over a 10-year period. The stock tanked to $5 a share at the end of 2011, but in early 2012, it rose back above $7 a share, above the price where the warrants could be exercised.

With Berkshire’s investment of $5 billion in cash, Bank of America CEO Brian Moynihan said in a statement, “We are building the best franchise in financial services and we have laid out a clear plan to deliver long-term value. I remain confident that we have the capital and liquidity we need to run our business. At the same time, I also recognize that a large investment by Warren Buffett is a strong endorsement in our vision and in our strategy.”

Buffett said in a statement, “Bank of America is a strong, well-led company and I called Brian to tell him I would like to invest in it. I am impressed with the profit-generating abilities of the franchise, and that they are acting aggressively to put their challenges behind them...”

Buffett told CNBC (August 25, 2011) that he was in the bathtub on the previous morning when he thought up the investment. Then an assistant to Buffett phoned a Moynihan aide to pass on Buffett’s private number so the two men could talk. The following morning, the deal was announced after the bank’s board voted by phone which took only 24 hours to complete from the moment it popped into Buffett’s brain.

Buffett told CNBC that “this isn’t 2008” and that’s why Bank of America was getting better terms for its $5 billion compared with those of GE and Goldman Sachs back in the financial crisis. Buffett also stressed the investment was his idea, which downplayed any fears the bank might be desperate for cash.

Bank of America’s stock price had been cut in half over the previous year as it set aside $20 billion to fix mortgage problems that stemmed from the 2008 financial crisis. Losses of about $9 billion had accumulated during the previous 18 months. Litigation and regulatory problems had slowed the bank’s growth. For example, lawsuits from AIG, USBancorp, and Goldman Sachs over mortgage problems were working their way through the courts.

In 2008, Bank of America bought Countrywide Financial, the big subprime lender, at the very time the housing market crashed.

Moynihan’s predecessor, Ken Lewis, paid $4 billion for Countrywide which later cost Bank of America about $30 billion. Bank of America had to sell good assets to pay off the problems of the bad ones.

Bought in 2008, Bank of America’s Merrill Lynch brokerage firm has performed well enough considering the sluggish economy.

The Buffett seal of approval was meant as a confidence booster and a way to buy time to create a sounder footing to fix the bank’s challenging mortgage problems.

Bank of America started as the Bank of Italy in San Francisco in 1904 when it was founded by A.P. Giannini. The bank survived the San Francisco earthquake and fire in 1906. In 1930, it became the Bank of America National Trust and Savings Association, which flourished along with the country and the rise of the automobile, movies, and the telephone.

Previously, Berkshire had owned some Bank of America common stock—9.1 million shares in 2007, but sold 35% of it in 2008 and the rest in 2010.

Shortly after the announcement of the Berkshire investment, Bank of America’s Moynihan said the bank would cut 30,000 jobs in the next few years to meet its cost-savings goals. And it sold most of its investment in China Construction Bank, giving Bank of America’s capital a boost.

Buffett told Bloomberg News September 30, 2011, that Bank of America is a wonderful business, but that it has a lot of problems. “The bet is, Brian’s going to get rid of those problems. It won’t take six months or a year. It will take much longer than that even. But the underlying businesses are doing fine. I don’t want him to step down. Brian, stay at work.”

WHAT BUFFETT WILL BUY NEXT

No one can predict what Buffett will buy next, but there is a fairly dependable trend: He tends to buy whatever he liked in his youth, whether it be gum or Cokes.

One of his early endeavors was selling gum, and today Berkshire has billions invested in Wrigley.

As a five-year-old, he sold Cokes he got from his grandfather’s grocery store; later in life, his company became Coke’s largest shareholder.

Buffett delivered The Washington Post newspapers as a youngster, and later the Post became one of his classic long-term successes.

Once on a trip to New York, his father took him to visit Goldman Sachs, where he was treated well. At the height of the financial crisis in 2008, Buffett made a $5 billion investment in Goldman.

At Columbia University, he studied GEICO under his teacher Ben Graham. Today GEICO is a wholly owned unit of Berkshire.

As a child, Buffett was enamored with model trains and, to this day, still has a train set in his house. Hence, the purchase of all of the Burlington Northern railroad should come as no surprise.

The list goes on. Buffett knows hot dogs and cheese; thus, he has invested in Kraft.

Don’t forget that during a youthful escapade, he visited Hershey, Pennsylvania, home of Hershey Foods Corp. Hmmm…

OK, OK, the next purchase turned out to be the Omaha World Herald Company.

The next hint came on CNBC’s Squawk Box show on November 14, 2001: “Harold.”



Brian Moynihan

Some pointed out that Archimedes famously came up with quite an idea while in the bathtub. That idea was that the volume of water displaced in the tube was equal to the volume of his body. That meant that he could measure the volume of irregular objects thus solving a problem that had perplexed mathematicians.



Bank of America Logo

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Bank of America



251





THE BUCK DOES NOT STOP HERE


“Perhaps you feel that some new thing is gathering in

my brain.” (James Joyce, Exiles)

Going way beyond anything ever suggested by Graham and Dodd, Buffett began investing in foreign currencies in the spring of 2002. Foreign exchange positions are not found as such on Berkshire’s balance sheet but are listed in its cash and cash equivalents line.

The foreign-exchange marketplace is the largest capital market in the world, with almost $2 trillion trading daily.

Buffett, formulating his thesis after reading the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Economic Analysis data, moved into foreign currencies in a big way.

He was very close-mouthed about which currencies he was investing in, but he showed interest in Chinese currency when he told Harvard Business School students that it was undervalued and that he wondered how long it could remain that way (Harbus, April 28, 2003).

In an article published in Forbes (October 26, 2003), Buffett wrote, “Berkshire has made significant investments in—and today holds—several [foreign] currencies.” He continued, “I won’t give you the particulars; in fact, it is largely irrelevant which currencies they are.” To Buffett, the specific currencies might not have seemed important information to share; but the underlying point was a major issue worth stating: “To hold other currencies is to believe that the dollar will decline.” Both as an American and as an investor, Buffett actually had hopes these commitments would prove to be a mistake.

“Our trade deficit,” Buffett said, referring to that of the United States, “has greatly worsened, to the point that our country’s ‘net worth,’ so to speak, is now being transferred abroad at an alarming rate.”

Buffett forecast: At the present trade-deficit level, foreign ownership of U.S. assets will grow at about $500 billion a year, which means that the deficit will be adding about one percentage point annually to foreigners’ net ownership of U.S. national wealth. “A perpetuation of this transfer will lead to major trouble,” he firmly stated.

Buffett explained further in Berkshire’s 2003 Annual Report:

During 2002, we entered the foreign currency market for the first time in my life; and in 2003, we enlarged our position, as I became increasingly bearish on the dollar. I should note that the cemetery for seers has a huge section set aside for macro forecasters. We have in fact made few macro forecasts at Berkshire, and we have seldom seen others make them with sustained success.



We have—and will continue to have—the bulk of Berkshire’s net worth in U.S. assets. But in recent years our country’s trade deficit has been force-feeding huge amounts of claims on, and ownership in, America to the rest of the world. For a time, foreign appetite for these assets readily absorbed the supply. Late in 2002, however, the world started choking on this diet, and the dollar’s value began to slide against major currencies. Even so, prevailing exchange rates will not lead to a material letup in our trade deficit. So whether foreign investors like it or not, they will continue to be flooded with dollars. The consequences of this are anybody’s guess. They could, however, be troublesome—and reach, in fact, well beyond currency markets.



As an American, I hope there is a benign ending to this problem. I myself suggested one possible solution—which, incidentally, leaves Charlie cold—in a November 10, 2003, article in Fortune magazine. Then again, perhaps the alarms I have raised will prove needless: Our country’s dynamism and resiliency have repeatedly made fools of naysayers. But Berkshire holds many billions of cash-equivalents denominated in dollars. So I feel more comfortable owning foreign-exchange contracts that are at least a partial offset to that position.



These contracts are subject to accounting rules that require changes in their value to be contemporaneously included in capital gains or losses, even though the contracts have not been closed. We show these changes each quarter in the Finance and Financial Products segment of our earnings statement. At year-end, our open foreign exchange contracts totaled about $12 billion at market values and were spread among five currencies. Also, when we were purchasing junk bonds in 2002, we tried when possible to buy issues denominated in euros. Today we own about $1 billion of these.



By the end of 2004, Buffett had pushed the foreign exchange contracts up to a whopping $21 billion among 12 currencies. This is the second biggest bet Buffett has made after the $22-billion purchase of General Re.

Buffett’s foreign currency purchases have been in forward contracts, which are agreements to buy or sell a currency at a specific price in the future.

Buffett said in an interview (Bloomberg, August 15, 2004) that he was accumulating the foreign currencies as a long-term bet that the U.S. trade gap would weaken the dollar. “That’s a long-term position. I have no idea what currencies are going to do next week or next month or even next year. I think I know over time.”

Although Buffett was looking at these contracts as long-term investments, he admitted that the reporting of them in current market value could produce exceptional volatility in reported earnings in given periods. Consider the year 2004, for example. Berkshire’s 2004 first-quarter report said that as of May 5, 2004, the fair value of the foreign exchange contracts had fallen by about $600 million because of the dollar’s rise. Then by the end of the third quarter, with the value of the dollar having fallen, Berkshire registered a $412-million pretax gain on the books for its $20 billion in foreign currencies.

Early in 2005, Forbes reported that two of the eight currencies that Berkshire held at that time were the euro and the pound (Forbes, January 10, 2005). Buffett started buying foreign currency contracts when the euro was worth 86 U.S. cents and kept buying until the price reached $1.20. Buffett told Forbes he was not adding new positions at that time but had been rolling over the contracts as they matured.

From January 2002 until the end of 2004, the dollar fell about 33% against the euro. In addition to a continued trade deficit, the dollar’s future apparently looked no brighter to Buffett: “If we have the same policies in place, the dollar will go down,” he stated in the 2005 Forbes article.

The Forbes story pointed out the unusual nature of Buffett’s investment in foreign currency contracts, given his history of investing in primarily U.S. businesses. But it noted Buffett’s recent acquisitions of a few anti-dollar assets. In 2002, Berkshire bought euro-denominated bonds of Level 3, the telecommunications company. In a more indirect move toward foreign currency, Berkshire bought the majority of MidAmerican Energy in 2000. In doing so, it acquired the assets of its MidAmerican subsidiary, a British utility company named Northern Electric, at a time when the pound was worth $1.58. At of the end of 2004, the pound was worth $1.94. So during that four-year span, Berkshire had realized a paper gain aside from the electric company’s earning power.

Buffett shared his long-term perspective on the foreign currency contracts once again in this early 2005 Forbes story stating that he may hold them “for years and years.”

Also in early 2005, a Bloomberg story revealed that Microsoft’s Bill Gates had a short position against the dollar. “I’m short the dollar,” Gates said to television interviewer Charlie Rose. “It’s a bit scary,” Gates admitted. “We’re in uncharted territory when the world’s reserve currency has so much outstanding debt” (January 31 [29 according to Internet story], 2005).

Gates did not say how big his short position against the greenback was, but his $27-billion foundation did receive approval in September 2004 from China’s foreign-currency regulator to invest as much as $100 million in the nation’s yuan shares and bonds.

Thus, as of January 2005, at least two major players were betting against the dollar; but results during the remainder of that year led Buffett to reevaluate options.

In the first half of 2005, Berkshire suffered a pretax loss of $926 million on its foreign currency positions. The second quarter report offered some reminders that may have served to lessen the sting of that loss: “Berkshire first began ‘shorting’ the U.S. dollar in 2002 and since inception in 2002 through June 30, 2005, has recognized pretax gains of $2.03 billion from forward [sic] currency forward contracts and has received $2.10 billion from counterparties in cash.” But the loss remained at year-end, totaling $955 million.

At the end of 2005, Berkshire reported the worth of its foreign currency investment had been reduced to $13.8 billion, down from $21.5 billion earlier in the year. Berkshire reduced its play against the dollar as the dollar became stronger due, in part, to rising interest rates. By mid-year 2006, Berkshire had slashed its foreign currency position to only $1.2 billion.

Buffett said he was making more investments in non-dollar-denominated shares of companies—in other words, buying foreign stocks.

“My views on currency are as strong as ever—probably stronger. We’re doing less with currencies because the carry costs are negative. There are better ways of mitigating the consequences of a devalued dollar,” Buffett said at Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2006.

In Berkshire’s 2006 Annual Report, Buffett wrote about the company’s foreign currency experience:

We’ve come close to eliminating our direct foreign-exchange position from which we realized about $186 million in pre-tax profits in 2006 … That brought our total gain since inception of this position in 2002 to $2.2 billion. Here’s a breakdown by currency:



Total Gain (Loss) in Millions

At Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 2007, Buffett said, “We think the dollar will continue to decline against most currencies. When we first became negative on the dollar, we bought $21 billion in foreign currencies directly. Then the carry on that position became negative, and it became expensive to own. More recently, we have focused on owning companies that generate non-dollar earnings. But the currency a company earns in is not a huge determinant as to whether we invest. It is a factor, though. The government’s current policies will cause the dollar to fall further. I don’t know the speed of the decline or when it will accelerate. But the fundamental forces are strong.”

Also during Berkshire’s 2007 Annual Meeting weekend, Buffett said he was adding to positions in a single foreign currency, which he would recall in 2008. He revealed the mystery currency to Liz Claman, anchor of Fox Business Network, in an October 18, 2007 interview. Before doing so, however, he made a point to clarify that his bearish play on the dollar was now going in a different direction than foreign currency contracts: “I’ve decided rather than following this idea through currencies, I would buy businesses with lots of earnings abroad, because that’s a better way, in my view, to play a bearishness on the dollar.”

After making that point, Buffett gave a short history lesson on the Brazilian real: In the preceding five years, the Brazilian real had doubled against the U.S. currency, while the Brazilian government had, in effect, been supporting the U.S. dollar by “buying dollars in the market.”

Buffett went on to explain, “They have been building up their own reserves. Their current account has turned into a good surplus, and we have been, in effect, behaving like people attributed to the Brazilians or the Argentineans 10 or 20 years ago.”

However, after that real review, Buffett admitted to owning some reals and a few Brazilian bonds. He made it clear he was not telling anyone else to buy reals. He stated, “We may be cashing out of the reals.” Minimizing his investments, he then added, “This is not a huge position. We’ll make $100 million or something like that.”

The Brazilian currency advanced about 19% against the dollar during the first three-quarters of 2007.

In February 2008, Buffett said the only foreign currency that Berkshire owned at that time was the Brazilian real. The company no longer owned Canadian currency but had made “several hundred million dollars” by having done so. Buffett admitted that he wished he had kept the Canadian currency.

Still bearish on the U.S. dollar in early 2008, Buffett once again predicted its decline. “We’re still sending about $2 billion a day to the rest of the world,” he said during an appearance in Toronto where Business Wire was opening a new office.

“Force-feeding a couple of billion a day to the rest of the world is not conducive to a stable dollar.”

____________________

Quick! What do Buffett and Brazilian supermodel Gisele Bündchen have in common? The answer to this head-scratcher is that they both would rather be paid in currencies other than the dollar.

When news broke that Bündchen, the former girlfriend of Leonardo DiCaprio and now wife of Tom Brady, preferred to be paid in other currencies because she was not fond of the dollar, stories connected her to Buffett’s view that the dollar would weaken.

Her twin sister and manager, Patricia Bündchen, was quoted as saying, “Contracts starting now are more attractive in euros because we don’t know what will happen to the dollar.”

News reports said that when Gisele Bündchen signed a contract with Berkshire-investee Procter & Gamble to advertise hair products, it was stipulated she’d be paid in euros. No word came forth from P&G.

If she really wants to follow Buffett’s views, perhaps she should take payment in the Brazilian currency, the real. After all, she is Brazilian.

There was no word from Berkshire headquarters if Buffett planned to consult the world’s highest-paid supermodel in the future about her views on currency.

Actually, her views may have changed (or may never have been as reported) since her manager told CNBC after the original story broke that Bündchen, who lives in New York, is not a dollar bear.

Over My Head

The Story of Warren Buffett



High Adventure

by Edmund Hillary

Buffett embarked on his own high adventure when he began investing in foreign currency.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value The Buck Does Not Stop Here

The Buck Does Not Stop Here The Story of Warren Buffett

Australian dollar $247.1

British pound 287.2

Canadian dollar 398.3

Chinese yuan (12.7)

Euro 839.2

Hong Kong dollar (2.5)

Japanese yen 1.9

Mexican peso $106.1

New Zealand dollar (2.6)

Singapore dollar (2.6)

South Korean won 261.3

Swiss franc 9.6

Taiwan dollar (45.3)

Miscellaneous options 22.9



Gisele Bündchen

This beauty is the highest-earning supermodel internationally.

Of Permanent Value The Buck Does Not Stop Here



252





NO MORE SILVER LINING


Tonto: “Giddy-up, Scout.”

Lone Ranger: “Hi-ho, Silver! Awaaaaaaay!”

Early in 1998, a modern day duo—Buffett and Munger—finished buying a silver bullet worth more than half a billion dollars.

Known for buying dollar bills for 50 cents, Buffett, this time around, may have bought silver dollars for half a buck apiece. Time would tell.

Buffett took a shine to the metal between July 25, 1997, a day when silver futures contracts were at $4.32 an ounce, and January 12, 1998, when the price was $5.47 an ounce. Silver was trading at a 650-year bottom (Timothy Vick, How to Pick Stocks Like Warren Buffett, p. 97).

Berkshire planned to announce its silver purchase in its 1997 Annual Report, which was slated to be published March 1998; but because of inquiries by silver traders about silver’s rising price, Berkshire let the word out earlier in a press release.

Berkshire’s February 3, 1998 press release stated that the company owned 129.7 million ounces of silver (That’s a gleaming silver lining for every cloud in the sky!) and that it had no current plans for further purchase or sale of the silver.

At the time of the announcement, Berkshire’s precious white metal stake was worth about $850 million, briefly up about $200 million from Buffett’s cost of almost $650 million or about $5 an ounce. However, in 2004, silver’s price slipped and the investment was almost a wash temporarily. It did finally inch up into the $6 range again by the end of 2004. Silver just could not get a real gallop going until popping up to $12 a share in 2006—more than double Berkshire’s purchasing price finally. It must have looked like time to sell.

According to Berkshire’s press release, Berkshire bought the silver because bullion inventories had fallen in recent years and “because of an excess of user-demand over mine production and reclamation.” Indeed, the demand for silver in 1997 turned out to be about 800 million ounces compared with a supply of about 586 million ounces.

During the summer of 1997, Buffett and Munger reached the age-old conclusion that prices should rise if demand exceeds supply. As the press release put it: “Last summer Mr. Buffett and Mr. Munger, Vice Chairman of Berkshire, concluded that equilibrium between [silver] supply and demand was only likely to be established by a somewhat higher price.”

So the muse that inticed Buffett and Munger in their purchasing of silver for Berkshire was supply and demand, not inflation. Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1997 Annual Report, “Inflation expectations, it should be noted, play no part in our calculation of silver’s value.”

Although accelerating inflation would probably cause silver prices to rise, the real demand for silver comes mainly from jewelry and silverware manufacturers and also from makers of photographic and electronic equipment.

Berkshire bought the glittering, malleable metal for delivery in London through a single brokerage, Phibro, the commodities-trading arm of Travelers Group’s Salomon Smith Barney unit. At no time did Berkshire own any options, Berkshire’s February 1998 press release stated, and none of its purchases established new highs. All buying came after price dips, a classic Buffett buying method.

Berkshire’s silver purchase represented at the time about 20% of the world’s annual silver mine output and about 30% of the world’s aboveground vault inventories. If melted and poured into a solid block, Berkshire’s silver would have fit into a space 26 feet by 26 feet by 26 feet. So what was Berkshire to do with all that silver? Where was it to be housed? Here is The New York Times’s 1998 take on the matter:

The booty resides for the moment at one or more London bullion banks, which normally store silver for a fee of 5 cents a day per 1,000-ounce bar, including theft insurance. Once Berkshire gets all its silver delivered, it will have 129,710 bars. Perhaps Mr. Buffett can get a quantity discount, but if not the storage will cost $6,485.50 a day.



To avoid that fee, Berkshire could take delivery. But finding a place to store so much silver would not be easy. A 1,000-ounce silver bar (actually about 1,097 ounces, since silver is weighed in heavier troy ounces), measures 12.5 inches by 5.5 inches by 3.5 inches. To store all that silver, stacked in a building with nine-foot ceilings, Berkshire would need 2,007 square feet of space. That’s a couple of one-bedroom apartments (The New York Times, February 8, 1998).



Berkshire’s stake was the largest accumulation of a silver position since the Hunt brothers were accused of trying to corner the silver market at its peak in 1980.

In 2006, Buffett said that the silver position had been sold and at the meeting in 2007, he made a painful admission with a touch of humor: “We bought too early and sold too early. Other than that, it was a perfect trade.” Munger added, “We have shown the world that we don’t know anything about the silver market.”



No More Silver Lining

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value No More Silver Lining



253





THE INDEFENSIBLE


B

uffett bought Berkshire’s first corporate jet in 1986, and it has been the butt of jokes, mostly from Buffett himself.

“It’s shameful how much I love it.… I can’t explain it. It’s a total blank in my mind. I’ve given speeches against them for years,” he says. “Occasionally a man must rise above principle.” Buffett has also written, “I find the thought of retiring the plane even more revolting than the thought of retiring the chairman. In this matter I’ve demonstrated uncharacteristic flexibility. For years I argued passionately against corporate jets. But finally my dogma was run over by my karma.”

Buffett wrote in Berkshire’s 1986 Annual Report, “Whether Berkshire will get its money’s worth from the plane is an open question, but I will work at achieving some business triumph that I can (no matter how dubiously) attribute to it.” Buffett missed a chance to quote Mae West again: “I generally avoid temptation unless I can’t resist it.”

The first airplane was a 20-year-old Falcon jet that Buffett picked up for only $850,000. It cost about $200,000 a year to operate. The average cost per hour for operation was $1,500 (Forbes ASAP, February 24, 1997). In 1989, he turned it in for a truly first-class jet, though again a used one. He bought it for $6.7 million.

“The old plane had lots of problems,” said a worker at Omaha’s Eppley Airfield Airport. The second one, a Canadair Challenger, was a sleek white jet that seated about 10 people. Housed at the Sky Harbor facilities at Eppley, it had no insignia, nothing to suggest it belonged to Berkshire.

The pilots for the plane were generally from the Peter Kiewit firm in Omaha. One pilot once told a shareholder that it would be typical for Buffett to greet the pilot, talk briefly to any guests aboard, then “stick his head in an annual report.”

Traveling about 60 days out of the year, Buffett used the plane often, mainly tending to the boards on which he sits and visiting Berkshire subsidiaries. He’s glad to share “his” plane with people who have Berkshire business.

“He’ll let us piggyback in the plane,” says a Borsheims employee. Sometimes Buffett talks to a passenger or two about buying their businesses; and sometimes he goes through a pile of mail, but according to a Borsheims employee, “He usually reads.”

The corporate jet was the one toy of the rich that Buffett accepted for the convenience it provided.

Munger never traveled in the jet; he refused to get in it, refused to condone its existence. He often kidded Buffett about it, saying the thing was a monstrosity against shareholder interests.

With that much needling from Munger, Buffett threatened to name the second aircraft The Charles T. Munger. Charlie’s counter-suggestion was the Aberration. They finally settled on a name: The Indefensible.

For years, Munger’s public stance was that the purchase of an airplane was total extravagance and something with which he was not in favor. But privately, Munger said that if any CEO deserves a jet, it is Buffett; and that for his needs, it makes sense. Berkshire shareholder Ed Prendeville recalls Munger coming out of an annual meeting in the mid-1980s telling someone, “It’s the most deserved jet in corporate America.”

In a November 5, 1990 Fortune story, written at the time when Berkshire’s stock price had fallen to $5,550 a share from a beginning-of-the-year price of about $8,675, Buffett was asked about The Indefensible. He quipped, “That’ll be the last thing to go.”

That was quick-witted, but nothing could beat this punch line in the 1990 Annual Report: Buffett wrote that if he left the scene, Munger would immediately sell the corporate jet, ignoring Buffett’s wish that it be buried with him.

If you have ever wondered what would happen to the companies Berkshire owns, such as Coca-Cola, after Buffett dies, consider this: Of Coca-Cola, Buffett said, rather Pharaoh-like, “There actually will be a short-term bulge [in Coke sales], as I plan to have a large supply buried with me aboard the plane.”

When the Salomon crisis was at its height in the early 1990s, and Buffett was constantly using the plane to take him from New York to Omaha and back, he rechristened the aircraft Somewhat Indefensible. Could it yet become The Indispensable? Yes, it did when Munger declared it so at the 1997 Annual Meeting. His “counterrevelation” occurred after Berkshire’s purchase of FlightSafety.

In 1995, Buffett, in his role as pitchman for Nebraska economic development, posed for an ad photo in front of The Indefensible. The published ad read, “Until Midwest Express came to Omaha, this was the only way I could buy a nonstop.”

The ad, promoting Midwest’s role in Omaha’s economic development, quoted Buffett: “Last month I flew Midwest Express to Washington and arrived just as quickly and comfortably as if I had been in Berkshire’s corporate jet. (And believe me, it cost a whole lot less!)”

Although Buffett endorsed Midwest Express service, he indicated he would not give up the corporate jet. “Once spoiled, always spoiled,” he said (Omaha World–Herald, June 26, 1995).

Buffett sold the corporate jet that he liked so much in 1999. He said, “I take it to the drugstore now” (The Wall Street Journal, September 10, 1997). Buffett started using NetJets. He shared some advantages of the change with the Financial Times (February 20, 1999): “I’ll save a bundle. I have none of the headaches of training or scheduling pilots, or waiting on maintenance checks. This way I just call them up and a plane is there when I want it.”

Buffett explained: “I’m now flying The Defensible, The Very Defensible! It

didn’t make sense for me to own 100% of a plane. I thought that was my only option when I did it. To pay for four or five times the capacity you need doesn’t make any sense. Somebody who has a whole airplane is like a navy with one type of boat. They don’t need one destroyer: they need a whole array. I’m on a different mission all the time. I’ll have a 300-mile flight in the states, a 1,200-mile trip, or I’ll be flying over here [Europe] and I have 11 aircraft types, or something to choose from. I never had that with The Indefensible” (Time, Online, September 28, 2002).

Buffett told Time (September 13, 1999) that NetJets is one of the few luxuries he can justify. “I sleep in a bed, you sleep in a bed; I go to McDonald’s, you go to McDonald’s. For most things in life, being rich just isn’t that much of an advantage. The one area where money has made a difference for me is the ability to travel efficiently and do things that would otherwise be impossible.”

Munger—until his change of heart or his counter-revelation—often traveled on commercial coach flights, carrying his own bags. He showed up at Borsheims once carrying his own luggage, a suitcase in each hand.

Munger finally threw financial caution to the winds and signed up as a NetJets customer after a little push from Buffett. When Munger, ever the coach flyer, expressed some hesitation, Buffett told him he would get him “a seat in the back of the plane.”

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Indefensible



254





CHARLES MUNGER


Our experience tends to confirm a long-held notion that being prepared on a few occasions in a lifetime, to act promptly in scale, in doing some simple and logical thing will often dramatically improve the financial results of that lifetime.



A few major opportunities, clearly recognizable as such, will usually come to one who continuously searches and waits, with a curious mind, loving diagnosis involving multiple variables.



And then all that is required is a willingness to bet heavily when the odds are extremely favorable, using resources available as a result of prudence and patience in the past.”



—Charles Munger, 1998 Wesco Annual Report



Berkshire vice-chairman Charles Munger said one of the turning points for Berkshire was the purchase of See’s Candies. He noted, “It was acquired at a premium over book [value] and it worked. Hochschild-Kohn, the department store chain, was bought at a discount. It didn’t work. Those two things together helped shift our thinking to the idea of paying higher prices for better businesses” (Interview, May 21, 1997).

With See’s Candies, Buffett and Munger learned the real lesson of pricing power. See’s was purchased for three times its book value, far more than Buffett and Munger usually paid for a business. But See’s had a quality product and quality service. See’s has given Berkshire excellent returns over the years.

Munger said it also helps when you get high returns on a large amount of capital, as was the case with Berkshire’s investments in The Washington Post and Coca-Cola. “The Post took a fair amount of the capital available to us at the time,” he added. “At no time was there a point when Berkshire might have gone off the tracks. I knew it would do well, but not this well.”

At Wesco’s Annual Meeting in 2002, Munger discussed Buffett as an investor:

Warren Buffett came to investing at the knee of Ben Graham, who ran a geiger counter over the detritus of the 1930s. Stocks were ridiculously cheap. Graham bought companies that were quite mediocre on average, but made 20% when their stock bounced.



Warren trained under this system and made money, so he was slower to come to the idea I learned that the best way to make money is to buy great businesses that earn high return on capital over long periods of time.



We’re applying Graham’s basic ideas, but now we’re trying to find undervalued great companies. That concept was foreign to Ben Graham.



Warren would have morphed into a great investor without Ben Graham. He is a greater investor than Graham was. Warren would have been great had he never met anyone else. He would have excelled at any field that required a high IQ, quantitative skills, and risk-taking. He wouldn’t have done well at ballet though.



Buffett once described to Forbes (January 22, 1996) the impact Munger had on his investment style: “Charlie shoved me in the direction of not just buying bargains, as Ben Graham had taught me. This was the real impact he had on me. It took a powerful force to move me on from Graham’s limiting views. It was the power of Charlie’s mind. He expanded my horizons.”

Buffett has said Munger’s impact on him has been “huge.” according to the Omaha World–Herald, May 2, 1999): “Charlie has always emphasized, ‘Let’s buy truly wonderful businesses,’” Buffett said. “I fooled around a little more with cigar butts. Too often I was looking at something that was selling at a big discount from working capital.… Charlie knows that game, and he felt that’s not the direction we should go. He was a significant factor in taking me consistently away from it.”

In recent years, they have talked less, but some investors were surprised at Buffett’s quote in Business Week (July 5, 1999), “Charlie and I don’t talk a lot anymore,” adding that he did not consult Munger on the General Re purchase. The Business Week story offered some explanatory remarks: “By all accounts, including their own, Munger and Buffett have not fallen out. But while Buffett is wholly devoted to Berkshire, Munger, 75, now spends his time chairing a non-profit hospital and serving as a trustee of a private high school. ‘Charlie is broader in his interests than I am,’ Buffett says. ‘He doesn’t have the same intensity for Berkshire that I have. It’s not his baby.’ Munger concurs: ‘Warren’s whole ego is poured into Berkshire.’ ”

Still, Buffett told Forbes (October 11, 1999), “Our relationship is the same as it has been for 40 years.”

In the foreword to Janet Lowe’s book about Munger, Damn Right!, Buffett said:

Charlie is “one of a kind … what makes Charlie special is his character … his mind is breathtaking: He’s as bright as any person I’ve ever met and, at 76, still has a memory I would kill for. He was born, though, with these abilities. It’s how he has elected to use them that makes me regard him so highly.… In 41 years, I have never seen Charlie try to take advantage of anyone, nor have I seen him claim the least bit of credit for anything that he didn’t do. In fact, I’ve witnessed exactly the opposite: He has knowingly let me and others have the better end of a deal, and he has also always shouldered more than his share of the blame when things go wrong and accepted less than his share of credit when the reverse has been true. He is generous in the deepest sense and he never lets ego interfere with rationality. Unlike most individuals who hunger for the world’s approval, Charlie judges himself entirely by an inner scorecard—and he’s a tough grader” (Janet Lowe, Damn Right!, p. iii).



“By now Warren knows pretty much everything I think,” Munger was quoted as saying. “Once in a while I’ll know something that’s useful to him” (Fortune, November 11, 2002).

Buffett has acknowledged moving somewhat away from Graham’s bargain-basement tactics: “Ben Graham wanted everything to be a quantitative bargain. I want it to be a quantitative bargain in terms of future streams of cash” (Forbes, October 18, 1993).

Munger, who receives no compensation as Wesco’s CEO, said at the Wesco Annual Meeting in 1991, “The basic concept of value to a private owner and being motivated when you’re buying and selling securities by reference to intrinsic value instead of price momentum—I don’t think that will ever be outdated. But Ben Graham had blind spots. He had too low an appreciation of the fact that some businesses were worth paying big premiums for.”

In a creditable footnote to one edition of The Intelligent Investor, he [Graham] sheepishly said that he’d practiced this one value system for a long time and achieved a very respectable record doing it, but he got rich in a hurry by buying one growth stock investment. It amused him that half or more of his fortune came to him from one investment [GEICO].



Graham was insufficiently aware of the possibility that a company could prove a great holding for a long time—even when it sold at a large multiple of book value. Look at Coca-Cola stock. It has a very minor book value compared to its current price.



You will notice that we’re not following classic Graham and Dodd to the last detail as it was in Ben Graham’s mind. Both Warren and I sometimes wonder what would have happened if we’d started out in better businesses instead of trading stamps, aluminum, textile companies—we even had a windmill company at one time. It took us a long time to wise up.



Munger is Buffett’s friend, soul mate, sidekick, and interchangeable partner. Buffett likes to joke that Munger is his “junior partner in good years and senior partner in bad years.”

When reporters cannot get Buffett, which is most of the time, they will

sometimes call Munger for an observation of Buffett. Munger will offer one of his classic remarks, such as, “He takes his work seriously, but he doesn’t take himself seriously.”

While Munger has excellent investment vision, he suffers a problem with his physical vision. Back in the early 1970s, Munger had a cataract operation which went awry. A damaged optical nerve led to excruciating pain and nausea. He had his left eye removed in the early 1980s and wears uncommonly thick and sturdy black frame glasses. “It’s no big handicap,” he has said. “I play golf and tennis.” He reads about a book a day, saying he “skims” a fair amount, too.

This voracious reader has recommended such books as Titan, Genome, The Selfish Gene, Influence, Models of My Life, and Ice Age. He has read the Los Angeles Times, The New York Times, and The Wall Street Journal by the time he finishes breakfast. Also he reads Forbes, Fortune, and Business Week, as well as academic writings. He reads “a ton of biographies” and “a lot of expository stuff.” Munger says, “I don’t know anybody I regard as wise, who lives a full-scale life, who isn’t a fairly prodigious reader” (Omaha World-Herald, May 2, 1999). Munger has read Fermat’s Last Theorem. He doesn’t read detective stories or romance novels.

“In my whole life, I have known no wise people … none, zero … [who don’t read]. You’d be amazed at how much Warren reads.” Munger, commenting on his own affinity for reading, has said, “My children probably think of me as a book with two legs sticking out.”

Likewise, it was once said England’s Lord Thomas Macaulay, who wrote a five-volume history of England, was a voracious reader: “[He was] a book in breeches.” Macaulay started reading at three and died at fifty-nine with an open book in front of him. While sailing on a trip to India he read Homer, Virgil, Caesar, Horace, Dante, Petrarch, Ariosto, Tasso, Bacon, Cervantes, and all seventy volumes of Voltaire. “What a blessing it is to love books as I love them to be able to converse with the dead, and to live amidst the unreal,” Macaulay once said (Anne Fadiman, Ex Libris, p. 64).

Munger concedes that Buffett is somewhat more talented than he hinself is. Munger says, “The main risk we face as we scrabble on is not going broke but going crazy” (Katharine Graham, Personal History, p. 535).

Unlike Buffett, Munger has sold or given away a few thousand shares of Berkshire stock along the way. He has given a few hundred shares to such entities as Los Angeles’ Good Samaritan Hospital, Planned Parenthood, Stanford Law School, and the Harvard-Westlake School (Forbes, January 22, 1996).

“I’ve tried to imitate, in a poor way, the life of Benjamin Franklin. When he was 42, Franklin quit business to focus more on being a writer, statesman, philanthropist, inventor, and scientist. That’s why I have diverted my interest away from business” (Forbes, January 22, 1996). Ben Franklin was known for his insightful sayings; key examples include: “Creditors have better memories than debtors,” and “But in this world nothing can be said to be certain, except death and taxes.”

A tragedy that hit Munger was similar to ones that struck Ben Franklin and Ben Graham: Munger’s first son, Teddy, died early of leukemia; and the first sons of Ben Franklin (Franklin’s son died of smallpox when he was four years old) and Ben Graham’s son also died young (Janet Lowe, Damn Right! p. 77). Munger’s first marriage ended in divorce which caused a financial setback.

At Wesco’s Annual Meeting in 2002, Munger sang high praises of Franklin:

I’d argue that we’ve never seen his equal in terms of range. He was the best writer in his country. He was the best scientist in his country. He was the best inventor in his country. He was certainly one of the best statesmen in the country. He was one of the best legislators in the country. He was one of the best philanthropists in the country. It’s a lot. And he played four different musical instruments.



And he invented all of these things like bifocal glasses—which I’m now wearing. And of course, he was present, by the accidents of life, at the creation of a great and prosperous country.



In addition to all that, Franklin famously tamed lightning and created the largest printing business in colonial America.

Franklin was also a pioneer in American insurance. He developed organized risk bearing by forming the first incorporated fire insurance in the country. It was the Philadelphia Contributorship for the Insurance of Houses from Loss by Fire. Franklin was so smart that maybe he knew back then that he could invest the float and be like Buffett and Munger.

Like Munger, Franklin was a great reader from early on. He wrote in his autobiography (p. 9): “From a child I was fond of reading, and all the little money that came into my hands was ever laid out in books.” As a boy he read John Bunyan’s The Pilgrim’s Progress and Plutarch’s Lives. “This bookish inclination at length determined my father to make me a printer,” Franklin wrote.

And Franklin, like Buffett and Munger, was great at the pithy quip. Once asked what could be the possible use of balloon flights that were the mania of the time, Franklin replied: “What is the use of a newborn baby?” (Walter Isaacson, Benjamin Franklin: An American Life, p. 421).

Founder of the Public Library of Philadelphia, printer, and author of Poor Richard’s Almanack, Franklin famously said, “Well done is better than well said.”

Once Munger commissioned an artist to create 20 copies of a bust of Ben Franklin and gave many of them to friends (Janet Lowe, Damn Right!, p. 214).

Raised in the Unitarian Church, Munger now attends an Episcopal church. He has said he believes in God “in a sense” and has “embraced the ethos” of his church upbringing but not the “technical theology.” Munger raised the question (Omaha World–Herald, May 2, 1999): “Do you think Franklin cared about such things as whether the body of Christ is really present in the sacrament?” Munger asked. “It didn’t interest Franklin and it doesn’t interest me.”

“Warren and I are a little different in that we actually run businesses and allocate capital to them. [John Maynard Keynes] atoned for his portfolio management ‘sins’ by making money for his college and serving his nation. I do my outside activities to atone, and Warren uses his investment success to be a great teacher” (Forbes, January 22, 1996).

One marvels at Buffett and kindred spirit Munger, a curmudgeon of high standards and temperate habits like Buffett’s: two old-timers sitting on the porch taking a shrewd, realistic look at an imperfect world and having a ball trying to figure out how to make the most of it. Buffett and Munger talked with one another almost daily over the years, but less in recent years as both men’s schedules are full. They need each other. Munger explained: “Everybody engaged in complicated work needs colleagues. Just the discipline of having to put your thoughts in order with somebody else is a very useful thing” (Forbes, January 22, 1996).

Buffett said, “I probably haven’t talked to anyone on Wall Street one hundredth of the time I speak to Charlie” (Forbes, January 22, 1996).

“There are huge advantages for an individual to get into a position where you make a few great investments and just sit back,” Munger stated. “You’re paying less to brokers. You’re listening to less nonsense.… If it works, the governmental tax system gives you an extra one, two or three percentage points per annum with compound effects” (Forbes, January 22, 1996). That’s because with a long-term holding, you do not pay the tax collector every year.

In many ways, Munger is a great foil for Buffett, especially when the two are at the dais conducting the annual meeting. Their dialogue when trying to keep Berkshire investments quiet, went like this::

Buffett: Unfortunately, we have to file certain reports. And it has lately been our policy to list our year-end holdings which total $100 million [now $750 million] or more in our annual reports. But in between, we don’t say much. Charlie?



Munger: No comment.



Buffett has called Munger, “the abominable ‘no’ man.” The Washington Post (March 22, 1998) said Munger is Buffett’s “mordant and cerebral sidekick.”

Munger is one of the nation’s leading thinkers when it comes to investing, education, and worldly wisdom. (See Robert Hagstrom’s Latticework.) Here’s a sample from a talk he gave to a Stanford Law School class: “And when law schools do reach out beyond traditional material, they often do it in what looks to me like a pretty dumb way. If you think psychology is badly taught in America, you should look at corporate finance. Modern portfolio theory?! It’s demented!” (Outstanding Investor Digest, March 13, 1998).

Munger also discussed personal investment strategy in his talk: “Each person has to play the game given his own marginal utility considerations and in a way that takes into account his own psychology. If losses are going to make you miserable—and some losses are inevitable—you might be wise to utilize a very conservative pattern of investment and saving all your life. So you have to adapt your strategy to your own nature and your own talents. I don’t think there’s a one-size-fits-all investment strategy that I can give you.

“Mine works for me. But, in part, that’s because I’m good at taking losses. I can take them psychologically. And besides, I have very few. The combination works fine” (Outstanding Investor Digest, March 13, 1998).

Munger said there is always someone doing better or making money faster than you, but it is useless to give that much thought. “Envy is a deadly sin—one sin that you can’t have any fun at.” Munger said his style is simply to “go through life in an orderly way.”

A student asked Munger if he were fulfilling his responsibility to share his wisdom. Munger responded: “Sure. Look at Berkshire Hathaway. I call it the ultimate didactic exercise. Warren’s never going to spend any money. He’s going to give it back to society. He’s just building a platform so people will listen to his notions. Needless to say, they are very good notions. And the platform’s not so bad either. But you could argue that Warren and I are academics in our own way” (Outstanding Investor Digest, March 13, 1998).

Munger doesn’t always answer with “no comment,” he has also said things like, “Just out of our respective graduate schools, my friend Warren Buffett and I entered the business world to find huge, predictable patterns of extreme irrationality. These irrationalities were obviously important to what we wanted to do, but our professors had never mentioned them. This was not an obvious or easy path.… I came to the psychology of human misjudgement almost against my will; I rejected it until I realized that my attitude was costing me a lot of money, and reduced my ability to help everything I loved.”

Munger continued: “We [Buffett and I] automatically suspect anything the crowd goes along with. Early on, when I saw how successful you could be having that temperament, I intensified it. Temperament is vastly more important in financial terms than IQ. It doesn’t take a genius, but it does require proper temperament.” And proper framework.

Munger has also said you should bet on what will happen, not what should happen.

Here are a few more Mungerisms to enjoy:

• Understanding both the power of compound return and the difficulty getting it is the heart and soul of understanding a lot of things (Forbes, January 22, 1996).



• A big difference in a life can occur when a few ideas are thoroughly assimilated.



• If you buy a few great companies, you can sit on your ass.



• Life is a whole series of opportunity costs.



• Take a simple idea and take it seriously.



• So you have to learn in a very usable way this very elementary math and use it routinely in life—just the way if you want to be a golfer, you can’t use the natural swing that broad evolution gave you. You have to learn to have a certain grip and swing in a different way to realize your potential as a golfer.



• If you don’t get this elementary but mildly unnatural mathematics of elementary probability into your repertoire, then you go through a long life like a one-legged man in an ass-kicking contest. You’re giving a huge advantage to everybody else.



• One of the advantages of a fellow like Buffett, whom I’ve worked with all these years, is that he automatically thinks in terms of decision trees and the elementary math of permutations and combinations.



• Munger has said human beings tend to have confirmation bias, tend to pick evidence in support of their own views, often think too little and often conform to group-think.



Here are some Mungerisms from the Wesco Annual Meeting in 2002:

• You don’t get a lot of credit in life for not committing adultery with the Virgin Mary.



• Get the big points with organized common sense.



• People calculate too much and think too little.



• We know a lot of successful businessmen who have not one true friend on earth, and rightly so. That’s no way to live a life.



• Regarding the circle of competence: Have three baskets: IN, OUT, and TOO TOUGH. Toss a lot of stuff into the TOO TOUGH basket.



• Many of the world’s prolems are caused by liquor or debt.



At the Berkshire annual meeting in 1995, Munger commented on how little corporate America has studied Berkshire, despite its success. “How much of Berkshire has been copied?… People don’t want to do it.” At the annual meeting in 1996, Munger noted, “Berkshire’s assets have been lovingly put together so as not to require continuing intelligence at headquarters.”

Munger offered this jewel at the 1997 meeting, “People underrate the importance of a few simple big ideas. And I think to the extent Berkshire Hathaway is a didactic enterprise teaching the right systems of thought, the chief lessons are that a few big ideas really work. I think these filters of ours have worked pretty well—because they are so simple.”

During the 1999 meeting, he commented about the Internet, saying great technological advances for mankind do not necessarily turn out to be great investments. He likened the Internet to railroads, refrigeration, radio, television, and air conditioning—marvelous advances but often less attractive as investments.

“The number one idea,” Munger said in a Harvard Law Bulletin interview in 2001, “is to view a stock as an ownership of the business [and] to judge the staying quality of the business in terms of its competitive advantage. Look for more value in terms of discounted future cash flow than you’re paying for. Move only when you have an advantage. It’s very basic. You have to understand the odds and have the discipline to bet only when the odds are in your favor.”

At Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2002, Munger offered this observation: “All intelligent investing is value investing—to acquire more than you are paying for. Investing is where you find a few great companies and then sit on your ass.”

Munger was educated at public schools in Omaha, including Dundee Elementary School and Central High School, where he graduated in 1941. Eventually he left Omaha for good.

Munger attended the University of Michigan (1941–42) and has been quoted as saying of his Michigan days, “I was kind of a wise ass and tried to get As without doing any of the work. I went to the first exam [in economics], and it was honestly the hardest exam I’ve ever seen. I tried my best at it, but went and dropped the class right afterward.” Later he found he had made the second highest score in the class. The top score went to “a young man that was even more maladjusted than I was” (Michigan Daily, February 21, 2007). Thereafter, Munger served as a meteorological officer in the Air Force during World War II.

After his days in the service, he took a few classes at the University of New Mexico and Cal Tech but never earned an undergraduate degree.

As part of a program favoring veterans, he was accepted to Harvard Law School in 1946 without an undergraduate degree. At the end of his second year, he won a $400 prize from Sears for being the No. 2 student in his class. He was one of 12 students in his Harvard Law School class of 335 who graduated magna cum laude in 1948. Kingman Brewster, the future president of Yale University, was in Munger’s class.

Munger was admitted to the California Bar in 1949, and became associated with the law firm Wright & Garrett, which later became Musick, Peeler & Garrett.

In 1962, a group of lawyers left that firm to found Munger, Tolles, Hills & Rickershauser, which engaged in corporate matters. Among the seven founders of the firm were Munger; LeRoy Tolles; Roderick Hills, chairman of the SEC for a time and his wife, Carla Hills, who became U.S. trade representative. Harvard Law professor Roderick Hills recruited Robert Denham to join the firm in 1971. Denham would later go on to manage Salomon during its rebuilding years (1992–1998). Although Munger is no longer a partner in the firm, he still maintains his office there.

The Munger, Tolles & Olson firm has been described by the American Lawyer as Los Angeles’ most elite law firm; at the time 13 of its 103 were former U.S. Supreme Court clerks. The firm had about 124 lawyers as of August 2008. Partner Ron Olson was named California’s Most Influential Lawyer in 1997.

American Lawyer ran an article in April 1992 with this heading: “No leverage. No marketing. Consensus compensation. Disdain for management. How Munger, Tolles is breezing through the recession.”

The Los Angeles Times (June 10, 1997) described the firm’s compensation system:

Every January each partner—there are now 52—gets a ballot listing the names of all the partners with a blank after each name. The firm’s net income for the previous year is printed at the bottom. Then each partner fills in the amount of money he or she thinks every partner should make, with no rules other than the numbers must add up to the net. No points, no shares. No seniority, no nothing.



Since the early 1970s, the firm has served as Berkshire’s chief counsel. Firm partner Robert Denham had done work off and on for Berkshire since 1974 before serving as Salomon’s chairman until it was sold to Travelers.



Denham returned to the firm after his stint at Salomon. He focuses on merger-and-acquisition advice, corporate governance issues, and crisis management.



The Times quoted Denham as he discussed crisis management: “When a good company hits a rock, the task of getting it off the rock is critical. Jobs and lives and shareholders’ wealth are tied up in succeeding. It’s a high-energy, high-pressure job where time has value.” He added, “Getting the job done [at Salomon] in nine months instead of a year and a half probably made the difference between the company living and dying.”

Denham continues to serve as Buffett’s main lawyer. Denham and his wife Carolyn live in Pasadena, California. She is president of Pacific Oaks College & Children’s School.

Munger has distinguished himself in many ways: Lawyer, businessman, educator, and investor. His investment record suffers in comparison only with Buffett’s. Asked at Wesco’s Annual Meeting if he used a personal computer, Munger replied, “Not so far.”

“VERY IMPRESSED”

Munger, the grandson of a federal judge and the son of an Omaha lawyer, was born on January 1, 1924, in Omaha. He grew up in a house once owned by industrialist Peter Kiewit which is remarkably about 100 yards from Buffett’s current home. Munger has said that his family and Buffett’s knew each other, but that he did not actually meet Buffett until 1959. Referring to his life before Buffett, Munger has said, “I knew everyone in the [Buffett] family except Warren.” Munger once worked Saturdays in the Buffett & Son grocery store which belonged to Buffett’s grandfather. The small store furnished both credit and delivery services and survived the arrival of supermarkets for many years.

Munger and Buffett were introduced by mutual friends, Dr. and Mrs. Edwin Davis. Buffett had called on Davis one night, as he did many doctors in Omaha in the early days, seeking money for his partnership. Buffett later asked Davis why he was so quick to invest with him. Davis told him it was because Buffett reminded him so much of Munger. Dr. Davis, who is now deceased, was a urologist. His brother-in-law, Lee D. Seeman, Sr., a decorated B-17 pilot in World War II, is a longtime major Berkshire shareholder.

Munger had heard about Buffett but was not prepared to be particularly impressed. Buffett and Munger spent that first dinner together in July 1959, at Johnny’s Café talking about the securities markets. Munger said that on meeting Buffett, he was instantly impressed, recognizing Buffett’s sensational abilities on the spot.

“I wasn’t just slightly impressed. I was very impressed,” Munger said (Linda Grant, Los Angeles Times, April 7, 1991). Buffett and Munger became “mental partners.”

In an interview, Munger joked that he deserves some credit for spotting the

abilities of Buffett even though Buffett lacked the outward appearances of success. “He had a crew cut. He was working out of a sun porch at his house, and his dietary [leanings] were toward Pepsi, salted nuts and no vegetables.”

Of their first dinner together, Munger admitted, yes, they talked about the markets, but they also “talked about a lot of things.”

The two became fast friends, and Buffett kept telling him that investing was a quicker way to riches than the law. Munger became convinced and established a long, successful investment record himself even while keeping one foot in his law practice. He left his law practice in 1965.

“Somewhere along the line, I decided that I would get rich, not so much for the love of money, but for the love of independence,” Munger has said. “I liked being able to say what I thought instead of what was expected of me” (Omaha World–Herald, May 2, 1999).

“Like Warren, I had a considerable passion to get rich not because I wanted Ferraris—I wanted the independence. I desperately wanted it. I thought it was undignified to have to send invoices to other people. I don’t know where I got that notion from, but I had it” (Janet Lowe, Damn Right! p. 4).

From 1962 to 1975, Munger managed the investment firm of Wheeler, Munger & Co. from a no-frills office in the Pacific Coast Stock Exchange building. “Munger earned a highly respectable compound return of 19.8% a year before fees and after expenses” (Forbes, January 22, 1996). Munger had a superb record from 1962 to 1969, but was way below the market averages in the early 1970s.

Munger was clubbed in the 1973–74 selloff. Buffett had closed his partnership but subsequently Berkshire fell 50% in the 1973–74 decline.

At the end of 1974, the Wheeler, Munger partnership had $7 million, of which $3.7 million was invested in two securities, Blue Chip Stamps and New America Fund. The Munger family had about $3 million in the fund and $2 million in real estate. After 11 years of beating the Dow, Munger had about $3.7 million, which he later saw drop to $1.7 million. He hung on; and at the end of 1975, he was back up to $3 million. Munger took the money from the partnership in the form of Blue Chip and Diversified, which were eventually merged into Berkshire and became worth more than $1 billion.

So what persuaded Munger to switch from law to investing?

“I had a huge family. Nancy and I supported eight children.… And I didn’t

realize that the law was going to get as prosperous as it suddenly got. The big money came into law shortly after I left it. By 1962, I was mostly out. And I was totally out by 1965. So that was a long time ago.

“Also, I preferred making decisions and gambling my own money. I usually thought I knew better than the client anyway, so why should I have to do it his way? So partly, it was having an opinionated personality. And partly, it was a desire to get resources permitting independence.

“Also the bulk of my clients were terrific. But there were one or two I didn’t enjoy. Plus I liked the independence of a capitalist. And I always had sort of a gambling personality. I liked figuring things out and making bets. So I simply did what came naturally” (Outstanding Investor Digest, March 13, 1998).

Munger once said, “I wanted to get rich so I could be independent, and so I could do the things like give talks on the intersection of psychology and economics. I didn’t want to turn it into a total obsession” (Speech at Harvard Law School, date unknown).

Munger is now old enough and rich enough to say exactly what he pleases. At a Stanford Law School function June 21, 2004, talking about how he would like to see a new securities law similar to that of the military that prohibits conduct unbecoming an officer, Munger said, “People ought to know that banging the stewardess on the corporate airplane … is conduct unbecoming.” Talk about brass cashews.

Buffett and Munger invested together in the mid-1960s, particularly in Blue Chip Stamps, an issuer of trading stamps originally formed by a consortium of grocery store chains. Munger became a Berkshire officer in 1976, and has been vice chairman since 1978 with the Berkshire–Diversified Retailing merger that year.

Munger became a large Berkshire shareholder in the late 1970s when two of his investments, Diversified Retailing and later Blue Chip Stamps, were merged into Berkshire (Forbes, January 22, 1996). Five years later Munger became chairman of Wesco Financial.

Munger continues to live in Los Angeles. He is chairman, at no salary, of the Daily Journal Corporation, publisher of the Los Angeles Daily Journal for lawyers and more than a dozen other small legal newspapers in California and other western states. The Los Angeles Daily Journal and the San Francisco Daily Journal, established in the late 1800s, are the largest newspapers the company publishes.

In addition to the newspapers, the company also offers online information, continuing legal education, bankruptcy publications, and the magazine California Lawyer.

Daily Journal Corp. owns Sustain software, which is used by courts and justice agencies. The Sustain software business posted negative results in recent years, delivering a blow to the Daily Journal’s finances.

Daily Journal occupies a certain niche in the newspaper business. It has about 300 employees, is headed by Munger and company president Gerald Salzman, and in 2007, had profits of about $5.3 million.

Salzman bought the Daily Journal in 1977 when he was putting together an investment portfolio for Munger.

In one annual letter to Daily Journal shareholders, Munger described a pre-tax loss of $300,000 at the company’s California Lawyer magazine: “The venture plainly (1) is a contribution to the social order, (2) creates the best style of communications between the State Bar and its members and (3) works well for its advertisers. But its economic effects continue to be unsatisfactory to our company as owner.” Munger controls 39% of the shares of the over-the-counter company, which he holds through Munger, Marshall & Co., a California limited partnership of which Munger and his family are the largest owners. Munger’s close friend, J. P. Guerin, and his family own about 17% of the shares.

Neither Munger nor Guerin takes any compensation for work on company

matters, and Munger admits they underpay company president Gerald Salzman.

In a supreme example of patience and timing, the small long-struggling company spent years building a cash reserve of about $20 million in Treasuries. Then at the height of the financial crisis—in the first quarter of 2009—the company invested most of the money in stocks which virtually doubled over the following year.

Munger also occasionally replies to shareholder letters by jotting a note back on the same letter. Berkshire-like, it saves a sheet of paper and time.

From the early 1970s to the late 1980s, Munger and Rick Guerin ran the New America Fund, which had a terrific record before it was liquidated.

In 1997, Munger was named to the board of directors of Costco Companies Inc., “I admire the people and the business for what they’ve invented in retailing,” Munger said in an interview. He said Costco has created a revolution in the distribution of consumer goods. Munger owns 91,884 shares of Costco, according to the 1998 Costco Annual Report.

Munger also owns more than 5% of the preferred issue of Price Enterprises, a real estate firm which leases properties to such tenants as Costco. Price was bought out by Excel Legacy Corp. in late 1999.

A Forbes story about Costco (August 11, 1997) said Munger knew about the revolution Costco is creating. “Earlier this year the Berkshire Hathaway vice chairman joined Costco’s board at age 73. It’s a rare business commitment outside the investment juggernaut he oversees with Warren Buffett. Munger’s introduction to Costco wasn’t as an investor but as a customer. A man who appreciates the value of a buck, Munger buys everything from meat and wine to office supplies at the warehouse. He even bought his wristwatch there.

“‘I admire the place so much that I violated my rules [against sitting on outside boards],’ says Munger. ‘It’s hard to think of people who have done more in my lifetime to change the world of retailing for good, for added human happiness for the customer.’

“‘Including Sam Walton?’ Munger nods.”

The story went on to say: “Actually, Munger didn’t say ‘people,’ he said ‘two people.’ One is James Sinegal, 61, president and chief executive officer of Costco. The other is Sinegal’s mentor, San Diego’s Sol Price, who invented the warehouse concept with the Price Club chain after first transforming mass discounting with his Fed-Mart stores.”

A story in The New York Times (April 4, 2004) compared the modest salary of Costco’s Sinegal with the lavish pay of Cendant Corp.’s Henry Silverman. The story quoted Munger as saying, “One of the things you are supposed to do when you rise to a leadership position is to be an exemplar, and a man who rises to be an exemplar should not be fanning the flames of envy.”

Munger is quick with quips and often comes up with important common sense lessons of his own; for instance, he has said: “The first chance you have to avoid a loss from a foolish loan is by refusing to make it. There is no second chance.”

Munger and Buffett work together quickly and efficiently and have worked together so long, each knows how the other will view something. However, the two men do have their different opinions.

Munger is a staunch Republican; Buffett is a Democrat. Munger likes to fish in lakes and stalk big salmon in Alaskan rivers, while Buffett cares little about fishing. Otherwise, the men agree on almost everything. Buffett has said that if something got by one of them, it might get by both because their “filters” are similar.

Buffett said, “Charlie Munger and I can handle a four-page memo over the phone with three grunts” (John Train,The Midas Touch, p. 70).

“Charlie and I are interchangeable on business decisions,” Buffett has said per Train’s account. “Distance impedes us not at all; we’ve always found a telephone to be more productive than a half-day meeting.”

Buffett also said, “My idea of a group decision is to look in the mirror.” Over the years, however, if Buffett had a hard time making a decision, Munger was the first person he consulted. “Charlie says everything I do is dumb. If he says it’s really dumb, I know it is; but if he just says it’s dumb, I take that as an affirmative vote” (Fortune, July 20, 1998).

Buffett told Forbes (October 18, 1993) that the three people who most influenced him were his father, Ben Graham, and Munger.

He said of his father: “[He] taught me to do nothing that could not be put on the front page of a newspaper. I have never known a better human than my dad.”

Buffett said Graham gave him an intellectual framework for investing and a temperamental model, and the ability to stand back and not be influenced by a crowd, not to be fearful if stocks go down.

As for Munger’s influence, Buffett said: “Charlie made me focus on the merits of a great business with tremendously growing earning power, but only when you can be sure of it—not like Texas Instruments or Polaroid, where the earning power was hypothetical. Charlie doesn’t have his ego wrapped up in the business the way I do, but he understands it perfectly. Essentially we have never had an argument, though occasional disagreements.”

Munger returned the compliment to Buffett in the same Forbes story: “One of the reasons Warren is so cheerful is that he doesn’t have to remember his lines.” In other words, public Buffett and private Buffett are the same.

Forbes rated Munger’s net worth at $365 million in 1993. Munger was surprised to be on the 400 richest list and responded: “I’ve been associated with Warren so long, I thought I’d be just a footnote.” He added that his life’s goal had been to stay below the cutoff for the list.

At Wesco’s annual meeting in 1997, Munger said, “The beauty of a great

business is that it can stand some ruin.” He told the story about a mine that had suffered some mismanagement and ended it by saying, “If it won’t stand some mismanagement, it’s no mine.”

For classic stock picking, he said that one simply needs to try to find mispriced bets where you conclude, through a multi-disciplined approach, you have an advantage. “I need no more than that.” He continued, “We don’t worry about the Fed. … We’re a net buyer of stocks as far ahead as we can see.”

He concluded by saying, naturally, he wants to buy stocks at good prices. “I never want to pay above intrinsic value for a stock—with very rare exceptions where someone like Warren Buffett is in charge. There are people—very few—worth paying up a bit to get in with for a long-term advantage.”

A story in The New York Times (June 8, 1997) quoted Blair Sanford, an analyst with Hoefer & Arnett in San Francisco, as saying that Wesco has “if not the smartest investing mind of the 20th century, then one of the smartest. Warren is more publicized, but Warren wouldn’t be Warren had he not met Charlie Munger.”

One wag says this:

“Warren, Warren. He’s our man.



If he can’t do it, Munger can.”



A PREPARED MIND

At Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2003, Munger made an interesting point about the importance of maintaining a prepared mind: “We have this idea that desirable opportunities frequently are very ephemeral. So, if you get the idea that for each of us, really good investment opportunities are not going to come along too often and are not going to last too long when they come, you’ve got to prepare yourself to act during this brief period. And that takes a prepared mind. It’s just that simple.”

ACADEMIC ECONOMICS

Munger gave a talk on October 3, 2003, entitled “Academic Economics: Strengths and Faults After Considering Interdisciplinary Needs.” OK, the talk may sound like a snoozer, but it really wasn’t at all. Here are a few clips:

As I talk about strengths and weaknesses in academic economics, one interesting fact you are entitled to know is that I never took a course in economics. And with this striking lack of credentials, you may wonder why I have the chutzpah to be up here giving this talk. The answer is I have a black belt in chutzpah. I was born with it. Some people, like some of the women I know, have a black belt in spending. They were born with that. But what they gave me was a black belt in chutzpah.…



Well, Berkshire’s whole record has been achieved without paying one ounce of attention to the efficient market theory in its hard form. And not one ounce of attention to the descendants of that idea, which came out of academic economics and went into corporate finance and morphed into such obscenities as the capital asset pricing model, which we also paid no attention to. I think you’d have to believe in the tooth fairy to believe that you could easily outperform the market by seven-percentage points per annum just by investing in high-volatility stocks.



Finally, with my peculiar history, I’m also bold enough to be here today, because at least when I was young I wasn’t a total klutz. For one year at the Harvard Law School, I was ranked second in my group of about a thousand, and I always figured that, while there were always a lot of people much smarter than I was, I didn’t have to hang back totally in the thinking game…



Einstein and Sharon Stone



I think that economists would be way better off if they paid more attention to Einstein and Sharon Stone. Well, Einstein is easy because Einstein is famous for saying, “Everything should be made as simple as possible, but no more simple.” Now, the saying is a tautology, but it’s very useful, and some economist—it may have been Herb Stein—had a similar tautological saying that I dearly love, ‘If a thing can’t go on forever, it will eventually stop.’”



Sharon Stone contributed to the subject because someone once asked her if she was bothered by penis envy. She replied, “Absolutely not, I have more trouble than I can handle with what I’ve got.” (Laughter.)



THE WISDOM OF CHARLIE MUNGER

• The best armour of old age is a well-spent life preceding it.

• Ban derivatives.

• The highest form of human governance is not a lot of procedure-driven decision making. The right culture, the highest and best culture, is a seamless web of deserved trust.

In a piece “How We Can Regain Confidence” (The Washington Post, February 11, 2009), Munger began: “Our situation is dire. Moderate booms and busts are inevitable in free-market capitalism. But a boom-bust cycle as gross as the one that caused our present misery is dangerous, and recurrences should be prevented.”

THE WISDOM OF DOERTHE OBERT

P.S. One joke told about Munger is that he is never wrong. Well, he thought he was wrong once and checked and found that he was mistaken.

A MUNGER STORY

Berkshire shareholder and money manager once told Munger about a btilliant surgeon and author named Atul Gawande. Mohnish later asked Gawande if he had ,heard from Munger.

Gawande: I did. He said he really liked my books and what I was doing. Interestingly, a couple weeks after I talked to him I got in the mail a handwritten envelope from him. I opened it up and inside was a check addressed to me for $20,000. I called him up and said, “Mr. Munger, I got your envelope. Thank you for the check, but I can’t accept this.”



Munger: No, no, use it for something good.



Gawande: Sir, I’m a surgeon. I’m seeing patients all the time. I can’t really just spend $20,000 to do “something good.”



Munger: No, no, you’re smart. You’ll figure something out.



Gawande: Okay, if you really want me to do something with it, I can give it to the Harvard School of Public Health.



Munger: You fool! If I wanted to give it to the damn Harvard School of Public Health, I would’ve written a damn check to the Harvard School of Public Health.



Gawande decided to send it back. A week later, he opened his mail to find another envelope from Munger.

Inside were two checks for $20,000. One to Gawande, and one to the Harvard School of Public Health.





Another Portrait of an Artist as a Young Man

Munger’s senior year photo at Central High School in Omaha in 1941

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Charles Munger



Financial Rock Star Munger and His Groupies

Munger, one of the brightest bulbs in the chandelier, is mobbed by Berkshire shareholders the weekend of the Berkshire Annual Meeting in 1995. On Munger’s left is Jim Armstrong; Armstrong is portfolio manager at Henry H. Armstrong Associates which owns more than 600 shares of Berkshire. Armstrong is a member of the Omaha Lounge Suits Society. Lounge suits were worn by upper-class Englishmen in the old days. Among the members of the self-proclaimed society are Gifford Combs of Los Angeles; Steve Wallman of Madison, Wisconsin; Bill Scargle of San Francisco; and Mick Moriarty of Omaha.

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

Charles Munger The Story of Warren Buffett



Damn High IQ

Ben “I’m a big fan of Charlie Munger” Franklin. Munger’s office furnishings include a life-size bronze bust of Ben Franklin.

(AP/Wide World Photos)

Of Permanent Value Charles Munger



Above Average IQs

Harvard Business School students, Class of ’97, gather with Munger at Berkshire’s Annual Meeting in 1997. From left, participants in the apparent case study of Coca-Cola are Elizabeth Prus, Ward Glassmeyer, David Tunnel, Tommy Frist, Munger, Allen Thorpe, and Jamie Elias. Harvard notwithstanding, Munger would agree with Mark Twain: “Never let a formal education get in the way of your learning.”

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)



Benjamin Franklin

by Walter Isaacson



A Great Improvisation: Franklin, France, and the Birth of America

by Pulitzer Prize winner Stacy Schiff.

(Photos by Mary Porter)

Charles Munger The Story of Warren Buffett



Munger’s Wisdom

Munger’s Worldly Wisdom was published in 2009.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Charles Munger



Munger Way Back When

Munger is second from left on the back row. (The circle was added by the photographer when the 1941 photo was reshot in 2003.)

(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)



On the Rifle Team

Charles T. Munger, third from left on the front row, was on the boys’ rifle team at Central High School. He was also an instructor for the girls’ rifle team.

Charles Munger The Story of Warren Buffett



Damn Right! A Damn Good Education.

Central High School in Omaha is where Munger got his start at being so damn smart. Buffett’s wife, Susan, gave the school $5.5 million to help pay for its football stadium and another $6 million for the district’s Educare Center, a state-of-the-art early childhood center. In 2004, Buffett’s daughter, Susie, Jr., gave $2.5 million to Central for a variety of items, including a $1-million donation, which allows the school to host varsity basketball games. The new additions include ticket booths, concessions, and restrooms. Prior to these improvements, Central played its home games elsewhere.

(Photo by Dara Zapata)



Wisdom of the Ages

Munger and his wife, Nancy, are

pictured at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1997. Munger’s first marriage ended

in divorce after eight years. He was married to Nancy for almost half a

century.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Charles Munger



Extra Wide Bandwidth

Munger, left, and Buffett—Berkshire’s Dynamic Duo—share a moment in a room above Borsheims the day before the Berkshire annual meeting in 1996.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



This is the home of Alfred C. Munger at 420 North 41st Street in Omaha where Charles Munger and his sister, Mary, spent their early childhood in the 1920s and 1930s.

(Photo by John Gass)

Charles Munger The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Steak House Mental Partners

Johnny’s Cafe in South Omaha is the site of Buffett and Munger’s first meeting in 1959 (Kennedy and Nixon debated here the following year) where they became “mental partners.” The two were introduced in the summer of 1959 by Munger’s friend Edwin Davis. Johnny’s, a well-known steak house, is appropriately located near Omaha’s stockyards, one of the nation’s biggest in the heyday of the American beef industry. The Union Stockyards of Omaha were founded in 1883, and by 1890 were the third largest in the country. By 1947, they were second only to Chicago in the world. Omaha overtook Chicago as the largest livestock market and meat packing center in 1955, a title which it held until 1971. The stockyards closed in 1999. Frank Kawa opened the steak house in 1922, and it’s now run by his son and grandchildren. Featured in About Schmidt, Jack Nicholson sat at the right end of the bar.

Of Permanent Value Charles Munger

Charles Munger The Story of Warren Buffett



Mr. “No Bullshit” Earnings

Munger signed copies of Damn Right! a book written about him by Janet Lowe, at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2001. Blunt-spoken Munger has described EBITDA earnings (earnings before interest, taxation, depreciation, and amortization) as “bullshit” earnings. When Munger is around, the bullshit meter gets turned off.

(Photo courtesy of Rick Ebbinghouse)

Corrected Version of History

This huge birthday card was given to Charlie Munger for his 80th birthday. He is a great student of American history, so Berkshire’s Kelly Muchemore found this photo in World Book, blew it up, and had Munger’s face superimposed on the image.



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Charles Munger



Sharon “No Envy” Stone

(AP/World Wide Photos)



The Brains Behind The Brain

Munger’s assistant, Doerthe Obert is at work in Munger’s office in Los Angeles.

(Photo by

Debbie Bosanek)

Charles Munger The Story of Warren Buffett

Munger sold about $750 million of Berkshire stock in November 2010 following his wife’s death earlier in the year. His disposals were made to a beneficiary of a community property revocable trust to which he and his wife were co-trustees.

Of Permanent Value Charles Munger



255





MUNGER’S MANIFESTO


To write well, express yourself like the common people, but think like a wise man.

(Aristotle)

In 1994, Munger—a cross between Aristotle and Stephen Hawkings—gave a speech to USC’s business school called “A Lesson on Elementary, Worldly Wisdom As It Relates to Investment Management and Business.” Widely viewed as a seminal lecture about investing and wisdom, the talk could have been called, “Munger’s Manifesto.”

“What is elementary, worldly wisdom?” Munger asked.

“Well, the first rule is that you can’t really know anything if you just remember isolated facts and try and bang ’em back. If the facts don’t hang together on a latticework of theory, you don’t have them in a usable form.

“You’ve got to have models in your head. And you’ve got to array your experience—both vicarious and direct—on this latticework of models. You may have noticed students who just try to remember and pound back what is remembered. Well, they fail in school and in life. You’ve got to hang experience on a latticework of models in your head.

“What are the models? Well, the first rule is that you’ve got to have multiple models—because if you just have one or two that you’re using, the nature of human psychology is such that you’ll torture reality so that it fits your models, or at least you’ll think it does. You become the equivalent of a chiropractor who, of course, is the great boob in medicine.

“‘Worldly wisdom’ comes from a working understanding—not necessarily advanced degrees—of math (algebra, geometry, and understanding the advantages of scale), accounting, engineering, physics (the notion of critical mass), biology, and psychology. And right up there may need to be an understanding of pari-mutual betting.”

Both Buffett and Munger have stressed the importance of knowing math even though there is some woman saying, “The only thing math taught me was how to make partial payments.”

In his talk, Munger quoted Pascal as saying, “‘The mind of man at one and the same time is both the glory and the shame of the universe.’”

“And that’s exactly right,” Munger continued, “It has this enormous power. However, it also has these standard misfunctions that often cause it to reach wrong conclusions. It also makes man extraordinarily subject to manipulation by others. For example, roughly half of the army of Adolf Hitler was composed of believing Catholics. Given enough clever psychological manipulation, what human beings will do is quite interesting.”

Munger says, “Let’s go through a list—albeit an incomplete one—of possible advantages of scale. Some come from simple geometry. If you’re building a great spherical tank, obviously as you build it bigger, the amount of steel you use in the surface goes up with the square and the cubic volume goes up with the cube. So as you increase the dimensions, you can hold a lot more volume per unit area of steel.

“And there are all kinds of things like that where the simple geometry—the simple reality—gives you an advantage of scale.

“For example, you can get advantages of scale from TV advertising. When TV advertising first arrived—when talking color pictures first came into our living rooms—it was an unbelievably powerful thing. And in the early days, we had three networks that had whatever it was—say 90% of the audience.

“Well, if you were Procter & Gamble, you could afford to use this new method of advertising. You could afford the very expensive cost of network television because you were selling so many cans and bottles. Some little guy couldn’t. And there was no way of buying it in part. Therefore, he couldn’t use it. In effect, if you didn’t have a big volume, you couldn’t use network TV advertising which was the most effective technique.

“So when TV came in, the branded companies that were already big got a huge tail wind. Indeed, they prospered and prospered and prospered until some of them got fat and foolish, which happens with prosperity—at least to some people.

“And your advantage of scale can be an informational advantage. If I go to some remote place, I may see Wrigley chewing gum alongside Glotz’s chewing gum. Well, I know that Wrigley is a satisfactory product, whereas I don’t know anything about Glotz’s. So if one is 40 cents and the other is 30 cents, am I going to take something I don’t know and put it in my mouth—which is a pretty personal place, after all—for a lousy dime?

“So, in effect, Wrigley, simply by being so well known, has advantages of scale—what you might call an informational advantage. Another advantage of scale comes from psychology. The psychologists use the term ‘social proof’. We are all influenced—subconsciously and to some extent consciously—by what we see others do and approve. Therefore, if everybody’s buying something, we think it’s better. We don’t like to be the one guy who’s out of step.”

Further, “There’s another kind of advantage to scale. In some businesses, the very nature of things is to sort of cascade toward the overwhelming dominance of one firm.

“The most obvious one is daily newspapers. There’s practically no city left in the U.S., aside from a few very big ones, where there’s more than one daily newspaper.

“And again, that’s a scale thing. Once I get most of the circulation, I get most of the advertising. And once I get most of the advertising and circulation, why would anyone want the thinner paper with less information in it? So it tends to cascade to a winner-take-all situation. And that’s a separate form of the advantages of scale phenomenon.”

Munger also pointed out, “The great defect of scale, of course, which makes the game interesting—so that the big people don’t always win—is that as you get big, you get the bureaucracy. And with the bureaucracy comes the territoriality—which is again grounded in human nature.

“And the incentives are perverse. For example, if you worked for AT&T in my day, it was a great bureaucracy. Who in the hell was really thinking about the shareholder or anything else? And in a bureaucracy, you think the work is done when it goes out of your in-basket into somebody else’s in-basket. But, of course, it isn’t. It’s not done until AT&T delivers what it’s supposed to deliver. So you get big, fat, dumb, unmotivated bureaucracies.”

Understanding what an exclusive franchise is, or a monopoly-like business, is essential to investing, Munger says.

“If you get the franchise for the only food stand in an airport, you have a captive clientele and you have a small monopoly of a sort.

“The great lesson in microeconomics is to discriminate between when technology is going to help you and when it’s going to kill you. And most people do not get this straight in their heads. But a fellow like Buffett does.

“For example, when we were in the textile business, which is a terrible commodity business, we were making low-end textiles—which are a real commodity product. And one day, the people came to Warren and said, ‘They’ve invented a new loom that we think will do twice as much work as our old ones.’

“And Warren said, ‘Gee, I hope this doesn’t work because if it does, I’m going to close the mill.’ And he meant it.

“What was he thinking? He was thinking, ‘It’s a lousy business. We’re earning substandard returns and keeping it open just to be nice to the elderly workers. But we’re not going to put huge amounts of new capital into a lousy business.’

“And he knew that the huge productivity increases that would come from a better machine introduced into the production of a commodity product would all go to the benefit of the buyers of the textiles. Nothing was going to stick to our ribs as owners.

“That’s such an obvious concept—that there are all kinds of wonderful new inventions that give you nothing as owners except the opportunity to spend a lot more money in a business that’s still going to be lousy. The money still won’t come to you. All of the advantages from great improvements are going to flow through to the customers.”

STAY IN YOUR CIRCLE OF COMPETENCE

Munger said, “Every person is going to have a circle of competence. And it’s going to be very hard to advance that circle. If I had to make my living as a musician, I can’t even think of a level low enough to describe where I would be sorted out to if music were the measuring standard of the civilization.

“So you have to figure out what your own aptitudes are. If you play games where other people have the aptitudes and you don’t, you’re going to lose. And that’s as close to certain as any prediction that you can make. You have to figure out where you’ve got an edge. And you’ve got to play within your own circle of competence.

“If you want to be the best tennis player in the world, you may start out trying and soon find out that it’s hopeless—that other people blow right by you. However, if you want to become the best plumbing contractor in Bemidji, that is probably doable by two-thirds of you. It takes a will. It takes the intelligence. But after a while, you’d gradually know all about the plumbing business in Bemidji and master the art. That is an attainable objective, given enough discipline. And people who could never win a chess tournament or stand in center court in a respectable tennis tournament can rise quite high in life by slowly developing a circle of competence—which results partly from what they were born with and partly from what they slowly develop through work.

“So some edges can be acquired. And the game of life to some extent for most of us is trying to be something like a good plumbing contractor in Bemidji. Very few of us are chosen to win the world’s chess tournaments.”

Having provided a general substructure of worldly wisdom, Munger began talking about investing—“plain vanilla stock picking.” He said: “The first question is, ‘What is the nature of the stock market?’ And that gets you directly to this efficient market theory that got to be the rage—a total rage—long after I graduated from law school.

“And it’s rather interesting because one of the greatest economists of the world is a substantial shareholder in Berkshire Hathaway and has been for a long time. His textbook always taught that the stock market was perfectly efficient and that nobody could beat it. But his own money went into Berkshire and made him wealthy. So, like Pascal in his famous wager, he hedged his bet.

“Is the stock market so efficient that people can’t beat it? Well, the efficient market theory is obviously roughly right—meaning that markets are quite efficient and it’s quite hard for anybody to beat the market by significant margins as a stock picker by just being intelligent and working in a disciplined way.

“Indeed, the average result has to be the average result. By definition, everybody can’t beat the market. As I always say, the iron rule of life is that only 20% of the people can be in the top fifth. That’s just the way it is. So the answer is that it’s partly efficient and partly inefficient.”

PARI-MUTUAL BETTING

Not totally buying the efficient market theory, Munger said, “The model I like—to sort of simplify the notion of what goes on in a market for common stocks—is the pari-mutual system at the racetrack. If you stop to think about it, a pari-mutual system is a market. Everybody goes there and bets and the odds change based on what’s bet. That’s what happens in the stock market.

“Any damn fool can see that a horse carrying a light weight with a wonderful win rate and a good post position etc., etc., is way more likely to win than a horse with a terrible record and extra weight and so on and so on. But if you look at the odds, the bad horse pays 100 to 1, whereas the good horse pays 3 to 2. Then it’s not clear which is statistically the best bet using the mathematics of Fermat and Pascal. The prices have changed in such a way that it’s very hard to beat the system.

“And then the track is taking 17% off the top. So not only do you have to outwit all the other betters, but you’ve got to outwit them by such a big margin that on average, you can afford to take 17% of your gross bets off the top and give it to the house before the rest of your money can be put to work.”

After playing with that thought for a while, Munger posed a question: “How do you get to be one of those who is a winner—in a relative sense—instead of a loser?” He followed with an interesting observation.

“The one thing that all those winning betters in the whole history of people who’ve beaten the pari-mutual system have is quite simple. They bet very seldom.

“It’s not given to human beings to have such talent that they can just know everything about everything all the time. But it is given to human beings who work hard at it—who look and sift the world for a mispriced bet—that they can occasionally find one.

“And the wise ones bet heavily when the world offers them that opportunity. They bet big when they have the odds. And the rest of the time, they don’t. It’s just that simple.

“And yet, in investment management, practically nobody operates that way. We operate that way—I’m talking about Buffett and Munger. And we’re not alone in the world. But a huge majority of people have some other crazy construct in their heads. And instead of waiting for a near cinch and loading up, they apparently ascribe to the theory that if they work a little harder or hire more business school students, they’ll come to know everything about everything all the time.

“To me, that’s totally insane. The way to win is to work, work, work, work and hope to have a few insights.

“How many insights do you need? Well, I’d argue: that you don’t need many in a lifetime. If you look at Berkshire Hathaway and all of its accumulated billions, the top 10 insights account for most of it. And that’s with a very brilliant man—Warren’s a lot more able than I am and very disciplined—devoting his lifetime to it. I don’t mean to say that he’s only had 10 insights. I’m just saying, that most of the money came from 10 insights.

“So you can get very remarkable investment results if you think more like a winning pari-mutual player. Just think of it as a heavy odds against a game full of craziness with an occasional mispriced something or other. And you’re probably not going to be smart enough to find thousands in a lifetime. And when you get a few, you really load up. It’s just that simple.”

But finding those few mispriced options can be very hard, Munger explained. “In the stock market, some railroad that’s beset by better competitors and tough unions may be available at one-third of its book value. In contrast, IBM in its heyday might be selling at six times book value. So it’s just like the pari-mutual system. Any damn fool could plainly see that IBM had better business prospects than the railroad. But once you put the price into the formula, it wasn’t so clear anymore what was going to work best for a buyer choosing between the stocks. So it’s a lot like a pari-mutual system. And, therefore, it gets very hard to beat.”

Munger said, “To Graham, it was a blessing to be in business with a manic-depressive who gave you this series of options all the time. That was a very significant mental construct. And it’s been very useful to Buffett, for instance, over his whole adult lifetime.

“However, if we’d stayed with classic Graham the way Ben Graham did it, we would never have had the record we have. And that’s because Graham wasn’t trying to do what we did.

“For example, Graham didn’t want to ever talk to management. And his reason was that, like the best sort of professor aiming his teaching at a mass audience, he was trying to invent a system that anybody could use. And he didn’t feel that the man in the street could run around and talk to managements and learn things. He also had a concept that the management would often couch the information very shrewdly to mislead. Therefore, it was very difficult. And that is still true, of course—human nature being what it is.

“And so having started out as Grahamites which, by the way, worked fine—we gradually got what I would call better insights. And we realized that some company that was selling at two or three times book value could still be a hell of a bargain because of momentums implicit in its position, sometimes combined with an unusual managerial skill plainly present in some individual or other, or some system or other.

“And once we’d gotten over the hurdle of recognizing that a thing could be a bargain based on quantitative measures that would have horrified Graham, we started thinking about better businesses.

“And, by the way, the bulk of the billions in Berkshire Hathaway have come from the better businesses. Much of the first $200 or $300 million came from scrambling around with our Geiger counter. But the great bulk of the money has come from the great businesses.”

Munger said, “It makes sense to load up on the very few good insights you have instead of pretending to know everything about everything at all times. You’re much more likely to do well if you start out to do something feasible instead of something that isn’t feasible. Isn’t that perfectly obvious?

“Occasionally, you’ll find a human being who’s so talented that he can do things that ordinary skilled mortals can’t. I would argue that Simon Marks—who was second generation in Marks & Spencer of England—was such a man. Patterson was such a man at National Cash Register. And Sam Walton was such a man.

“These people do come along—and in many cases, they’re not all that hard to identify. If they’ve got a reasonable hand—with the fanaticism and intelligence and so on that these people generally bring to the party—then management can matter much.

“However, averaged out, betting on the quality of a business is better than betting on the quality of management. In other words, if you have to choose one, bet on the business momentum, not the brilliance of the manager.

“But, very rarely you find a manager who’s so good that you’re wise to follow him into what looks like a mediocre business.

“Finally, I’d like to once again talk about investment management. That is a funny business because on a net basis, the whole investment management business together gives no value added to all buyers combined. That’s the way it has to work.

“Of course, that isn’t true of plumbing and it isn’t true of medicine. If you’re going to make your careers in the investment management business, you face a very peculiar situation. And most investment managers handle it with psychological denial—just like a chiropractor. That is the standard method of handling the limitations of the investment management process. But if you want to live the best sort of life, I would urge each of you not to use the psychological denial mode.

“I think a select few—a small percentage of the investment managers—can deliver value added. But I don’t think brilliance alone is enough to do it. I think that you have to have a little of this discipline of calling your shots and loading up—if you want to maximize your chances of becoming one who provides above average real returns for clients over the long pull.”



Munger: Today’s Aristotle

Aristotle, antiquity’s greatest philosopher, owned the first library of which anything is actually recorded (The Great Book-Collectors, Elton and Elton, p. 12). The word philosophy means “love of wisdom.”

(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Munger’s Manifesto

Munger’s Manifesto The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Munger’s Manifesto



256





A PARODY BY CHARLES MUNGER


A PARODY DESCRIBING THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF WANTMORE, TWEAKMORE, TOTALSCUM, COUNTWRONG, AND OBLIVIOUS TO THE TRAGIC “GREAT RECESSION” IN BONEHEADIA AND THE THOUGHTS OF SOME PEOPLE RELATING TO THIS DISASTER.

In the country of Boneheadia there was a man, Wantmore, who earned his income as a home mortgage loan originator. Wantmore operated conservatively. All his home loans bore interest rates of 6% or less, and he demanded of all borrowers large down payments, documented proof of adequate income and an immaculate credit-using history. Wantmore sold all his loans to life insurance companies that, before closing purchases, checked loan quality with rigor—then held all loans to maturity.

As Wantmore prospered, he eventually attracted the attention of Tweakmore, a very bold and ingenious investment banker. There was no other investment banker quite like Tweakmore, even in the United States.

Tweakmore had become the richest person in Boneheadia, driven by an insight that had come to him when, as a college student, he had visited a collection of hotels that contained gambling casinos located in a desert.

As Tweakmore saw immense amounts of cash pouring into cashiers’ cages surrounded by endless sand, in business operations that did not tie up any capital in inventories, receivables, or manufacturing equipment, he realized immediately that he was looking at the best business model in the world, provided one could also eliminate commitment of any capital or expense to hotel rooms, restaurants, or facilities providing parking or entertainment.

Tweakmore also saw exactly how he could create for himself an operation that possessed all the characteristics of his ideal business. All he had to do was add to investment banking a lot of activities that were the functional equivalent of casino gambling, with the bank having the traditional “house advantage.” Such casino-type activities, masked by respectable sounding labels, Tweakmore foresaw, could easily grow to dwarf all the action in ordinary casinos.

Determined to create and own his ideal business as fast as possible, Tweakmore quit college and entered investment banking.

Within twelve years, Tweakmore was the most important investment banker in Boneheadia. Tweakmore rose so rapidly because he was very successful in convincing regulators and legislators to enlarge what was permissible.

Indeed, by the time Tweakmore called on Wantmore, any investment bank in Boneheadia could invent and trade in any bets it wished, provided they were called “derivatives,” designed to make counterparties feel better about total financial risks in their lives, outcomes that automatically happened. Moreover, an investment bank faced no limit on the amount of financial leverage it employed in trading or investing in derivatives or anything else. Also, Tweakmore had obtained permission to use “Mark-To-Model” accounting that enabled each bank to report in its derivative book whatever profit it desired to report. As a result, almost every investment bank claimed ever-growing profits and had ownership of assets totaling at least thirty times an ever-swelling reported net worth. And despite a vast expansion of transaction-clearance risk, no big mess had so far occurred.

Tweakmore was pleased, but not satisfied, by what he had accomplished. And he now planned to revolutionize Boneheadia’s home mortgage loan business in a manner that would make Tweakmore a national hero.

In his first proposal to Wantmore, Tweakmore held much of his ingenuity in reserve. All he proposed was that Wantmore hereafter sell all his home loans to Tweakmore at a higher price than life insurers would pay. Tweakmore said that he planned to put all loans into trusts with no other assets. Each trust would be divided into five “tranches” with different priorities in use of loan payments. Four tranches would use their shares of loan payments to pay off complex new fixed-interest-bearing, freely-tradable debt instruments, called CDOs. The fifth tranch got a tiny residue in case

all home loan payments were received as due. The CDOs would be sold by Tweakmore, using a highly-paid sales force, to anyone who could be induced to buy, even highly-leveraged speculators and small Scandinavian cities in the Arctic.

To Wantmore, Tweakmore’s proposal at first appeared unfeasible. The planned operation seemed to resemble the operation of a meat vendor who routinely bought 1000 pounds of chuck roast, sliced it up, and then sold 950 pounds as filet mignon and the balance as dog food.

But Wantmore’s doubts melted away when Tweakmore revealed how much he would pay. Under the offered terms, Wantmore would double his income, something Tweakmore could easily afford because his own income was going to be three times that of Wantmore. After Wantmore accepted Tweakmore’s proposal, everything worked out exactly as Tweakmore had planned, because buyers of CDOs in aggregate paid much more than the life insurers had formerly paid.

Even so, Wantmore, as he became familiar with Tweakmore’s prosperity, was soon dissatisfied with a merely doubled income. With Wantmore restive, Tweakmore now displayed the full range of his ingenuity.

What Tweakmore next proposed was that Wantmore add to his product line a new class of “subprime, pay-what-you-wish” home mortgage loans. All loans would bear interest at 71/2% or more, and borrowers would not be allowed to state anything except that they wanted the money. There would be no down payments and no credit checks or the like. Also, each loan would be very user-friendly in its first three years, during which the borrower could make only tiny payments with all unpaid interest being added to principal. After three years, very onerous loan service was required, designed to pay off the greatly swollen principal, plus all interest, over the next five years.

This proposal would have seemed preposterous, even hilariously satirical, if it had been presented to Wantmore when Tweakmore had first called. But by now Wantmore had doubled his income by going along with a peculiar idea of Tweakmore’s. So Wantmore’s credulity was easily stretched to allow acceptance of the new loan product, which Tweakmore projected would triple Wantmore’s already doubled income.

It is easy to see why Wantmore became a “true believer” in the new loan product. But why did the already super-rich, prominent, and sophisticated Tweakmore believe his revised scheme would work safely and well for him?

Well, we know the answer. As Tweakmore revealed in his prideful autobiography, his thought process was as follows:

1. There would be no significant troubles during the first three years. Under the accounting standards of Boneheadia, all its accountants would be required for a long time to reserve no loan-loss provision at all against unpaid principal and unpaid interest on the new loans. And CDOs would be valued highly in trading markets because underlying loans were booked at unreasonably high value. It wouldn’t matter that homebuyers were making no down payments, had no personal liability at any time, and paid only a tiny portion of interest accrued for three years, It also wouldn’t matter that any competent inquiry would have revealed extreme past improvidence on the part of most borrowers.

2. House prices in Boneheadia would not merely rise as they had done before. Prices would rise much faster as more and more people learned they could bid to acquire homes without using any of their own money, no matter how poor were their credit-using histories.

3. All the buyers of new CDOs would have a near perfect investment experience. Ever-rising house prices would cause full payment of all mortgage debt as due. The market for the new CDOs would expand and expand as investors reliably earned much more interest than they could get elsewhere. House prices in Boneheadia would rise faster and faster as the scheme fed on itself in a runaway feedback mode.

4. True, after the first three years many over-stretched homebuyers were sure to suffer somewhat as they were forced, by threats of foreclosure, to sell their homes. This would often cost them their credit and the respect of their children, friends, and employers, but that would be the only trouble, and it would prove endurable by Tweakmore and everyone else, except the people forced out of homes.

5. The runaway feedback mode that drove up house prices would cause no significant trouble for decades, as had happened in Japan where a big bust in real estate prices occurred only after the Imperial Palace grounds in Tokyo were apparently worth more than the market value of the entire state of California.

6. The principles of economics would give the scheme a large tailwind and considerable popularity. As Tweakmore, a former student in elementary economics, knew from studying Galbraith, a large undisclosed embezzlement strongly stimulates spending because the perpetrator is much richer and the victim spends as before because he does not yet feel poorer. And what Tweakmore was creating was the functional equivalent of a long-running undisclosed embezzlement on steroids. The perpetrators would not be the only ones to depend more, as typically occurs during ordinary embezzlements. The CDO-buying victims also would spend more as they believed they were getting richer and richer from ever-growing paper gains embodied in accrual of interest at above normal rates.

7. To be sure, the scheme looked a little like a chain-letter scheme, and such schemes were usually ill regarded by prospective users, partly because the schemes were criminal and partly because the schemes always blew up so quickly, bringing criminal troubles so soon. Tweakmore’s scheme, in contrast, would, by design, be lawful and benevolent, and recognized as such, because it would create big macroeconomic stimulus as a public good.

8. And should the scheme eventually blow up after decades, like the land-price bubble in Japan, who could fairly blame Tweakmore? Nothing lasts forever. Besides, the blowup might be lost in a miasma of other blowups like those sure to come in many irresponsible countries and subdivisions of countries.

Tweakmore’s revised scheme worked fantastically well for a considerable period. Naturally, there were some glitches, but Tweakmore turned each glitch into an opportunity to boost profit. For instance, when Wantmore was made nervous as hordes of scumball salesmen were drawn into his business by rich commissions paid for production of easy-to-sell “subprime” pay-what-you-wish home loans, Tweakmore responded by buying Wantmore’s business. Then Tweakmore replaced Wantmore with a new CEO, Totalscum, who did not consider any business practice optimal unless it was depraved. Totalscum soon increased loan production by 400%, and his success caused Tweakmore to buy five additional loan businesses and replace their CEOs with people like Totalscum, causing profits to soar and soar, even though Tweakmore never again found anyone else whose depraved operations could produce results that matched those of Totalscum.

As Tweakmore’s scheme went on, it was necessary for its continuing success that the accountants of Boneheadia never stop treating as trustworthy a lot of hugely important loan-payment promises that any sensible person would deem unreliable. However, there was almost no risk that accountants would act otherwise than as Tweakmore desired. The accountants of Boneheadia were not allowed to be sensible. They had to use by rote “rules-based” accounting standards set by a dominating man, Countwrong, who was head of Boneheadia’s Accounting Standards Setting Board. And Countwrong had ordained, in effect, that all loss provisions on the new loans must remain based on the zero-loss record that had existed before Wantmore met Tweakmore. And, so long as Countwrong was in charge, no one was going to use in accounting an understanding of runaway feedback modes, instead of Countwrong’s rules.

Of course, if Totalscum or Tweakmore ever started to have loan losses, he would have to start making loan-loss provisions against new loans. But there weren’t any meaningful loan losses for anyone for a very long time.

Countwrong was so habit-bound as a thinker that he never recognized that his cognition was anti-social. He had always sought simplicity of process for accountants at the expense of “principles-based” rigor in thought that would better serve his country. He had been rewarded in life for his convictions, and he was now proud of his conclusions, even as they were contributing mightily to the super-catastrophe sure to come eventually from Tweakmore’s scheme.

A large economic boom occurred in Boneheadia just as Tweakmore had expected. The boom made the regulators of Boneheadia feel extremely good about themselves as they passively watched the ever-enlarging operations of Tweakmore and Totalscum.

A famous regulator named Oblivious was particularly approving. He had been overinfluenced in early life by classical economics. So influenced, Oblivious loved all the new derivatives, even those based on outcomes of parts of complex CDOs composed of parts of other complex CDOs. And he did not believe the government should rein in any investment banker until the banker’s behavior was very much worse than Tweakmore’s.

The boom initiated by Tweakmore lasted only three years. He had underestimated the boom’s strength and the power of people to understand, in due course, super-sized folly. These factors had helped shorten the boom’s duration. Also, Boneheadia had proved less like Japan than had been hoped.

When the boom-ending bust came, it was a doozy. Almost every investment bank had been made collapse-prone by Tweakmore’s innovations before he became interested in home loans. And now, in a huge bust, most big financial institutions were sure to disappear, causing total chaos and another “Great Depression” unless there was super-massive intervention by the government, financed by printing money.

Fortunately, Boneheadia did so intervene, guided by effective leaders who somehow obtained support from politicians in both political parties. And, after this massive intervention, Boneheadia, with doubled unemployment, is enormously worse off than if the boom and bust had never happened, And its options in case of future trouble are greatly reduced because, after its money-printing spree, it is nearer to facing general distrust of its money and credit.

Boneheadia’s bust is now called the “Great Recession.” Yet, even so, not much has been learned by the elite in Boneheadia. Among the protagonists and too-passive types who contributed so much to the mess, only one has expressed significant contrition. To his great credit, Oblivious has recognized that he was grossly wrong.

The accounting profession remains unaware of its large contribution to public woe. And it does not recognize the cognitive defects of Countwrong, which are still believed to be virtuous qualities that reduce accountants’ litigation risk and their duty to cause antagonism by opposing the wishes of some of their best-paying clients.

The professoriate in economics has barely budged toward recognition of the importance of optimized, more conservative accounting in both macroeconomics and microeconomics. And economics professors, even now, do not recognize what was so easily recognized by Tweakmore: the functional equivalent of undisclosed embezzlement can be magnified and have massive macroeconomic consequences when the victims, as well as the perpetrators, are led to believe they are getting richer under conditions that are going to last for a long time.

How about the legislators in Boneheadia? Well, most are confused by what has happened to their most powerful friends and draw no useful implications from the outcome of Canadia, a country just north of Boneheadia that had no “Great Recession” because its simple laws and regulations kept in place home loan operations much like those of Wantmore before he embraced modern finance in the state preferred by Tweakmore.

How about the regulators? Well, very few important regulators or former regulators in all Boneheadia have expressed really serious doubts about the status quo and interest in really serious re-regulation of investment banking. One of the doubters is Follyseer, a long-retired former Minister of Finance. Follyseer has argued that all the contributions of Tweakmore to investment banking should now be removed and banned, because it is now obvious that (1) augmenting casino-type activities in investment banks was never a good idea, and (2) investment banks are less likely to cause vast public damage when they are forbidden to use much financial leverage and are limited to few long-traditional activities.

Regarding accounting, no regulator now in power seems to understand, in a way that has any chance of causing effective remedial action, that the disaster triggered by Tweakmore couldn’t have happened if Boneheadia’s system of accounting regulation had been more “principles-based,” with a different and less tradition-bound group creating accounting standards that were less easy to game.

The former regulator and life-long professor who seemed extra wise after the Great Recession was England’s John Maynard Keynes, dead for more than half a century. Keynes had predicted, correctly, that “When the capital development of a country is a by-product of the operations of a casino, the job is likely to be ill-done.”

Charlie Munger

Afterword: The foregoing parody is not an attempt to describe in a fair way real contributions to the “Great Recession” in the United States. Certain characters and industries, for instance, Tweakmore and investment banking, are grossly overdrawn as contributors to sin and mayhem, while other contributors are not discussed at all. The whole idea was to draw attention to certain issues in accounting, academic economics, and conceivable over-development of finance as a percentage of the entire economy, by making the characters and the story line extreme enough to be memorable.

(Handout from Charles Munger in 2011)

A Parody by Charles Munger



Rome’s Pliny The Elder



Pliny The Welder

Maybe this is the famed Wantmore of Boneheadia in Munger’s parody. He’s disguised as Pliny the Welder.



Pliny the Elder

Pliny the Elder was born in 23 AD and became an author, naturalist, philosopher, military commander, and friend to the emperor in the early Roman Empire. He spent much of his time studying, writing and investigating natural and geographic phenomena and wrote an encyclopedic work, Naturalis Historia. It’s perfectly obvious that Berkshire’s Charlie Munger is a direct descendant of Pliny the Elder.

(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value A Parody by Charles Munger

A Parody by Charles Munger The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value A Parody by Charles Munger



257





WESCO ANNUAL MEETINGS


At the Wesco annual meeting held May 5, 2004, in Pasadena, Charles Munger said that the fact that 19,500 people had just attended the Berkshire annual meeting was “unusual.”

He said such a turnout prompted him to ask two questions: (1) “What the hell is going on here?” and (2) “Why did it happen?”

Of all the annual meetings for corporations, the Berkshire meeting alone offered a brand-new dimension of festival, intellectual inquiry, friend encounters, and discount shopping. Ranking above all the other offerings, he added, was a common “value system adored by the group.”

He said a “central ethos” has arisen. Part of it is an effort to be rational and part is out of disgust with scandals at other corporations. Not only that, Munger added, “I don’t think it would happen if Warren and I didn’t have a significant wiseass streak.”

Munger went on to say that the Wesco meeting draws the hard-core nutcases attracted to such views that markets are not always efficient, that diversification is not always helpful, and that beta and modern portfolio theory offer no real help and, in fact, are a hindrance.

Munger said that this particular time was the “most extreme period” for holding cash, and with Berkshire’s huge hoard of cash and billions of bonds “it doesn’t want to own,” Berkshire had about $70 billion in available funds.

“We don’t believe that markets are totally efficient, and we don’t believe that widespread diversification will yield a good result,” Munger said. “We believe almost all good investments will involve relatively low diversification.

“If you took the top 15 decisions out, we’d have a pretty average record. It wasn’t hyperactivity, but a hell of a lot of patience. You stick to your priorities, and when opportunities come along, you pounce on them with vigor.

“Maybe 2% of people will come to our corner of the tent and 98% will believe what they’ve been told [that markets are totally efficient].”

Investment success, he said, comes partly from the proper temperament. “Most people are too fretful. They worry too much. Success means being very patient, but aggressive when it’s time. And the more hard lessons you learn vicariously rather than through your own hard experience, the better.

“I don’t know anyone who [became a better investor] with great rapidity. Warren has gotten to be one hell of a better investor over the period I have known him. So have I. So the game is to keep learning. You gotta like the learning process.”

2005

“SEAMLESS WEB OF DESERVED TRUST”

At Wesco’s annual meeting in 2005, attended by approximately 600 people, Munger said what one should want from society is a “seamless web of deserved trust.” That is what works best for society, for a corporation, or for a football team; things work more efficiently if everyone operates in an atmosphere of trust.

He cited the Japanese as working together to build their country’s prosperity. “Japan learned it from us,” Munger said, then added that Japan proceeded to “beat our brains out.” The following are some of the many good points that Munger made at the 2005 meeting:

• He decried the overabundance of hedge funds, saying his guess was that perhaps 5% of gross domestic product (GDP) was going to run hedge funds, trading costs, and the sale of financial products, such as annuities. “It’s not an intelligent allocation of brainpower,” he said.

• China, he said, is making tremendous strides as the talent there is being freed up with a better political system. Most Asians are obsessed with educating their children.

• For Social Security to put money in the stock market in private accounts was “not a good idea.”

• Investors should lower the bar for expected returns.

• He praised Wal-Mart for its dominant franchise.

• He said, “Over the long term the eclipse rate of great civilizations is 100%.”

• GE’s Jack Welch was probably underpaid, but that did not necessarily mean he approved of Welch’s pay, adding that if a person rises in a corporation that person should be “an exemplar.” Leaders should “deliberately take less than they deserve.” That is something never mentioned in the setting of compensation. “Be an exemplar,” Munger said.

2006

At Wesco’s 2006 meeting, Munger offered these observations:

• The amount of brainpower going into money management is a national

scandal.

• The worshipping at the temple of diversification is really crazy.

• [Wesco has] 7.1 million shares outstanding, the same number of shares as when I started, perhaps the only company in the country with that fact.

• Portfolio insurance died on Black Monday in one dénouement.

• Warren likes examples that markets aren’t all that efficient, that the world isn’t perfectly efficient. He gave examples of looking at a Moody’s manual for Korea with chaebol that didn’t care about shareholders, a huge consumer credit collapse, flour mills trading at two times earnings, and Warren thought he was young again.

• You can miss a lot [of good investments]. As long as you get some and don’t make monstrous mistakes, you’ll do fine. But you should constantly review mistakes of omission.

• Enron could have been stopped, particularly when Skilling went down to the SEC to talk them into front-ending profits from long-term contracts.

• A lot of sense is conventional.

• What about Patrick Byrne’s “jihad” against short-selling? “One of the privileges of being an old man in a secure place is I don’t need to have an opinion on everything. My jihad calendar is full enough.”

2007

Wesco’s 2007 annual meeting of shareholders was held inside a large tent at the Pasadena Civic Center. Munger called the impressively engineered tent a “tribute to the civilization.” One thousand people showed up.

During the meeting, Munger, referring to his role at Berkshire Hathaway, said, “I didn’t set out in life to become the assistant leader of a cult.” Then he launched into a discussion of the success of Warren Buffett and his investment vehicle, Berkshire.

Munger started by posing a question: “Why did one man, starting with nothing, no credit rating, end up with this ridiculous collection of assets: $120 billion of cash and marketable securities, all from $10 million when Warren took over, with about the same number of shares outstanding?”

Then Munger, claiming Berkshire was in the top 5 to 10 of all investments, started identifying reasons for the company’s success, in general, and Buffett’s success in particular.

“It’s a very extreme result,” Munger said. “A confluence of factors in the same direction caused Warren’s success.”

He cited Buffett’s mental aptitude first, saying that Buffett, through a chain reaction, had outachieved even his own intellectual aptitude. Munger added, “He’s interested.” To achieve success, Munger said, “A person must be very interested in what he or she does.”

Another reason for such success is Buffett’s “early start.” He said Buffett is a great “learning machine.” Many people stop learning, he said, but Buffett has become a better investor with age. “Warren’s investing skills have increased markedly since he turned 65.”

Further, he noted Berkshire succeeded by concentrating on the decisions at the top in the way that UCLA Coach John Wooden concentrated most of his effort on the top players. “The work has been heavily concentrated in one mind.”

Buffett, he said, has not been slowed in life by waste-of-time factors, such as self-pity, envy, or being an ideologue about things. He has been rational and has been encouraged by wonderful results. Finally, Buffett has given trust to and received trust from a variety of people who have furthered the enterprise.

2008

Munger began the 2008 Wesco meeting saying he would first conduct a “Socratic solitaire.” He said the world can expect lower investment returns, with 4% to 5% being about all one could expect. He said derivatives were out of control and had been created by “greed, envy, and terrible accounting.”

He praised Berkshire as an “educational institution” that perhaps will leave an “exemplar” long after Buffett and he are dead. “You people may be part of something,” he added. Munger said Berkshire was “getting calls from people who trust us.” Baiting the audience, he said, “We have a lot of firepower, so stay tuned.”

2009

Munger’s Q&A at the 2009 meeting began this way:

CM: We’ll have a long question-and-answer session upon adjournment. Meeting is adjourned.

CM: We’ll copy Berkshire this year in part. I’ll ask a bunch of questions of myself, and then I’ll answer them. After you get tired of that, we’ll go to the audience.

CM: Q1: How serious is the present economic mess?

CM: Deadly serious. It is the worst mess since the Great Depression. The Great Depression caused Adolf Hitler to rise in a formerly civilized nation. You can’t predict what happens when people get dissatisfied enough. We have a deadly serious problem, and it could lead to terrible problems.

As to how the country got into such an economic mess, he said it was a confluence of factors that included abusive practices in consumer credit, craziness and greed on Wall Street in issuing products such as credit default swaps, poor regulatory apparatus, and poor accounting.

He said good stock investments would be Coca-Cola and Wells Fargo.

Munger expressed his strong opinion about ethanol: “Ethanol is quite possibly the stupidest thing ever invented by rational people. The ultimate social safety net—which is a very good idea, by the way—is cheap food, and ethanol production is destroying this.”

Munger recommended the book Outliers: “It’s a terrific book, a best seller. There is a reason why it is a bestseller. The guy has a way of picking out examples that guide reason well.”

Asked about the Buffett biography Snowball, Munger had this response, “Snowball is an interesting book, covering a single life in such detail. That said, some facts will be incorrect and she [Alice Schroeder] made a lot of money for herself.”

2010

On the Great Recession: “What we just went through was deadly serious. We were on the edge of something that could have taken civilization as we know it to the edge of ruin. If the government had not stepped in, the whole damn thing would have gone down like pins in a bowling alley.”

Who to blame: “The academic elites failed us with their utterly asinine ideas of risk control … Very high IQ people can be completely useless. And many of them are.”

Goldman Sachs: “Goldman has the best morality of any of the big banks. From this sense, it’s a little crazy to be attacking our best bank. I don’t think the government did this to be asinine, but I don’t think how they’ve handled it has been an appropriate response.”

Finance as a career: “A big percentage of Cal-Tech grads are going into finance. I regard this as a regretfully bad outcome. They’ll make a lot of money clobbering customers who aren’t as smart as them. It’s a mistake. I look at this in terms of losses from the diversion of our best talent going into some money-grubbing exercise.”

On JPMorgan Chase: “Jamie Dimon is a fine and admirable man. But the world would be better off if JP Morgan didn’t run a gambling casino alongside a legitimate business. I take my hat off to Dimon, but I’d take away his derivative book in a second.”

Success of Berkshire: “There are two main reasons Berkshire has succeeded. One is its decentralization [of the units]. We’ve installed decentralization almost to the point of abdication … The other reason is our extreme centralization of capital deployment. Our centralization is just as extreme as our decentralization.”

Munger said Wesco, an historical accident, could one day be merged into Berkshire.

2011

“A MORNING WITH CHARLIE”

Indeed, the remaining 19.9% of the Wesco shares not already owned by Berkshire were slated to be bought by Berkshire for about $545 million, or $385 a share with both Berkshire B stock and cash. The deal was finalized in June 2011.

Instead of a Wesco annual meeting in 2011, Munger said he planned to hold an “Afternoon with Charlie” in Pasadena to take “questions about business, economics, and life. But not Wesco.”

In the end, the meeting turned out to be “A Morning with Charlie” on

July 1, 2011.

“This is likely to be the swan song,” Munger told the Omaha World-Herald. “I’m 87 years old and there comes a time.”

Asked if Munger fans wouldn’t be disappointed, he replied, “Better to disappoint them by not appearing than by appearing.”

At the meeting, attended by about 500 people, Munger said he felt like a captain who finally got to the port he had always dreamed of because for Wesco, Berkshire is the right home.

Munger said that some would live to see a dividend from Berkshire, but he added that he hoped he would not. Buffett and Munger have long maintained that reinvesting shareholder money rather than paying it out in a taxed dividend is the best way to go.

He said Coca-Cola remains an entrenched company and that its stock is a safe bet, adding that if he were running money he’d have shares of Coke in each account. Also, he said Google would be a hard company to displace given its strong position, reports of the meeting said. He said Costco, where he serves on the board, is one of the most admirable of all companies in free enterprise and he said Berkshire shareholders should do well by “sitting on their patoots.”

He suggested people should follow their own interests and talents, adding that he could not have been a quarterback or a ballet dancer.

Munger spoke again of getting “lollapalooza” effects, which can come from a confluence of factors operating in the same direction but coming from different academic disciplines, such as economics, finance, and psychology.

Blue Chip Stamps, he said, was a “doomed” trading stamp company that rose to success over the years by reinvesting the float from the trading stamp business into three big ideas: See’s, the Buffalo News, and control of Wesco.

Munger said he felt Berkshire has made a contribution to the world although he is still waiting for a cascade of top executives to follow Berkshire’s lead in taking $100,000-a-year salaries.

Education, he said, should be a lifelong pursuit. He added that he was currently studying astrophysics.

Munger was enthusiastically applauded at the end of the meeting and he replied that he liked the appreciation shown as opposed to the turnout for a dead man when people show up at a funeral to be sure the man is dead.

With that, the Wesco venture ended. Days before the meeting, Wesco was merged into Berkshire and so, at the meeting, Munger was holding forth as Wesco’s chairman for the last time.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Wesco Annual Meetings

Wesco Annual Meetings The Story of Warren Buffett



Outliers

(Photo by Mary Porter)



Munger and Scargle Instead of Munger and Buffett

Munger and longtime Wesco and Berkshire shareholder Bill Scargle of San Francisco share a moment at the “Morning with Charlie” meeting in Pasadena on July 1, 2011.

(Photo courtesy of Bill Scargle)

Of Permanent Value Wesco Annual Meetings



258





THE CHANNEL CAT


During a two-and-a-half-year period, Charlie Munger oversaw the building of the largest non-metal passenger catamaran in the world. It took 46 workers to build the boat in a Florida boatyard which was set up solely for its construction.

On its maiden voyage in 1998, the catamaran encountered Hurricane Mitch on its way to Munger’s house in Santa Barbara, California. While holding up for the hurricane, it cruised the Caribbean, Gulf of Mexico, and the Pacific Ocean, averaging 260 miles a day in the open sea. Upon finally arriving in the Santa Barbara Channel, it was dubbed Channel Cat.

The boat, which boasts a pilot’s console and bird’s-eye maple bar, is the dream of Munger and its captain, King Williams, a former professional deep-sea diver and fishing charter skipper.

One day in 1996, Williams had just docked his boat in the Santa Barbara Channel and was unloading after a day of fishing. A man, Charles Munger—can you believe it?—came along and asked the seaman what he would do if he could do anything in the world.

Williams’ answers: Build a catamaran.

Munger asked why.

“They’re smooth sailing, hard to capsize, and fast,” Williams answered.

“Well,” Munger asked, “can you build that kind of catamaran for me?” (This Month in Santa Barbara County, Summer 2000).

The catamaran “is not crazy, opulent, or pretentious,” Munger stated in a Santa Barbara News-Press article. “I just regard it as a large motor sailing catamaran” (May 15, 1999).

The 85-foot-long, 41-foot-wide, 107-ton sailing vessel looms over nearby boats and even over other yachts. The spacious interior, resembling an executive boardroom, has cream leather furniture near picture windows and beneath 10-and-a-half-foot ceilings. Giant TV screens and audio-visual equipment are among the amenities. A kitchen in one of the hulls is adequate for cooking a sit-down banquet for about 60 people. The boat has fiber-optic lighting, four custom-etched glass panels in the salon, and ultra-dense carpet from England. The catamaran can carry up to 149 people for events ranging from corporate meetings to weddings.

“The thing is for the next 50 years or so, people will get a lot of harmless pleasure out of using the Channel Cat,” Munger said.

The boat was planned for use as a day charter and for the Santa Barbara Maritime Museum. “I’m a bug on education,” Munger told the Santa Barbara paper. He and his wife previously contributed $600,000 to build the museum’s high-definition theater named in their honor.



A New Kind of Mobile Home

This interior view of the Channel Cat shows a bird’s-eye maple bar to the right. On the left is one of several large TVs.

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Ship’s Literary Library

This library on the Channel Cat needs a set of World Books.

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)_

Of Permanent Value The Channel Cat



Charlie’s Cat

The Channel Cat can be yours for $2,200 an hour. The pricey feline is shown here in hot pursuit of big fish.

(Channel Cat brochure)



259





“TO POUR FORTH BENEFITS”


According to Charles Munger’s hero, Ben Franklin, “The most acceptable service to God is doing good to man” (Walter Isaacson, Ben Franklin: An American Life, p. 91). Franklin certainly did his part. In addition to giving mankind electricity, he also contributed bifocals, libraries, stoves, catheters, fire corps, police patrol, and the University of Pennsylvania. In keeping with “We hold these truths to be self-evident,” he also gave us Silence Dogood, Anthony Afterwit, and Alice Addertongue.

As we take a look at Munger, vice-chairman of Berkshire Hathaway and renowned investor as well as family man, we will get a glimpse of some of what Franklin would define as Munger’s “acceptable service to God.” Munger is not just an investor but, like Franklin, has pursued a broad range of interests, including boats, fishing in Alaska, and philanthropy. Munger also reads widely and is fascinated by science. He has traveled extensively and owns five homes.

He and his wife Nancy have a wide net of friends in the highest positions in

the country. The Mungers have two children each from prior marriages and four together. Their five sons are graduates of Harvard-Westlake, a private college preparatory school in Los Angeles. Their three daughters attended either Marlborough School in Los Angeles or Westridge School in Pasadena. None of the Munger children pursued careers in finance.

Although Munger has amassed a personal fortune of close to $2.4 billion according to Forbes’ 2008 list of billionaires, he agrees with John Maynard Keynes in believing that money management is a “low calling.” He said he has considerable “guilt about making so much with soft white hands” (The Wall Street Journal, November 19, 1997). He has tried to atone for spending so much time devoted to being an investor instead of spending more time in a profession with better social utility. He atones and alleviates his guilt by getting involved and sharing his wisdom and means, particularly in local causes and with great emphasis in the area of education.

One example of his charitable endeavors has been his involvement with Harvard-Westlake School in the North Hollywood district of Los Angeles. In 1969, Munger was named a trustee of Harvard School (which started in 1900 as a military school); he served from 1974 to 1979 as chairman of the board of trustees. In 1989, officials for Harvard School and those for Westlake School, a school for girls, effected a merger which resulted in the combined Harvard-Westlake, a coeducational day school for grades 7 through 12. Munger continued his service as a trustee through this transition, and he holds the record for service with 40 years on that board.

He told the Harvard-Westlake publication that he regarded the school, where a number of his children had attended, as “one of the best institutions of its type in the world.”

Munger and his wife have made several donations to the school in the amount of more than $10 million. They also donated 100 Berkshire A shares on December 22, 2003 (which left Munger with 16,411 shares); and another 100 A shares in 2006.

More than $7 million of the Mungers’ first-mentioned donation was earmarked for a science building, now called the Munger Science Center. “The state-of-the-art facility, nestled below Seaver on the hillside overlooking Coldwater Canyon, includes a dozen customized laboratory-classrooms, a conference room, a computer center, and a theater-style lecture hall with each of the 110 seats wired to accommodate laptop computers,” a Harvard-Westlake publication reported (Spring 1995).

“The problem with most buildings is that they don’t build enough flexibility into them. We tried to assure that the science facility will work, and work well, for the better part of a century. I see no reason why it should become obsolete,” Munger told the publication. “We were already short of science facilities before the Harvard and Westlake merger, and then when we doubled up on the advanced grades, we had an enormous need. It was basically a no-brainer. It would have been educational malpractice not to have improved the science facilities.”

Munger was involved in every aspect of the building, and he was vehement about some issues, such as the building having first-rate ventilation and heating and exceeding current earthquake standards. School officials did say that Munger, despite his hands-on efforts, left much of the planning to the teachers. Teachers were consulted on every item, large and small. As a matter of fact, benches for chemistry and physics classrooms were designed differently from those for biology classrooms.

With respect to the Munger Science Center, its namesake said, “The best way to get what you want in life is to deserve what you want, and Harvard-Westlake deserves this building.”

In September 2007, Munger further demonstrated his interests in education and family when he gave 90 A shares to Marlborough School in Los Angeles, a school where his wife, Nancy, has served as trustee, and another 90 A shares to Polytechnic School in Pasadena, a school for which his daughter Wendy serves as president of the board of trustees.

Another one of Munger’s community interests is Planned Parenthood. He serves as trustee and chief financial officer of Planned Parenthood of Los Angeles. He has donated a few hundred shares of Berkshire stock to this cause (Janet Lowe, Damn Right! p. 217).

In keeping with his interest in Planned Parenthood and family planning, Munger once stepped up to bat for a case involving abortion laws. In 1969, the California Supreme Court had agreed to hear an appeal from Leon Belous, a doctor convicted of referring a woman to an abortionist. Munger read about the case and called Buffett, and the two decided to underwrite the appeal. In September 1969, Belous won a landmark victory. It was the first time an abortion law had been declared unconstitutional (Roger Lowenstein, Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist, p. 117).

Another time Munger disagreed with a court ruling, he was not hesitant to share his business acumen and legal wisdom. Munger simply wrote an editorial for The Washington Post (September 1, 2000) criticizing court findings that Microsoft had violated antitrust laws: “If appellate courts are foolish enough to go along with the trial court ruling in the Microsoft case, virtually every dominant high-tech business in the United States will be forced to retreat from what is standard competitive practice for firms all over the world when they are threatened by better technology first marketed elsewhere.”

Munger is chairman of the Hospital of the Good Samaritan in Los Angeles and has given this institution hundreds of shares of Berkshire as well. The medical center, founded in 1885, is affiliated with the University of Southern California School of Medicine. About 4,200 surgeries and 25,000 emergency room visits take place there annually.

The Alfred C. Munger Foundation, which primarily supports Los Angeles charities and other nonprofits, is headed and funded by Charles Munger. Munger’s father, Alfred C. Munger, a Harvard Law School graduate, was the son of Judge Thomas C. Munger, who served as a federal district judge in Lincoln, Nebraska, from 1907 to 1941. Alfred C. Munger was a lawyer who practiced in Omaha from 1915 to 1959, with time out for service in World War I.

Nancy Munger also served in administrative roles for several education facilities and community services; her service, as is her husband’s, was most often accompanied by gifts. For example, she was a longtime member of the board of the YMCA, and the Mungers have donated a 40- by 80-foot swimming pool and shower/changing facility to the YMCA Camp Whittle near Big Bear.

Further, Nancy Munger had an early memory of and longtime ties with the Huntington Library, Art Collections, and Botanical Gardens in San Marino, California. Her first visit to the grounds was at age 8, when she went with her father to donate plants to the garden. She later served 10 years on the board of trustees for the Huntington, and was considered a member emerita of the board. A need at Huntington was identified, and Munger gave 100 Berkshire A shares to help build a new wing at the Huntington Library. He has given other gifts to the Huntington in honor of a $21-million pledge to fund a new research center that would double the size of the library, art collections, and botanical gardens.

The Huntington is a nonprofit collections-based research and educational institution established in 1919 by pioneer railroad tycoon, philanthropist, and art, book, and plant collector Henry E. Huntington and his wife, Arabella. The 207-acre estate, once home to the Huntingtons, is one of Southern California’s greatest attractions.

The Huntington Library, the largest independent library in the United States, holds 4.5 million manuscripts and 350,000 rare books focusing on American and British literature and the history of science, medicine, technology, and printing.

Among the treasures at the Huntington are Gainsborough’s The Blue Boy and Thomas Lawrence’s Pinkie paintings, a portrait of Chaucer in a 600-year-old manuscript of The Canterbury Tales, a copy of the Magna Carta, a renowned collection of Shakespeare’s works, John James Audubon’s Birds of America, and Edmund Spenser’s The Faerie Queene (1590). Also, there is a master set of microfilm negatives of the Dead Sea Scrolls and what has to be a Munger favorite, the original manuscript of Benjamin Franklin’s autobiography.

The Huntington Library claims the most extensive collection of James Joyce, including a 1922 first edition of Ulysses, which is on display. One of the library’s prized possessions is a Gutenberg Bible (1455), which Henry Huntington purchased in 1911 for $50,000. That price was double the highest price ever paid for a book at that time. The significance of the Gutenberg Bible is that it was the first substantial book printed with movable type. It was the work of Johannes Gutenberg of Germany, regarded as the developer of the printing process that revolutionized the Western world. Before the printing process was developed, books were few, expensive, and meant for only the wealthy literate elite. The printing process opened the world to a new reading public.

Although approximately 180 copies of the Gutenberg Bible were originally printed, the whereabouts of only 48 were known as of 2007. The Huntington’s Gutenberg Bible is one of only five in the United States; it is one of only 12 worldwide printed on vellum. These Bibles, as of 2002, were believed to be worth north of $50 million a copy (Nicholas A. Basbanes, Among the Gently Mad, p. 220).

Munger—who was born about the time the Gutenberg Bible came off the press—should have bought one then. He could have doubled his gift to the Huntington.

Another of Munger’s educational institutes of interest is Stanford University.

In 2004, the Mungers gave $43.5-million worth of Berkshire stock to Stanford Law School. At that time, it was the largest individual gift ever given outright to a U.S. law school.

The money was earmarked to be used to build a new graduate residence for several hundred law students along with graduate students from other parts of Stanford. The apartments were slated to be built next

to the existing law school, creating an integrated campus for the school by 2007.

Nancy Munger, who died in February 2010, was an alumna of Stanford University (’45) and had served on the board of trustees. The Mungers’ daughter Emilie Munger Ogden (BA ’82) graduated from Stanford Law School in 1989, and daughter Wendy (BA ’72) is a university trustee.

In 2011, Munger donated $20 million to the University of Michigan Law School for housing of its students. Munger studied math at the University of Michigan in the 1940s before going to Harvard Law School.

In 2012, Munger gave the University of Michigan 10 Class A shares of Berkshire stock.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value “To Pour Forth Benefits”



Supporting Planned Parenthood?

Munger sent this family photo as a Christmas card to Buffett in 2001. It was shot at Bassett’s Old Barn in Kent, England in August 2001. The card was signed by Munger saying simply: “Love from the family.” Buffett forwarded the card with this note: “Does this look like the kind of guy who has been a big supporter of Planned Parenthood all his life?”

(Photo courtesy of Warren Buffett)



Ben Franklin’s Autobiography

The first page of Franklin’s handwritten autobiography, housed at the Huntington, begins, “Dear Son.”

“To Pour Forth Benefits” The Story of Warren Buffett



The Mungers have donated $24 million for the Munger Research Center wing of the Huntington Library in San Marino, California. The three-story center, which opened in 2004, gives the library 90,000 square feet for acquisitions, a reading room for rare materials, three classrooms, 22 offices for long-term scholars, laboratories, and administrative offices.



Munger Research Center

The Munger Research Center was able to land the important Dibner medical collection. The center offers storage capacity for the Huntington’s growing collection of rare books and manuscripts and increases the workspace for more than 1,700 scholars who use the book collections each year.

(Photos by Andrew Kilpatrick)



The Huntington: Library/Art Collection/ Botanical Gardens

by Peggy Park Bernal

Appropriate Bibliopilic Attire

This classic tie is available for purchase at the Huntington bookstore.



Documenting the Huntington Library

(Photos by Mary Porter)



Of Permanent Value “To Pour Forth Benefits”

First Book Ever Printed from Movable Type: First Edition of the Supreme Book of Christendom per A Primer of Book Collecting

This is a page from the Gutenberg Bible—the most important book in the world. This image from the Gutenberg Bible is of the text of Book I of the Maccabees, which when translated to English, begins, “After Alexander son of Philip, the Macedonian, who came from the land of Kittim, had defeated Darius, king of the Persians and the Medes, he succeeded him as king” (RSV). Gutenberg’s printing press with movable type in the mid-15th century was a precursor to modern life, rapidly increasing education and the purpose of utilization. Gutenberg’s advancement was twofold. His type could be infinitely rearranged and reused, and the metal type could be reproduced in quantity. Hands down, the printing press beat orally passing on the Homeric epics in the very old days and certainly beat the method of transcribing books one by one in the pre-Gutenberg times. It’s estimated Gutenberg’s invention allowed him to print in one day what would have taken a scribe six months to write. So much of today’s technology traces back to the printing press—mass production of books, radio, television, digital media, online retailing, Ulysses, Gone With the Wind, and all the books about Buffett. Gutenberg printed approximately 180 of the 1,246-page Bibles, with 48 known copies surviving to modern times. The Library of Congress in Washington, D.C. has one of four perfect vellum copies in existence. The New York Public Library has the first copy to come to the U.S. Author’s note: Gutenberg went bankrupt after printing his 180 copies. Life’s not fair.



(Photo by Mary Porter)



Gutenberg’s printing press, using movable type, changed the world, giving birth to mass media and the Information Age.



260





POOR CHARLIE’S ALMANACK


Poor Charlie’s Almanack was released at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2005. Poor Charlie, of course, is rich Charlie Munger, devotee of Ben Franklin.

In the foreword, Buffett dubbed Munger as the latest authority on thrift, duty, hard work, and simplicity: “From 1733 to 1758, Ben Franklin dispensed useful and timeless advice through Poor Richard’s Almanack. Among the virtues extolled were thrift, duty, hard work, and simplicity. Subsequently, two centuries went by during which Ben’s thoughts on these subjects were regarded as the last word. Then Charlie Munger stepped forth.”

At its very beginning, Poor Richard’s Almanack caused a sensation when Franklin ran an ad announcing its publication—and predicting the coming demise of a rival almanac publisher, as the following book review points out:

This first great American advertising genius decided to amaze as well as amuse. His advertisement for his initial almanack started off naïvely enough in his own newspaper, the Pennsylvania Gazette, with a description of routine contents, such as “Planets’ motions and Aspects, Weather, etc.; besides many pleasant and witty Verses, Jests and Sayings; Author’s Motive of Writing; No Cuckhold; Bachelor’s Folly; Game for Kisses; Katherine’s Love; Conjugal Debate; Breakfast in Bed, all for 3s. 6d. per Dozen.” A stick of dynamite was hidden herein. In addition to the rather trite contents, there was included a “Prediction of the Death of his Friend, Mr. Titan Leeds” (A.S.W. Rosenbach, A Book Hunter’s Holiday, p. 187).



With the prediction of the death of Titan Leeds, excitement rose to a fever pitch. Poor Richard’s Almanack sold like Dilly Bars at a hot Berkshire annual meeting.

Munger published his own 480-page almanac, a $49 coffee table book. The book was edited by Peter D. Kaufman, chairman and CEO of Glenair Inc., a privately owned firm in Glendale, California, that makes high-tech connectors for ships and airplanes. Kaufman serves on the Wesco board with Munger.

The two men came to know one another through the Huntington Library in California, which received the proceeds from the book after recouping the $740,000 production cost for the initial 20,000 copies printed. Kaufman footed the bill.

Kaufman added to the book a picture of himself doing a yoga headstand under the heading, “Invert, Always Invert,” a maxim from 19th-century algebraist Karl Jacobi, to which Munger often refers.

The book which includes Munger’s biography, his talks, as well as his wit and wisdom, reflects Munger’s multidisciplinary approach to life. “The book is an attempt to put some valuable knowledge out in circulation,” Kaufman said (Omaha World-Herald, April 29, 2005).

Fortune’s Carol Loomis also applied her editing skills to this book.

The heavily illustrated book even has a picture of Ulysses and The Sirens near one of Munger’s quotes: “Avoid evil, particularly if they are attractive members of the opposite sex.”

Near a portrait of Dr. Samuel Johnson is the following quote: “As Dr. Johnson so wisely observed, truth is hard to assimilate in any mind when opposed by interest. And, if institutional incentives cause the problem, then a remedy is feasible—because incentives can be changed.”

Later in 2005, an abridged edition of Poor Charlie’s Almanack was distributed by Davis Advisors. The books were provided at cost to Davis Advisors on the condition that they make an “appropriate donation” to the Huntington Library.

The Chris Davis family members, long followers of Buffett and Munger, manage funds with more than $50 billion in assets. In 2006, Chris Davis was named to the Washington Post Co. board.

The original run of Poor Charlie’s Almanack—20,000 copies—sold out, and a 511-page revised and expanded edition was on sale at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2006. It contained additions, including revisits to his old talks and a new 12-page chapter entitled: “Praising Old Age.” Munger said the chapter was inspired by his reading of Discourse of Old Age, by Cicero, Rome’s greatest orator, lawyer, and statesman, first published in America by who else but Marcus Tullius Ben Franklin.

Munger wrote that he first heard of the Franklin-printed Cato-Major by Cicero in 2006 when he was given a copy of a first edition (1744). “I practically went into orbit upon seeing a work by Cicero ... full of praise for old age.”

Munger said that to Cicero, if you lived right, the inferior part of life is the early part, adding that Cicero felt the best a younger person could hope for is to get old before he dies. Franklin, said Munger, best exemplified Cicero’s ideal of a long, constructive, and happy life.

In 2008, an expanded third edition of Poor Charlie’s Almanack was published.

(Photo by Mary Porter)



Poor Richard’s Almanack

by Benjamin Franklin

“Drive Thy Business,

or It Will Drive Thee.”

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Poor Charlie’s Almanack



Poor Charlie’s Almanack, Expanded Third Edition

(Photo by Mary Porter)



Page from Munger’s Poor Charlie’s Almanack Showing the Cicero Discourse

“The best Armour of Old Age is a well-spent life preceding it.” (Cicero)



261





POOR RICHARD’S ALMANACK: $556,500


In 1732, I first published an Almanack under the name of Richard Saunders; it was continu’d by me about 25 Years, commonly call’d Poor Richard’s Almanack. I endeavor’d to make it both entertaining and useful, and it accordingly came to be in such Demand that I reap’d considerable Profit from it, vending annually near ten Thousand.… I consider’d it as a proper Vehicle for conveying Instruction among the common People, who bought scarcely any other Books. I therefore filled all the little Spaces that occur’d between the Remarkable Days in the Calendar, with Proverbial Sentences, chiefly such as inculcated Industry and Frugality, as a Means of procuring Wealth and thereby securing Virtue, it being more difficult for a Man in Want to act always honestly, as (to use here one of those Proverbs) it is hard for an empty Sack to stand upright (Ben Franklin’s Autobiography).

As old and smart as Munger is, one wonders why he didn’t start buying up everything touched by his hero Ben Franklin.

For example, in 1733, back when Munger, author of the modern-day Poor Charlie’s Almanack, was a precocious teenager, he might have bought one of the first copies of Poor Richard’s Almanack. He would have later been pleased to see that one of them sold at Sotheby’s on June 9, 2009, for $556,500. Alas, as Ben Franklin himself said, “Life’s tragedy is that we get old too soon and wise too late.”

The earliest known copy of the book is at the Rosenbach Museum and Library in Philadelphia. A second copy is owned by the Historical Society of Pennsylvania, also in Philadelphia, and is on loan to the Library Company of Philadelphia.

As to historical societies, the local one in Berwick, Pennsylvania, 95 miles northeast of Philadelphia, was conducting an inventory of its collection of Early American almanacs when it discovered the rare 1733 first annual edition of Poor Richard’s Almanack. Only three surviving copies of the 1733 edition are known to exist.

By now, Munger might have had that edition—and all others that Franklin wrote from 1733 until 1760.

Franklin printed thousands of copies of the almanacs, and through them, dispensed wit and wisdom along with “Lunations, Eclipses, Judgment of the Weather” and other data about the 40-degree latitude “from Newfoundland to South Carolina,” using the pseudonym Richard Saunders. Franklin used other pen names including Silence Dogood, Ephraim Censorious, Martha, Aftercast, the Busy-Body, Anthony Afterwit, Poor Richard, and Celia Single.

Estimates for the first-year Almanack started low then kept rising as the Berwick Historical Society realized the copy was in the original binding, with original ink, and printing. News reports said presale estimates were $100,000 and $150,000.

Participating in the sale were five bidders, one in the room and four by phone. The hammer price of $556,500 went to an anonymous bidder. The price was exceeded for an American book by the $1.4 million paid for George Washington’s copy of the Federalist Papers in 1990 and on December 3, 2009, one of the 12 known copies of Edgar Allan Poe’s Tamberlane and Other Poems (1827) sold at Christie’s for $602,500.

The money from the Almanack went to the historical society’s endowment fund. Members, on their way home from the sale, were said to be drinking champagne and making plans to renovate the town’s 1860-era city hall.

So the big question is this: Was Munger wrong not to throw all his money at Franklin memorabilia? The answer is no and here is why:

The original cost of the 1733 edition was five pence, according to James Green, librarian at the Library Company of Philadelphia, which was founded by Franklin himself in 1731. Green is the coauthor of Benjamin Franklin: Writer and Printer.

So at what rate must the original price be compounded to turn five cents into $556,500 over 276 years? Well, that one was beyond the paygrade of yours truly, so the question was turned over to Berkshire shareholder Richard Hoe, who calculated it to be a return of 6.05% annually.

Therefore, Munger was right to pass on the book and was right to wait two and a half centuries for the dawn of the Woodstock era at Berkshire before investing.

Remember the old joke about Munger. He thought he was wrong once, then checked and found he was right.



The Story of Warren Buffett



A Book about Ben Franklin

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Poor Riochard’s Almanack: $556,500

James N. Green, coauthor of Benjamin Franklin: Writer and Printer, says that among the maxims in the 1733 edition are these three:

1. Light Purse; Heavy Heart.

2. A Rich Rogue is Like a Fat Hog Who Never Does Good Until Dead as a Log.

3. The Poor Have Little,

Beggars None,

The Rich too Much,

“Enough, not one.”



262





THE CHARLES T. MUNGER BRIDGE


As part of Burlington Northern’s capital expenditures in 2011, it rebuilt six bridges along its lines due to severe flooding in the Midwest. One of those bridges was an old one called Rulo Rail Bridge in Nebraska which connects Rulo, Nebraska, with Holt County, Missouri. Well, that particular bridge, upon being rebuilt, was renamed in honor of Charles Munger, who, according to Buffett, “grimaces” at the thought of large capital expenditures. It has its own plaque immortalizing Munger. Sad though it may be, Buffett does not have a bridge named after him … yet.

The original bridge was built in 1887 (the year Munger was born?). Constructed in England, it was reassembled in Rulo. In 1977, the steel truss bridge was replaced in 48 hours. Sections of the new bridge were assembled on both sides of the river, then lifted on to falsework towers on barges on both of the upstream sides. The old bridge was moved tofalsework towers on barges on the downstream side. Then the new bridge was mounted on the original 1887 piers.

Before the replacement, only grain trains could cross the bridge. Now the bridge is used by BNSF primarily to haul coal from Wyoming and Colorado to Midwest power plants.

Burlington Northern’s John Ambler said the bridge was in Rulo and he procured a photo of the sought-after plaque.

Can it be long before a locomotive is named Warren the Fireball?



Dedication Plaque for Munger’s Bridge

Munger may be the only Berkshire employee to have a bridge named for him. The plaque reads, “This bridge is dedicated to Charles Munger for his enthusiastic support of BNSF Railway.”

(Courtesy BNSF Railway and Ben Weddle and Associates)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Close-up of the Now Famous Bridge

The Munger bridge is now part of Berkshire lore.

(Courtesy BNSF Railway and Ben Weddle and Associates)

This is an excerpt from the transcript of Buffett’s three-hour long live appearance on CNBC’s Squawk Box, Monday, November 14, 2011.

BUFFETT: Yeah. We will—we will spend at BNSF $3.7 billion this year on the railroad and a lot of this what you’d call infrastructure, in fact. And that’s by a large margin more than we’ve ever spent. One thing you’ll get a kick out of, you talk about infrastructure, we actually had to build six bridges in connection with the—because of the floods that look place here. The floods were really tough this year, particularly on our railroad. And Matt Rose who runs BNSF, knowing how Charlie kind of grimaces whenever he hears about capital expenditures, he has named one of those bridges in Iowa [sic] the Charles T. Munger Bridge. We’ve even got a plaque put up there. So Charlie now has a bridge named after him. I don’t have a bridge named after me yet.

Of Permanent Value The Charles T. Munger Bridge



Charles T. Munger Bridge

This is a view of the bridge which has been in use since 1877.

(Courtesy BNSF Railway and Ben Weddle and Associates)



The Flooding in Rulo

The above view is of Rulo during the 2011 Missouri River floods. The Rulo Bridge crosses the river here in the southeastern corner of Nebraska.



263





WHO WILL SUCCEED MUNGER?


The following letter was Buffett’s address to stockholders in the 2005 Annual Report:

As owners, you are naturally concerned about whether I will insist on continuing as CEO after I begin to fade, and, if so, how the board will handle that problem. You also want to know what happens if I should die tonight.



That second question is easy to answer. Most of our many businesses have strong market positions, significant momentum, and terrific managers. The special Berkshire culture is deeply ingrained through our subsidiaries, and these operations won’t miss a beat when I die.



Moreover, we have three managers at Berkshire who are reasonably young and fully capable of being CEO. Any of the three would be much better at certain management aspects of my job than I. On the minus side, none has my crossover experience that allows me to be comfortable making decisions in either the business arena or in investments. That problem will be solved by having another person in the organization handle marketable securities. That’s an interesting job at Berkshire, and the new CEO will have no problem in hiring a talented individual to do it. Indeed, that’s what we have done at GEICO for 26 years, and our results have been terrific.



Berkshire’s board has fully discussed each of the three CEO candidates and has unanimously agreed on the person who should succeed me if a replacement were needed today. The directors stay updated on this subject and could alter their view as circumstances change—new managerial stars may emerge and present ones will age. The important point is that the directors know now—and will always know in the future—exactly what they will do when the need arises.



The other question that must be addressed is whether the Board will be prepared to make a change if that need should arise not from my death but rather from my decay, particularly if this decay is accompanied by my delusionally thinking that I am reaching new peaks of managerial brilliance. That problem would not be unique to me. Charlie and I have faced this situation from time to time at Berkshire’s subsidiaries. Humans age at greatly varying rates—but sooner or later their talents and vigor decline. Some managers remain effective well into their 80s—Charlie is a wonder at 82—and others noticeably fade in their 60s. When their abilities ebb, so usually do their powers of self-assessment. Someone else often needs to blow the whistle.



When that time comes for me, our Board will have to step up to the job. From a financial standpoint, its members are unusually motivated to do so. I know of no other board in the country in which the financial interests of directors are so completely aligned with those of shareholders. Few boards even come close. On a personal level, however, it is extraordinarily difficult for most people to tell someone, particularly a friend, that he or she is no longer capable.



If I become a candidate for that message, however, our Board will be doing me a favor by delivering it. Every share of Berkshire that I own is destined to go to philanthropies, and I want society to reap the maximum good from these gifts and bequests. It would be a tragedy if the philanthropic potential of my holdings was diminished because my associates shirked their responsibility to (tenderly, I hope) show me the door. But don’t worry about this. We have an outstanding group of directors, and they will always do what’s right for the shareholders.



Apparently, the next hand-picked CEO does not know he (or she) is the selection. That gives the Board greater flexibility to adapt to change.

Since then, Buffett has added four more people to the original three who have been picked to possibly be called upon to serve as Berkshire’s chief investment officer.

For all the talk of succession, Munger summed it up this way at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2008: “We have a rising young man here named Warren Buffett. I think we want to encourage this rising young man to reach his full potential.”

Perhaps the real question was raised by Berkshire shareholder Nancy Van Wanderham of Birmingham: “Who will be the successor of Charlie Munger?”

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Who Will Succeed Munger?



264





LOU SIMPSON RETIRES


Lou Simpson, once considered the successor to Buffett on the investment side of Berkshire, announced in August 2010, that he would retire at the end of the year.

Buffett planned to take control of GEICO’s investment portfolio which Simpson had overseen for years. “I wish he weren’t retiring,” Buffett was quoted (Chicago Tribune, August 22, 2010).

Back in 1995, Buffett wrote in the Berkshire annual report that Simpson was the heir apparent at Berkshire: “His presence on the scene assures us that Berkshire would have an extraordinary professional immediately available to handle its investments if something were to happen to Charlie and me.”

Buffett said later, referring to the tapping of Simpson, “It really isn’t even succession planning. It’s just that if I were to die tonight the fellow who would handle the investments is Lou” (San Diego Union-Tribune, May 11, 1997).

So just who was this Lou Simpson, and how did he get the nod in 1995?

Simpson was born in Chicago on December 23, 1936, and grew up in the Highland Park suburb during the 1940s. He moved progressively eastward in two jumps for his university stints: Graduating in 1958 from Ohio Wesleyan University with a degree in accounting and economics, then subsequently receiving a master’s degree in economics from Princeton University.

Testing the waters of academia, Simpson started work on a doctorate and taught at Princeton for a short while. One of his students was Bill Bradley, who went on to become a three-time All-American basketball player at Princeton, a New York Knicks star, U.S. Senator from New Jersey for three terms (1979–1997), and presidential candidate in the 2000 race.

After a short stay in the realm of economics academia, he found himself dissatisfied with the financial rewards of that direction, so he left the doctorate program and turned to the practice of business.

In 1962, Simpson returned to Chicago and joined the investment firm Stein Roe & Farnham. It didn’t take him long to become a partner.

After discovering his views were different from the rest of that group, Simpson took a job in Los Angeles with Shareholders Management in 1969, during the go-go days of hot funds. Unfortunately, a bear market hit the funds run by Fred Carr, and Carr left the company a month after Simpson arrived (The New York Times, April 29, 1997).

After less than a year, Simpson joined Western Asset Management, a subsidiary of the Los Angeles–based Western Bancorporation, later First Interstate Bank. At Western, he eventually became president and chief executive officer in 1977.

In 1979, Simpson received a call from John J. Byrne Jr., chairman at GEICO. The insurance company was in need of a new chief investment officer, and Byrne had whittled the list of candidates down to four.

“The finalists would travel to Omaha to meet Buffett, who was renewing a long-standing interest in GEICO” (The New York Times, April 29, 1997). At that point, Berkshire owned about 30% of GEICO.

“I sent three of the four to meet Warren,” Byrne told The New York Times. “And after a four-hour interview with Lou, he called me and said: ‘Stop the search. That’s the fella.’”

So Simpson joined GEICO in September 1979, as senior vice president and chief investment officer. From 1985 to 1993, he served as vice chairman of the board. In May 1993, he was elected president and chief executive officer, capital operations.

When Berkshire bought the rest of GEICO in 1995, Simpson continued on in his role as co-CEO of GEICO, responsible for its investments. He was still holding this position as of 2008. However, unlike most other Berkshire CEOs, who ship excess capital and retained earnings to Omaha, Simpson made his own investment choices for GEICO with its earnings and float.

Buffett said at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1996, “Investment decisions at GEICO—which has about $5 billion of marketable securities—have been made, are being made, and will be made by Lou Simpson.”

Simpson has established a superb record at GEICO. In Berkshire’s 2004 Annual Report, Buffett praised Simpson’s long-term performance, offering the following chart:

Portrait of a Disciplined Investor

Lou Simpson

Return from

Year GEICO Equities S&P Return Relative Results

1980 23.7% 32.3% (8.6%)

1981 5.4% (5.0%) 10.4%

1982 45.8% 21.4% 24.4%

1983 36.0% 22.4% 13.6%

1984 21.8% 6.1% 15.7%

1985 45.8% 31.6% 14.2%

1986 38.7% 18.6% 20.1%

1987 (10.0%) 5.1% (15.1%)

1988 30.0% 16.6% 13.4%

1989 36.1% 31.7% 4.4%

1990 (9.9%) (3.1%) (6.8%)

1991 56.5% 30.5% 26.0%

1992 10.8% 7.6% 3.2%

1993 4.6% 10.1% (5.5%)

1994 13.4% 1.3% 12.1%

1995 39.8% 37.6% 2.2%

1996 29.2% 23.0% 6.2%

1997 24.6% 33.4% (8.8%)

1998 18.6% 28.6% (10.0%)

1999 7.2% 21.0% (13.8%)

2000 20.9% (9.1%) 30.0%

2001 5.2% (11.9%) 17.1%

2002 (8.1%) (22.1%) 14.0%

2003 38.3% 28.7% 9.6%

2004 16.9% 10.9% 6.0%

Avg. Annual

Gain

1980-2004 20.3% 13.5% 6.8%

With this kind of record, it is understandable why Buffett said, “Lou can keep running money as long as he wants” (The New York Times, April 23, 2007).

Simpson’s business acumen also has been put to use in many board positions.

Over the years, he has represented Berkshire’s interests on the boards of National Housing Authority and Bowery Savings. In the 1990s, he served on Salomon’s board and led the important audit committee responsible for the integrity of the company’s figures after the bond trading scandal in 1991.

Simpson has served as director on such public company boards as HNC Software, Potomac Electric Power, ResMed, and U.S. West.

He was a director of MediaOne, and after it was bought by AT&T in 2000, Simpson was named one of AT&T’s 14 board members. He transferred to the Comcast board after the AT&T cable buyout. Simpson resigned from the Comcast board in January 2004, shortly before the cable giant made its hostile takeover bid for Disney.

Simpson is a director of Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC), VeriSign, Western Asset Funds, Inc., and Western Asset Income Fund and a trustee of Western Asset Premier Bond Fund. He serves as a trustee for Northwestern University, the Urban Institute, and the Museum of Science and Industry, Chicago.

At age 71, he was said to be connected to 10 boards of directors in 10 different organizations across four different industries (http://investing.businessweek.com).

Simpson is married and has three grown sons. He lived many years in Rancho Santa Fe, California, near San Diego, where he loved to hike in the rolling hills. In 2005, he moved back to his native Chicago where he ran GEICO’s $4-billion portfolio with only one assistant and one analyst.

Simpson is known for working 12-hour days and weekends. Much of that time is spent reading. “An ideal day,” he says, “would be a day when I’m here in the office [in Rancho Santa Fe, California, at the time of this quote], the market is closed, there are no telephone calls, and I can read all day” (Robert P. Miles, Warren Buffett Wealth, p. 183).

Simpson “has the ideal temperament for investing,” Buffett told Institutional Investor magazine in 1986. “He derives no particular pleasure from operating with or against the crowd. He is comfortable following his own reason.”

SIMPSON ON HIS OWN

After his retirement from Berkshire, Simpson went right back to work opening an investment-adviser firm with his wife Kimberly Querrey in Naples, Florida. The company, SQ Advisors LLC, will manage money for Simpson’s family and friends, as well as outside charities.



Lou Simpson

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Lou Simpson Retires



Simpson and wife Kimberly at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2007.

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)



265





TODD COMBS


In a major move in its succession plan, Berkshire announced on October 25, 2010, that Todd Combs would be an investment manager. “For three years Charlie Munger and I have been looking for someone of Todd’s caliber to handle a significant portion of Berkshire’s investment portfolio,” Buffett said in a statement.

Combs, then 39, a dark horse candidate, headed Castle Point Capital, a privately owned “long-short” hedge fund in Greenwich, Connecticut, for five years. The fund invested in the financial services sector.

Combs lived with his wife and three children in Darien, Connecticut, but now lives in Omaha and works at Berkshire headquarters.

Born in Sarasota, Florida, he graduated from Florida State University in 1993 with degrees in finance and international business operations. He remains a Florida State Seminoles fan.

Castle Point closed after Combs’s departure for Berkshire. It had grown to manage about $400 million, a modest sum by hedge fund standards.

Combs is known for being intense in his work, yet socially low-key, even shy. News outlets could not immediately find a photo of him. The only one that surfaced a couple of days after the announcement, was his high school photo. Some days later, Bloomberg found him at his son’s ice-hockey game. In one photo where he is sitting, the casually dressed Combs had Buffett-like holes in his shoes.

Combs graduated from Riverview High School in 1989 and then went to Florida State University.

After college, he worked for Florida’s comptroller in the Banking, Securities and Finance Division, which gave him knowledge of banks and fraud investigations. Then he joined insurer Progressive Corp., where he analyzed risks and set rates for auto-insurance policies. Progressive is a major competitor to Berkshire’s GEICO.

At Progressive, he met Chuck Davis, a director, who later helped Combs start his hedge fund business.

In 2000, Combs went to Columbia Business School and graduated in 2002. In his second year, he was picked as one of 40 students for its Value Investing Program. Also while at Columbia, he won a stock picking contest by shorting a leveraged stock.

Afterwards, Combs worked at Copper Arch Capital analyzing financial stocks and conducting research on the negative events that could affect them. Combs is known to concentrate intently on the downside of investing. In Wall Street–speak, he plays “defense.” He’s said to consider risk equally as much as reward.

Combs left Arch Cooper in 2005 with seed money from Arch Cooper and started Castle Point Capital.

With Castle Point, Combs made a success of investing in difficult markets by making concentrated bets on quality companies and shorting ones he thought were in trouble.

According to the Fortune story, Combs invested in Berkshire, but not in AIG, Lehman, Bear Stearns, Citicorp, Fannie Mae, or Freddie, the very stocks that Buffett also successfully avoided.

Combs’s investments included U.S. Bancorp, MasterCard, State Street, Western Union, CME Group, CIT Group, and Goldman Sachs, among

others.

He bought Berkshire Hathaway stock in late 2009, but it is not one of his larger holdings (Omaha World–Herald, October 31, 2010).

Reports said that from November 2005 through October 2010, Combs’s fund was up 34% in comparison with a 46% drop in his benchmark, the SPDR Financial Services Sector Fund.

“He is extremely well-trained, reads 500 pages a week and does his own deep-dive research,” said Chuck Davis (The Wall Street Journal, October 26, 2010).

The New York Times (October 25, 2010) quoted Buffett as saying of Combs, “He’s always been enamored with Berkshire.” Buffett continued, “I know he’ll be good, but he’s the right type of guy. We don’t want someone who’s trying to figure out if they can make $100 million with us, or $200 million with the next guy.”

In the Journal story, Buffett said that Combs will oversee a portfolio with a size he “feels comfortable with” and “scale up until he has a chance to get fully invested.”

The announcement came, the Journal said, “after two candidates—including Chinese-American hedge fund manager Li Lu, and another individual Mr. Buffett was interested in—took themselves out of the running for the job.”

Buffett was quoted as saying that Li “decided he would prefer to be where he was.” Buffett explained: “In effect he didn’t want the job. I think he made a lot of money doing what he is doing and he has a very good position in life.”

Li was quoted as saying, “I’ve decided to stay where I am,” without elaborating further.

After much comment about how little known Combs was, Buffett told The Wall Street Journal (October 27, 2010) that Combs is “a 100% fit.”

Combs was one of 700 people who was interested in Buffett’s unconventional “help wanted” ad issued in 2007 and Combs expressed his interest in an unconventional way by sending a letter to Munger asking for a meeting. Munger told the Journal he gets “hundreds” of such requests each year, but something in Combs’s request piqued his interest.

Munger and Combs met for a lunch that extended well into the afternoon at the California Club in downtown Los Angeles. Afterwards, Munger phoned Buffett and told him, “This is a guy I am sure you are going to like.”

The top 25 positions of Combs’s fund in 2010 were as follows:

1. US Bancorp (USB): 8.2% of reported assets



2. MasterCard (MA): 7.3%



3. State Street (STT): 6.8%



4. Western Union (WU): 6.5%



5. CME Group (CME): 5.1%



6. Renaissance Re (RNR): 5.1%



7. PennyMac Mortgage (PMT): 4.6%



8. Chubb (CB): 4.6%



9. Starwood Property Trust (STWD): 4.5%



10. Annaly Capital Management (NLY): 4.4%



11. CIT Group (CIT): 4.3%



12. Progressive (PGR): 4.1%



13. JPMorgan Chase (JPM): 4.0%



14. Goldman Sachs (GS): 3.8%



15. Charles Schwab (SCHW): 3.6%



16. Broadridge Financial (BR): 3.5%



17. AerCap Holdings (AER): 3.4%



18. MB Financial (MBFI): 3.4%



19. Genworth Financial (GNW): 2.9%



20. United America Indemnity: 1.9%



21. BlackRock (BLK): 1.8%



22. Leucadia National (LUK): 1.8%



23. Hartford Financial (HIG): 1.6%



24. PNC Financial (PNC): 0.8%



25. First Financial Bancorp (FFBC): 0.8%



In addition to these domestic companies, Combs held top positions in Oaktree, Experian, and Aeroplan.

Fortune (November 5, 2010) reported that Combs accepted an invitation to attend a four-day Berkshire board meeting in early November. Although he didn’t attend the board meeting, he attended a dinner for the board at Piccolo Pete’s in Omaha and met such board members as Bill Gates and Tom Murphy. Combs spent a couple of days sitting in on presentations given by eight Berkshire managers about their operations. Among the presenters were Matt Rose, CEO of Burlington Northern, Ajit Jain, who heads Berkshire’s reinsurance operations, and David Sokol, who at that time headed NetJets.

It was not disclosed whether Combs took the Burlington Northern train on which the board went to Wyoming’s Arch Coal’s Black Thunder Mine, the largest coal mine in the U.S.

The Fortune story by Carol Loomis quoted Buffett saying that initially Combs was going to be investing about $2 billion to $3 billion, roughly comparable to the sum the retiring Lou Simpson invested for GEICO. Simpson was to retire at the end of 2010. Combs was to start work for Berkshire on January 1, 2011.

The story said Combs would be paid much in the same way that Simpson was paid: by salary and by an incentive plan linked to outperforming the S&P 500 Index.

Speaking of Combs, Buffett told Christiane Amanpour (This Week, November 17, 2010) that, “He’s good. I mean people thought, you know, maybe I should reach out for a big name, but I’d rather have a two-year Secretariat than a 10-year-old Seabiscuit. So I went with the Secretariat.”

Asked about Berkshire’s stock sales of some of its lesser positions such as Home Depot, CarMax, and Nike, Buffett confirmed that it was to clear the decks for Combs after the departure of Lou Simpson. “That’s his [Simpson’s] portfolio that’s being liquidated.” Buffett added, “We’re liquidating a portfolio of his that had maybe 12 stocks in it. Now they’ll all be gone by the end of the year.”

Buffett added that Combs doesn’t have to stay in a fixed area of investments. “He can range wherever he wants,” Buffett said.

The first sighting of Combs’ activities may have come at the end of the first quarter of 2011 when Berkshire said it owned 216,000 shares of MasterCard which had been the second largest holding when Combs ran Castle Point. Buffett was quoted as saying, “I think it showed up on our record that MasterCard was bought. And all I say is this: I didn’t buy it.”

At the end of the second quarter fo 2011, Berkshire owned 405,000 shares of MasterCard.

Apparently Combs was also responsible for position of 1.5 million shares of Dollar General.

Small positions in CVS Caremark, satellite-TV company DirecTV, General Dynamics, Visa, and in Intel disclosed at the end of the third quarter 2011 may have been at the hand of Todd Combs.



Todd Combs

This is the photo that Bloomberg News shot of Combs at his son’s ice-hockey game.

(Photo courtesy of

Berkshire Hathaway)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Todd Combs



266





TED WESCHLER


Who is John Galt?” is the opening line of Ayn Rand’s novel Atlas Shrugged. Although Galt does not appear until the last third of the novel, he is subject of the frequent question, “Who is John Galt?” The answer is that he is a creator, philosopher, and inventor who symbolizes the glory of the human mind.

Next question: Who is Ted Weschler?

Berkshire said on September 12, 2011 that Weschler would join Berkshire as an investment manager in early 2012. Weschler had been operating out of a small three-person office on Main Street in downtown Charlottesville, Virginia. Sounding a bit like Berkshire’s digs, the office—composed of himself, an analyst, and office manager—located on a second floor above the oldest independent bookseller (1924) in Virginia, the New Dominion Bookshop in the Downtown Mall.

The widely unknown Weschler became the second person after Todd Combs of Darien, Connecticut, to be named an investment manager at Berkshire. Combs was named in October 2010.

Weschler, 50, another under-the-radar eventual replacement for Buffett on the investment side of the company, was to join Berkshire after winding down his Peninsula Capital Advisors fund. He and Combs at first will run a small amount of Berkshire’s money—about $1 billion to $3 billion each—but eventually could build up to running all of Berkshire’s stock and bond investments worth more than $100 billion.

“With Todd and Ted on board, Berkshire is well-positioned for successor investment management at the time Mr. Buffett is no longer CEO,” Berkshire stated in a press release (September 12, 2011).

“After Mr. Buffett no longer serves as CEO, Todd and Ted—possibly aided by one additional manager—will have responsibility for the entire equity and debt portfolio of Berkshire, subject to overall direction by the then-CEO and Board of Directors,” the release stated. Buffett will continue to manage most of Berkshire’s money until his retirement, Berkshire reported. The word “retirement” seemed unusual for Berkshire since Buffett has always joked that he will run things for five to ten years after he passes on.

Fortune’s Carol Loomis reported (September 12, 2011) that Weschler paid $5.3 million over two years to win Buffett’s annual charity auction that benefits Glide, a San Francisco mission for the homeless. The prize auctioned each year is a private lunch with Buffett.

After Buffett and Weschler met in July 2010 in Omaha for the first of Weschler’s prize meals, Buffett invited Weschler to the Berkshire annual meeting in 2011. The Loomis story broke the news that Buffett got to know Weschler because he was the winning bidder, but until announcement of his post, he was not openly known to be the anonymous bidder in 2010 and 2011 for the charity event.

The San Francisco Chronicle story (September 13, 2011) quoted Glide’s Rev. Cecil Williams as saying he met Buffett through Buffett’s first wife, Susan, who Williams said worked as a volunteer at Glide for five years before he even knew who she was. “One Sunday, she came to Glide, brought Warren in and said, ‘I’m Susan Buffett, and this is my husband.’ It floored me.”

For more than 45 years, Williams has headed Glide, which now has a membership of 11,000 people in the heart of the city’s poorest neighborhoods.

Williams’ wife, Janice Mirikitani, also a founding president of Glide, has helped her husband build 87 programs that provide care for the homeless. Further, she is San Francisco’s second Poet Laureate, appointed in 2000 and has served as commissioner of San Francisco’s Arts Commission since 1996. Before graduating from UCLA and receiving a teaching credential from UC Berkeley, she, along with her family, was held in an Arkansas concentration camp with the mass internment of Japanese Americans in World War II.

Weschler had an earlier interest in Glide and in the auction; Williams told the Chronicle that several years ago, Weschler showed up at Glide for the auction. Although he lost out in the bidding that year, he walked up to Williams and handed him an envelope with a $100,000 check and commented positively, “I really like what’s going on at Glide. You will see me again.”

Loomis said that at the time Weschler won, he wanted to remain under the radar and did not want to have the lunch take place in New York as it usually does at the Smith & Wollensky steakhouse. It turned out Buffett and Weschler instead had dinner in Omaha in July 2010 and there hit it off.

Even after paying more than $2 million for the meal, Weschler offered to pay for the actual meal, but Buffett said: “You already have” (Omaha World–Herald, September 13, 2011), and later told the paper (September 14, 2011), “He’s our kind of guy. He’ll think of Berkshire first.”

At the second auction dinner held July 26, 2011, in Omaha, Buffett asked Weschler about the possibility of joining Berkshire. “I very much wanted him to do it, but I didn’t expect to get very far with the idea,” Buffett told Loomis. “Ted will no doubt make a lot of money at Berkshire. But he was already making a lot of money with his fund—you can get an idea of that from the size of his Glide bids—so money wasn’t a reason to come.”

Weschler has a bachelor’s degree in economics from the Wharton School of Business at the University of Pennsylvania, where Buffett began his career. To help pay for Wharton, Weschler bought a used pinball machine and charged students to play it. This again is shades of Buffett who started a pinball machine business when he was in high school.

Weschler worked for six years at specialty chemicals and materials company W.R. Grace, where at one time he was assistant to CEO Peter Grace. Weschler worked at Grace from 1983 to1989. After the Grace company filed for bankruptcy in 2011 because of asbestos lawsuits in the form of 100,000 personal injury claims, Weschler’s fund bought more than 5% of the stock at an average cost of about $2 a share, according to The Wall Street Journal (September 13, 2011). The stock closed at $34.29 on September 12, 2011. Weschler kept his stake in the W. R. Grace company (5.1%, or 3.74 million shares) and helped run the company’s investments as head of its equity committee, as he unwound his fund’s holdings. A Grace spokesman told Bloomberg News (September 13, 2011) that Weschler “has expressed support for Grace” and will own about 40% of the 10.8 million shares held by the fund.

Also, he helped start a private equity firm called Quad-C. In 1999, Weschler struck out on his own and started a hedge fund called Peninsula Capital Advisors. Reports said the fund had $150 million in stock in 2002, which grew to $2 billion by 2011. Partners who invested in the fund, which had long positions but also shorted the market and used margin, were up 1236% over those years compared with 146% for Berkshire’s B shares and minus 20% for the S&P.

In 2005, Weschler was one of two fund managers to help finance a merger of two airlines: America West and US Airways.

To wind up his fund, Weschler had to sell the $2 billion in stocks. More than half his funds were invested in satellite-television provider DirecTV and W. R. Grace. Among other positions were DaVita, which runs dialysis centers, and Liberty Media. Weschler’s fund focused on media groups with further holdings in Valassis Communications and Cogent Communications. It also had a position in Cincinnati Bell.

Reports said Weschler bought 2 million shares of Bank of America (now a big Berkshire holding) back in early 2009 during the credit crunch. The stock doubled by the time Weschler sold, long before Berkshire bought in.

The Loomis story said Weschler, who is married with two children, will keep his home in Charlottesville, but that he also will get an apartment in Omaha so he can be there several days a week.

The Journal story quoted a Weschler friend as saying: An exciting weekend for Ted likely “includes spending time with his family and reading 10-K’s.” He is known as a constant reader. He has modeled his investment activities after Buffett and is known for long-term holdings.

Weschler is part owner of The Hook, a weekly newspaper in Charlottesville. Its editor, Hawes Spencer, was quoted in The Wall Street Journal (September 14, 2011) as saying, “Ted is actually the nicest guy in Charlottesville.” He is known as a philanthropist and political donor in town. “He’s not one of those guys who wants to see his name in print,” Spencer also said. “Among the people in charity work, he’s extremely well known. Among the average person, he’s completely unknown.”

The self-effacing Weschler is a marathon runner who reportedly finished the 2007 New York City Marathon in 3 hours and 30 minutes.

In investments he adheres to a Buffett-like model of having a few well-researched positions that are held long-term.

As reporters scratched around for any information about Weschler on September 12, the day his new position at Berkshire was announced, Deal Journal came up with the fact that he had bid successfully several times at the auction of the personal property owned by convicted Ponzi scheme artist Bernard Madoff. Among the items Weschler won were a box of Madoff’s cuff links and Madoff’s telescope. Weschler gives the cuff links to clients and business associates and has mounted the telescope in his office “to keep an eye on things.”

Of the investment managers, Buffett said they impressed Berkshire’s top brass for reasons other than just their investment track records. “To us, they have to be very, very good in terms of investing, but that’s not the sole criteria. We care a lot about the nature of the persons. They go to work like we do—trying to think about what makes sense for Berkshire.”

With his new job at Berkshire, Weschler’s earnings will be taxed at the regular rate of 35% rather than the 15% for hedge-fund managers.

Weschler told The New York Times (September 20, 2011) that he’s ok with that. “When you have enough money to live the lifestyle you want, money and taxes are less of a consideration than who you want to work with.”



Weschler’s Workshop over the Bookshop

This Google map shows where Weschler operates in downtown Charlottesville, home of the University of Virginia.



Ted Weschler

The Story of Warren Buffett



Rev. Cecil Williams



Janice Mirikitani

Of Permanent Value Ted Weschler



267





CALL COLLECT


In the mid-1980s, Buffett circulated the following ad



We want to buy businesses worth $100 million or more before December 31, 1986. If you own such a business, there’s a vital reason why you should consider selling.



In 44 days the tax you must pay on the sale of your business may soar to 521/2%.



All of us know about the change in the Federal capital gains tax rate from 20% to 28%. In most cases, effective state tax rates on capital gains will also materially increase.



A second tax consideration is less well-known, but in many cases looms far more important. Effective January 1, the General Utilities doctrine is repealed. This change can produce the equivalent of a 521/2% federal capital gains tax on the sale of a business. Ask your lawyer, accountant, or investment banker how it will affect your situation.



The change in the General Utilities doctrine will not apply to transactions completed by December 31. Other things being equal, you will net dramatically more money if you close a sale by that date than if you delay.



Berkshire Hathaway will have no problem in completing a transaction by the December 31 deadline. We have the money, and we can act with extraordinary speed. Most of the purchases we have made have been agreed to after one meeting with the owners. If you phone us with a general description of your business and tell us the sort of transaction you are seeking, we can immediately tell you whether we have an interest. And if we do, we will proceed instantly. Here is the fine print:



Buffett says,

We are eager to hear from principals or their representatives about businesses that meet all of the following criteria:



1. Large purchases (at least $75 million of pre-tax earnings unless the business will fit into one of our existing units),



2. Demonstrated consistent earning power (future projections are of little interest to us, nor are “turnaround” situations),



3. Businesses earning good returns on equity while employing little or no debt,



4. Management in place (we can’t supply it),



5. Simple businesses (if there’s lots of technology, we won’t understand it),



6. An offering price (we don’t want to waste our time or that of the seller by talking, even preliminarily, about a transaction when price is unknown).



These criteria are firm so we would appreciate hearing only from owners whose businesses fully meet them.



We invite potential sellers to check us out by contacting anyone with whom we have done business in the past. You’ll find we are unusual: we buy to keep (no periodic “restructuring” convulsions); we leave subsidiary managements alone to operate in the future as they have in the past; and our own ownership and management structure is predictable for decades to come.



If you are interested, call me at 402-346-1400. Or, if you like, first call Mrs. Kaiser at the same number to request express delivery of Berkshire Hathaway’s current annual report. Your inquiry will be totally confidential; we use no staff, and we don’t need to discuss your company with consultants, investment bankers, commercial bankers, etc. You will deal only with Charles Munger, Vice Chairman of Berkshire, and with me.



If you have any possible interest, call promptly. Otherwise a 20% tax will become 28% to 521/2%.



Warren E. Buffett



Although the $47,000 ad produced no purchases, Buffett personally took at least 100 telephone calls.

One caller, a native of Pakistan, offered to sell Buffett a newsstand in New York for $185,000. That one didn’t meet Buffett’s test on size.

Another caller from Jackson, Mississippi, offered her antebellum mansion. Buffett turned that one down politely, but quickly (Omaha World-Herald, December 3, 1986).

Other callers offered farms or small-town businesses. Buffett later told his hometown newspaper that the last strong prospect came in on December 20, 1986, from a potential seller in the eastern United States.

Buffett said the business met all the requirements, such as earning $10 million a year after tax and possessing in-place management. And the price was right. “But it was a business we didn’t want to be in,” he said, declining to say what kind of business it was. “If you run an ad for a chihuahua, you get a lot of collie replies.” He added, “We’re looking for 747s, not model airplanes.”

The ad worked in the sense that people became more aware of what Berkshire wanted and would be more likely to think of Berkshire when they wanted to sell.

Berkshire ran a different ad in 1986. Published three times in Business Insurance magazine, it was titled, “Berkshire Hathaway Wants to See Property/Casualty Risks Where the Premium Is $1 Million or More.”

As a result of the ads, the cost of which totaled $20,000, Berkshire’s insurance subsidiaries generated new business that produced more than $100 million a year in premiums.

At the Berkshire annual meeting in 1993, Buffett granted a brief interview

to Linda O’Bryon of Nightly Business Report. In it, she asked if he was still trying to buy businesses; he answered, yes, he was always looking for new ones. Then he sneaked in an ad saying if anyone out in television land had a $2-billion to $3-billion business to sell him, to call him collect.

A later ad said Buffett was looking for an elephant [That’s a fakeout from Buffett. We know he’s looking for a gorilla.] of an acquisition in the $3–5 billion range. Berkshire’s 1997 Annual Report said: “The larger the company, the greater will be our interest: We would like to make an acquisition in the $5–10 billion range.”

Today it’s in the $5–20 billion range.

“If you name almost any big company in the U.S., I can tell you in five seconds whether or not it is within my circle of competence; and if it is, I’ve probably got some sort of fix on it. There are probably hundreds of companies in a category and if I got a call from any one of them today, I could tell them whether I was interested or not as soon as the fellow identified himself” (Financial Times, May 17, 1999).

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Call Collect



268





HIS PERSONAL PORTFOLIO


In addition to his more than 30% ownership of Berkshire, Buffett also has some smaller but substantial holdings in his personal portfolio.

Who really knows what the best investor of our time has been tucking away over the years? Information is skimpy, but he has said returns in his personal portfolio have been higher than those of Berkshire (Talk at Harvard Business School, October 18, 2001).

The best guess is that Buffett’s personal portfolio is worth about $500 million since he has been quoted as saying to former Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson in 2008 that he would be willing to contribute $100 million to a talked about public-private partnership fund, adding that $100 amounted to “about 20% of my net worth outside my Berkshire holdings” (Andrew Ross Sorkin, Too Big to Fail, p. 508).

In his Buffett Partnership letter of January 25, 1967, Buffett said his investment in the partnership represented more than 90% of his family’s worth, making it clear that his major personal investment all along has been his stake in the partnership and later in Berkshire stock.

In 1967, Buffett said that most of his money was in the partnership, excluding an investment in Data Documents stock. Reporter Jonathan Laing quoted Buffett in a Wall Street Journal story (March 31, 1977) that his personal portfolio of stockholdings was worth $30 million, but much of that $30 million included Diversified Retailing and Blue Chip Stamps which later became part of Berkshire. So, as he now says, almost all his fortune [99%] is in Berkshire. (In a March 2, 1999 interview with Nightline anchor Ted Koppel, Buffett said 99.75% of his net worth was in Berkshire.)

In late 1986, Buffett invested about $38 million in the stock of Illinois’ ServiceMaster for his personal portfolio. ServiceMaster provides laundry, food preparation, and maid services for hospitals, office buildings, colleges, and factories.

ServiceMaster runs a variety of cleaning businesses and operates on Christian principles. The name means Service to the Master. There were subsequent reports that Buffett was selling the stake, and ServiceMaster officials have said he is out of the stock.

That investment became known because Buffett bought slightly more than 5% of ServiceMaster stock, making it a public transaction. When confusion arose as to whether Berkshire bought the stock, Buffett told shareholders the purchase had been made for his personal portfolio, not for Berkshire.

When some shareholders said they wished he had bought ServiceMaster for Berkshire, he explained that the investment, because of tax reasons, was better suited for personal accounts.

Over the years, reports of small personal investments have come to light: One, in FirstTier Bank in Omaha; another in Nebraska’s sole minority-owned bank, the small Community Bank of Nebraska; and a little investment in the Omaha Royals. It’s safe to say Buffett is not standing idly by as his own investor; although by all accounts, the huge majority of his investment thinking is devoted to Berkshire.

DO THE REIT THING

On April 15, 1996, Property Capital Trust, a Boston, Massachusetts, real estate investment trust, said Buffett had bought a 6.7% stake in the company, or 610,800 shares that were trading at about $9 a share. Property Capital Trust planned to sell its real estate investments over the next several years. Reports in 1997, said Buffett bought more shares for his own account, bringing his total to 831,600 shares, or 8.9% of the company.

A report on October 24, 1998, said Buffett had bought a 5.1% stake, or 700,000 shares, in MGI Properties, another real estate trust in Boston. A report on February 17, 1999, said he had raised the stake to 1,141,300 shares, or 8.3% of the company. By April 1, 1999, Buffett held 1.42 million shares,

or 10.3% of the company. He raised his stake another 264,000 shares in

May 1999.

MGI planned to liquidate its holdings in June 1998, because the value of its stock was less than the value of its properties.

Reports for April 10, 1999, showed that Buffett personally had bought 417,100 shares, or a 5.3% stake in Greensboro, North Carolina–based Tanger Factory Outlet Centers, the nation’s largest factory outlet center owner. Reports in 2000 showed he had raised the stake to 13.5% and lowered later

to 5.3%.

A few days later reports showed another personal investment in REITs. Buffett owned 797,200 shares of Town & Country Trust, or 5.1% of the REIT based in Baltimore, Maryland—a stake listed in 2000 at 6.7%, but later lowered to 2.33%.

Buffett bought 5.3% (later reduced to 5.2%) or 2.06 million shares of Baker, Fentress & Co. common stock, according to an SEC filing in August 2, 1999. Baker Fentress, of Chicago, Illinois, is a non-diversified, closed-end mutual fund which invests mainly in stocks, but it was planning to sell its securities. Baker Fentress owns nearly 80% of Consolidated-Tomoka Land Co., which owns about 16,000 acres of prime real estate in the Daytona Beach, Florida, area (Orlando Sentinel, August 11, 1999). In September 1999, filings showed that Buffett owned 362,729 shares, or 5.7%, of Consolidated-Tomoka.

Apparently with the Baker Fentress investment, Buffett was making an arbitrage play to capture the difference between the fund’s share price and the value of the portfolio after liquidation and return the proceeds to the shareholders.

As for the REIT investments and the Baker Fentress outing, Buffett appeared to be playing liquidation, not long-term investing.

Reports on December 13, 1999, said Buffett owned a 5.3% stake, or 506,000 shares, of Bell Industries, of El Segundo, California. The company, a provider of computer stock services, said it was open to offers to be bought out.

Buffett told Bell officials in early 2000 he had sold his Bell stock (The Wall Street Journal, January 18, 2000).

By March 24, 2000, Buffett had established a 5.05% (raised to 7.1%) stake in Aegis Realty Inc., a New York–based real estate company that invests in neighborhood shopping centers. Buffett later criticized Aegis’ proposed buyout of Dallas-based strip mall developer P.O.B. Montgomery & Co. as “a terrible deal.” After Buffett’s criticism of the $203 million effort to buy the malls, the plan was dropped.

Following the recorded voice mail greeting, “Debbie Bosanek, please state your company followed by your name,” Buffett made the following response:

This isn’t Debbie Bosanek, she is my secretary, and you might have thought she had a sex change by the sound of my voice compared to [laughing]... This is Warren Buffett—I just wanted to make clear an earlier question that I think this is a terrible deal frankly.



I own over 500,000 shares, and I think considerably more money would be realized in liquidation than will be the situation if this deal goes through. I think the stock will sell at a discount to asset value with Apollo in a controlling position, and I intend to vote against it.



I hope there is a proposition put forward to liquidate the company where significantly more value can be realized. And one reason a competing bid isn’t brought in of course is because of a breakup fee and all that entails, so the simple way to avoid that is to simply vote the transaction down and then have a proposal for liquidation, which can be done under the present management or done under a new group of managers.



So it’s not a question just a statement and it’s not Debbie Bosanek with a cold.



Buffett also revealed a 5% stake in JDN Realty, an Atlanta-based REIT. He also bought a 5.1% (raised to 7.7% then lowered to 7.07%) stake in PMC Capital, a Dallas-based REIT which provides loans to businesses. A stake in PMC Capital fell to 3.25% from 5.1%.

Late in 2000, a 5.7% stake, or 7.5 million shares, was revealed in HRPT Properties Trust, a Newton, Massachusetts, REIT that invests mainly in commercial buildings.

Buffett bought about a million shares of specialty finance company Laser Mortgage Management Inc., according to a filing April 3, 2001. The company was in liquidation after getting into trouble in 1999 and 2000, when interest rates rose.

Buffett invested about $155 million in seven REITS worth about $180 million, which might be about half his personal portfolio, according to a Clarion CPA Securities Newsletter in April 2001.

Buffett bought 5.06%, or 1,663,200 shares, of Burnham Pacific Properties, a San Diego-based REIT, according to a report in late 2001. Burnham had recently announced a liquidating distribution as a result of selling eight properties.

During Berkshire’s annual meeting in 2004, Buffett said he no longer held the REIT positions in his personal portfolio.

The fate of Buffett’s personal portfolio is an intriguing question. Something good will come of it. Asked about it at the annual meeting in 1991, Buffett gave it little attention, saying only that his real stake is in Berkshire; and that in any case, almost all his money will ultimately be returned to society.

“My personal portfolio is Berkshire,” he said.

In an owner’s manual to shareholders in June 1996, he wrote: “Charlie’s family has 90% or more of its net worth in Berkshire shares; my wife, Susie, and I have more than 99%. In addition many of my relatives—my sisters and cousins, for example—keep a huge portion of their net worth in Berkshire stock.”

KOREAN STOCKS

On November 12, 2005, The Wall Street Journal (November 12, 2005) reported on Buffett’s Korean investment:

“Last year, Mr. Buffett says he began buying Korean stocks for his personal brokerage account, investing a total of $100 million in roughly 20 Korean companies. He says that the investments were too small to be appropriate for the Berkshire portfolio. ‘These were not Berkshire-size remotely,’ he says.

“He picked the stocks, which he declines to name, by leafing through a reference book compiled in Korea and provided by Citigroup to some clients. The book devotes a single page to each listed company. ‘You look for solid-looking companies at very low multiples of earnings, and sometimes with the added bonus of lots of excess cash,’ he said. After the shares rose in price, he unloaded some of them, though he still called them cheap.”

In a talk to Harvard business students (December 22, 2005), Buffett said that after Citigroup sent him a manual about Korean stocks, he studied it for five or six hours and found 20 stocks selling at two or three times earnings with good balance sheets. One was Dae-Han Flour Mills. Buffett bought stock in the flour mill firm when it was trading below book value although it was selling about 25% of the flour in South Korea. Buffett bought 20 companies for diversity, because some companies could be run by crooks. Buffett personally didn’t know the companies and hasn’t been to Korea. The Korean won [the currency] has strengthened against the dollar, giving them an extra kick.

A FEW RECENT INVESTMENTS

When Buffett announced to Fortune’s Carol Loomis (June 25, 2006) that he planned to give most of his stock to the Gates Foundation, Loomis asked if he meant he was giving nothing to his children. “I’ve always said my family won’t receive huge amounts of my net worth. That doesn’t mean they’ll get nothing.… I said that way back when I was buying Berkshire, I had less than $1 million in outside cash. Well, I’ve made a few decent investments [in his personal portfolio] with that money in the years since—taking positions that were too small for Berkshire, doing some fixed-income arbitrage, and selling my interest in a bank that was split off from Berkshire” [Rockford Bank].

TAXABLE INCOME OF $46.9 MILLION IN 2006

Forbes (November 26, 2007), quoted Buffett in his interview with NBC’s Tom Brokaw that his taxable income was $46.9 million in 2006.

Although difficult to calculate, such a large number almost certainly has to indicate a large personal portfolio.

Some of it most certainly is from capital gains, and some is probably from dividends. His Berkshire salary and board payments would hardly add much to the figure.

If the entire portfolio simply paid a 2% dividend, that would suggest a portfolio approaching a billion. Still, the amount could be skewed by non-taxable municipal bonds or a one-time exceptionally large capital gain. Even so, to earn a capital gain of that amount normally would require a large amount of money.

Buffett released his taxable income number to bolster his view about tax inequities, saying he paid 18% in tax, far less than the tax of employees at Berkshire whose tax rate averaged 33% on salaries ranging from $60,000 to $750,000.

A SMALL BET AGAINST HEDGE FUNDS

In 2008, Buffett (not Berkshire) bet that a group of hedge funds selected by experts would not return more to investors over the next decade than the S&P 500.

Carol Loomis reported in Fortune (June 9, 2008) that the bet was between Buffett, who thinks high fees charged by “helpers” hurt returns, and Protege Partners LLC of New York, with each side putting up $320,000. The total of $640,000 collected January 1, 2008, was invested in zero-coupon Treasury bonds that should be worth about $1 million at the bet’s conclusion. That money will go to charity—to London-based Absolute Return for Kids, if Protege wins, and to Girls Inc. if Buffett wins.

BERKSHIRE AND WELLS FARGO

Buffett told CNBC (October 3, 2008) that the only domestic stocks in his personal portfolio are Berkshire and Wells Fargo.

CASH IS IN TREASURIES

Buffett has said that almost all his personal holdings in cash and equivalents are in T-bills. “I wouldn’t dream of putting it anywhere else,” he said after the S&P downgraded U.S. debt from AAA to double A. “If I have to buy Treasurys at a zero yield, I will. I don’t like it, but I will.” (CNBC, August 8, 2011).

TAXABLE INCOME $62 MILLION IN 2011

Forbes (August 17, 2011) reported that Buffett’s gross of $62 million received a tax rate of about 17% because Buffett takes deductions for charitable contributions and, in fact, has a $30 billion carryover of charitable contributions for later use.

Buffett said his adjusted gross income in 2010 was $62,855,638, with taxable income of $39,814,784. He also paid $15,300 in payroll taxes (CNBC, October 12, 2011).

On the $39,814,784 million of taxable income, he paid $6.9 million, or 17.4% to Uncle Sam.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value His Personal Portfolio

His Personal Portfolio The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value His Personal Portfolio



269





THE OMAHA ROYALS




“A Helluva Pitch

For the First

60 Feet”

Warren “The Whip” Buffett greets the crowd as he prepares to throw out the ceremonial first pitch at an Omaha-Iowa Cubs minor-league baseball game on April 29, 2000, at Rosenblatt Stadium in Omaha.

(AP/Wide World Photos)

The Story of Warren Buffett

In 1991, Buffett and Walter Scott, Peter Kiewit Sons’ chairman and Berkshire board member, stepped in to buy a stake in the Omaha Royals, a minor league baseball team, when a deal with the previous buyer fell apart. The team was renamed the Omaha Golden Spikes in 1998, then took back its old name in 2001.

The rescue occurred when Philadelphia real estate developer Craig Stein backed out of an ownership plan because he couldn’t live with a requirement that gave Union Pacific veto power over any plan to move the franchise from Omaha.

Union Pacific railroad had announced that it would join with Stein to buy 49% of the Omaha AAA franchise, one notch below the major leagues. When he backed out, Buffett and Scott forked up $1.25 million each. Union Pacific contributed $2.5 million, and the deal was done.

The franchise, a farm team for the Kansas City Royals, might well have been lost had Buffett not stepped in with what was an act of good citizenship rather than the act of an opportunistic investor.

The hasty announcement was made in the office of Omaha Mayor P. J. Morgan, who commented he was surprised to learn that Buffett hadn’t visited the mayor’s office before then. Buffett replied, “At a million and a quarter a pop, I can’t afford it.”

Buffett once had the following exchange with Omahan Betty Davis on an

elevator at the Omaha’s City County Building:

“Do you know what floor the mayor’s office is on?”



“Third floor,” she said.



Buffett thanked her and punched the button.



“I have a favor to ask you,” Ms. Davis said. “Do you mind if I tell people I told Warren Buffett where to get off?”



“Not at all,” Buffett said, adding, “People are always telling me where to get off” (Robert McMorris, Omaha World-Herald, November 25, 1992).



Longtime baseball fans, Buffett and Scott still have their original positions in the team; although in 2000, Union Pacific sold its stake to the Blue Rocks, a minor-league baseball team in Wilmington, Delaware. In 2006, Ivy Walls Management, headed by William Shea, bought that stake.

In 1994, Buffett invited shareholders to an Omaha Royals game where he planned to throw out the first pitch. He assured folks he would better his “humiliating performance” of the previous year when, “I barely missed my foot.”

The Oracle of Omaha walked to the mound, shook off the catcher’s sign, wound up, and threw a strike! The crowd cheered. No one was more surprised than Buffett. The announcer declared the pitch a strike by Warren “The Whip” (his new nickname) Buffett, but said it was timed at only eight miles per hour, adding, “You’d better keep your day job.”

In the 1994 Annual Report, Buffett said, “Opening the game that night, I had my stuff and threw a strike that the scoreboard reported at eight miles per hour. What many fans missed was that I shook off the catcher’s call for my fast ball and instead delivered my change-up. This year it will be all smoke.”

In 1996, his pitch bounced off the plate. Buffett passed it off as “a premature sinker, but it was hard to hit” (Omaha World-Herald, August 16, 1996).

Buffett gave this explanation in Berkshire’s 1996 Annual Report: “Though Rosenblatt is normal in appearance, it is anything but: the field sits on a unique geological structure that occasionally emits short gravitational waves causing even the most smoothly delivered pitch to sink violently. I have been the victim of this weird phenomenon several times in the past but am hoping for benign conditions this year.”

After his 1997 pitch (low and inside), Buffett—decked out in his Royals warm-up jacket—said, “I keep waiting for the year they let me pitch the whole game.”

As had become his custom after his pitch, Buffett sat in the stands signing

T-shirts, programs, $1 bills—anything. One shareholder, Wayne Elmer of New London, Wisconsin, pressed a $100 bill at Buffett and asked, “Will you sign my $100?” Replied Buffett, “I wouldn’t sign anything else” (Money, July, 1997).

BUFFETT BUFFS UP HIS REPERTOIRE

In Berkshire’s 1997 Annual Report, Buffett wrote:

As usual, your Chairman, shamelessly exploiting his 25% ownership of the team, will take the mound. But this year you will see something new.



In the past games, much to the bafflement of the crowd, I have shaken off the catcher’s first call. He has consistently asked for my sweeping curve, and I have just as regularly resisted. Instead, I have served up a pathetic fast ball, which on my best day was clocked at eight miles per hour (with a following wind).



There’s a story behind my unwillingness to throw the curve ball. As some of you may know, Candy Cummings invented the curve in 1867, and used it to great effect in the National Association, where he never won less than 28 games in a season. The pitch, however, drew immediate criticism from the very highest of authorities, namely Charles Elliott, then president of Harvard University, who declared, “I have heard that this year we at Harvard won the baseball championship because we have a pitcher who has a fine curve ball. I am further instructed that the purpose of the curve ball is to deliberately deceive the batter. Harvard is not in the business of teaching deception.” (I’m not making this up.)



Ever since I learned of President Elliott’s moral teachings on this subject, I have scrupulously refrained from using my curve, however devastating its effect might have been on hapless batters. Now, however, it is time for my karma to run over Elliott’s dogma and for me to quit holding back. Visit the park on Saturday night and marvel at the majestic arc of my breaking ball.



In Berkshire’s 1998 annual report, Buffett mentioned another new pitch he would deliver: “This year I plan to introduce my flutterball. It’s a real source of irritation to me that many view our annual meeting as a financial event rather than the sports classic I consider it to be. Once the world sees my flutterball, that misperception will be erased. Come to the meeting and check out my flutterball. Sincerely, Warren a.k.a. ‘The Whip.’ ”

It was also in 1998 that the Royals began a three-year hiatus from their original name and became the Omaha Golden Spikes, to reflect the team’s connection to the Omaha-based railroad giant, Union Pacific. The transcontinental railroad was finished with the hammering in of a golden spike in Promontory Point, Utah, in 1869.

Buffett tossed his game-opening pitch in 1999 to Hall of Fame player Ernie Banks. Beforehand, Buffett said, “We will face off in what I regard as an extraordinary act of courage on his part,” indicating that Banks should be ready to duck.

Banks had hit 512 home runs during his 18 seasons with the Chicago Cubs from 1953-1971. In light of that fact, Buffett added: “I expect a big crowd in the left-field bleachers” (Associated Press, April 24, 1999).

In Berkshire’s 1999 annual report, Buffett wrote his review of the event:

Those who attended last year saw your Chairman pitch to Ernie Banks.



This encounter proved to be the titanic duel that the sports world had long awaited. After the first few pitches—which were not my best, but when have I ever thrown my best?—I fired a brushback at Ernie just to let him know who was in command. Ernie charged the mound, and I charged the plate. But a clash was avoided because we became exhausted before reaching each other…



I should add that I have extracted a promise from Ernie that he will not hit a ‘come-backer’ at me since I would never be able to duck in time to avoid it. My reflexes are like Woody Allen’s, who said his were so slow that he was once hit by a car being pushed by two guys.



In Berkshire’s 2000 Annual Report, in reference to one of his pitches that Banks knocked for a line drive the previous year, Buffett quoted Warren Spahn after Willie Mays knocked one of his pitches for a home run: “It was a helluva pitch for the first 60 feet.”

In 2001, Buffett not only arched a pitch to Omaha’s Hall of Famer Bob Gibson but also took a turn at bat, knocking a dribbler out to the shortstop.

In 2003 in lieu of the baseball game, Berkshire held a shareholder open house at the Nebraska Furniture Mart in order to devote a special night to them. It was called “Berkshire’s Backyard Barbecue.”

BARBECUE

After a decade on the mound, Buffett retired his No “1/16” jersey. His assistant Debbie Bosanek said Buffett had not totally given up his baseball career, adding, “He said that he’s going to be waiting for other offers now that he’s a free agent.”



A Buffett Investment

Omaha Royals memorabilia gets a prominent position at World Headquarters. Buffett has a $1.25 million investment in the team.

(Photo by Sherrie Gregory)

Of Permanent Value The Omaha Royals





Fistful of Family

Susan Buffett; grandson Howie (who has had his own business card since he was 10); Warren “The Whip” Buffett; and granddaughter Megan at Omaha Royals game in 1994. The fistful of dollars insignia on Buffett’s shirt is the closest thing Berkshire has to a logo.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

“Barely Missed My Foot”

Buffett, co-owner of the Omaha Royals but no threat to Nolan Ryan, winds up for a pitch at Omaha’s Rosenblatt Stadium in 1994. Right-hander Buffett called his pitch a “humiliating performance.... I barely missed my foot.”



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Whitey Ford

Calls It a Day

Buffett, The Gloved One (fourth from left), threw a perfect strike at an Omaha Royals game in 1994. Buffett and the cheering crowd were amazed. He must have worked hard in the

off-season.

The Omaha Royals The Story of Warren Buffett



Warren “The Whip” Buffett

The fraction 1/16 is the smallest

amount at which a stock trades.

(Photo courtesy of Omaha World-Herald)

Of Permanent Value The Omaha Royals



“Let’s Play Two!”

Buffett and Chicago Cubs legend and Hall of Famer Ernie Banks signeed autographs and talked with players in the dugout at Rosenblatt Stadium during the Omaha Royals’ season opener on April 11, 2003. Buffett tossed out the first pitch but then retired his jersey.

(Photo courtesy of Omaha World-Herald)

Buffett sent this letter to Seth Swirsky for his book Every Pitcher Tells a Story v(p. 27):



(With permission of Seth Swirsky)



270





BERKSHIRE’S LOOK-THROUGH EARNINGS


Glenn Tongue, managing partner of T2 Partners LLC in New York, has been remarkably accurate in predicting Berkshire’s earnings. Before joining T2, Tongue spent 17 years on Wall Street as an investment banker. He received an MBA with Distinction from Wharton and a B.S. degree in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science from Princeton University.

This chapter is a look at his late-2007 assessment of Berkshire’s look-through earnings:

Many analysts consider Berkshire Hathaway difficult to value. This is in part because the company consists of both wholly owned businesses (insurance, retail, utilities, and many others) and minority stakes in a number of publicly held companies (Coca-Cola, Procter & Gamble, American Express, etc.). While the earnings of the wholly owned businesses are presented in Berkshire’s financial statements, retained earnings of the minority stakes are not (only dividends received by Berkshire are counted as income). Since earnings under GAAP (generally accepted accounting principles) ignores the retained earnings of these minority investments held by Berkshire, reported earnings have been understated.



For example, in 2006, Berkshire owned 152 million shares of American Express (AXP), which earned $2.99 per share. Since AXP paid out $0.57 per share in dividends, the value per share retained by AXP was $2.42 per share ($2.99–$0.57). In Berkshire’s case, these retained earnings amounted to $367 million, an amount not captured by conventional accounting.



Warren Buffett introduced two frameworks in the annual letter to assist shareholders in valuing Berkshire: first he presented look-through earnings and later gave an assets/earnings presentation.



LOOK-THROUGH EARNINGS

To better incorporate the value of earnings from minority-held investments across the entire investment portfolio, Warren Buffett introduced the concept of look-through earnings in the 1989 Berkshire Hathaway annual report. “In our view, Berkshire’s fundamental earning power is best measured by a ‘look-through’ approach, in which we append our share of the operating earnings retained by our investees to our own reported operating earning.”

The 2000 Owner’s Manual (reprinted with every annual report) describes: “We attempt to offset the shortcomings of conventional accounting by regularly reporting ‘look-through’ earnings (though, for special and nonrecurring reasons, we occasionally omit them). The look-through numbers include Berkshire’s own reported operating earnings, excluding capital gains and purchase-accounting adjustments (an explanation of which occurs later in this message), plus Berkshire’s share of the undistributed earnings of our major investees—amounts that are not included in Berkshire’s figures under conventional accounting. From these undistributed earnings of our investees we subtract the tax we would have owed had the earnings been paid to us as dividends. We also exclude capital gains, purchase-accounting adjustments and extraordinary charges or credits from the investee numbers.”

In 1991, Buffett first presented a table in the annual letter highlighting these earnings. Through the years, these tables summarized the following information ($ in millions):

1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1996 1997 1999 2000

Berkshire’s share

of undistributed

earnings of

major investees $266 $230 $298 $422 $492 $661 $743 $707 $740

Hypothetical tax (35) (30) (42) (59) (68) (93) (105) (99) (104)

Reported operating

earnings of

Berkshire 371 316 348 478 606 954 1,292 1,318 1,779

Total look-through

earnings of

Berkshire $602 $516 $604 $841 $1,030 $1,522 $1,930 $1,926 $2,415

It is easy to see why he introduced this presentation. In 1990, Berkshire Hathaway stock closed the year at $6,250. Reported operating earnings were $371 million, or $322 per share. Using these numbers, Berkshire looked like it was trading at 19.4 times earnings (6,250/322), a relatively rich multiple. However, using the look-through earnings approach results in a much more reasonable 11.9 times multiple (6,250/525).

These look-through earnings have had varying degrees of importance through the years. In the early 90s, undistributed earnings represented around 40% of total company look-through earnings, a number that has been generally declining over time.

The annual report for 2000 quantified look-through earnings for the last time, as two dynamics were responsible for a changing financial profile at Berkshire. First, the wholly owned businesses were making up an ever-increasing percentage of the aggregate value of Berkshire Hathaway. Second, the excess cash position was building up at the company rapidly. Look-through earnings can distort the value of excess cash, especially in low interest rate environments.

What would calculated look-through earnings be today? While there is some inherent guesswork involved, we can estimate look-through earnings pretty closely. The first step is to calculate Berkshire’s share of undistributed earnings of its equity holdings:

2006 2006 2006 2006

Company Shares Earnings Dividends Undistributed Undistributed

(millions) per Share per Share Earnings/Share Earnings

(millions)

American Express 152 $2.99 $0.57 $2.42 $367

Anheuser Busch 36 2.53 1.13 1.40 51

Coca-Cola Co. 200 2.16 1.24 0.92 184

ConocoPhillips 18 9.66 1.44 8.22 147

Johnson & Johnson 21 3.73 1.46 2.27 49

M&T Bank Corp. 7 7.37 2.25 5.12 34

Moody’s Corp. 48 2.58 0.28 2.30 110

Procter & Gamble 100 2.64 1.15 1.49 149

Tesco 230 0.46 0.19 0.27 63

U.S. Bancorp 31 2.61 1.39 1.22 38

USG Corp. 17 4.33 0.00 4.33 74

Wal-Mart Stores 20 2.92 0.67 2.25 45

Washington Post 2 34.20 7.80 26.40 46

Wells Fargo & Co. 218 2.49 1.08 1.41 307

White Mountains Ins. 2 60.34 8.00 52.34 90

Others x460

Total $2,214

Berkshire’s operating earnings for 2006 were $9,193 million.

Look-through earnings for 2006 would then be calculated as follows ($ in

millions):

Berkshire’s share of undistributed

earnings of major investees $2,214

Hypothetical tax (310)

Reported operating earnings of Berkshire 9,193

Total look-through earnings of Berkshire $11,097

With the stock ending 2006 at $109,990 per share and look-through earnings of $7,205 per share ($11,097/1.54 million), Berkshire valuation was 15.2 times the look-through earnings. While Berkshire’s 2006 earnings were unusually high (super-cat insurance results were extraordinarily good), the company’s valuation appeared compelling.

ASSETS/EARNINGS PRESENTATION

A new form of disclosure has taken priority over look-through earnings. In 1995, Warren Buffett introduced a table presenting two columns: the first containing the marketable assets (cash, equities, and fixed income) held by Berkshire and the second listing operating earnings of the wholly owned businesses.

Pretax Earnings per Share

Marketable Securities Excluding All Income from

Year Per Share Investments

—— ————————— ——————

1965 $ 4 $ 4.08

1975 159 (6.48)

1985 2,443 18.86

1995 22,088 258.20

Yearly Growth Rate: 1965-95... 33.4% 14.7%

In the 1997 annual letter, Buffett explained: “In our last two annual reports, we furnished you a table that Charlie and I believe is central to estimating Berkshire’s intrinsic value. In the updated version of that table, which follows, we trace our two key components of value. The first column lists our per-share ownership of investments (including cash and equivalents) and the second column shows our per-share earnings from Berkshire’s operating businesses before taxes and purchase-accounting adjustments, but after all interest, and corporate expenses. The second column excludes all dividends, interest, and capital gains that we realized from the investments presented in the first column. In effect, the columns show what Berkshire would look like were it split into two parts, with one entity holding our investments and the other operating all of our businesses and bearing all corporate costs.”

Put simply, the marketable securities are worth their carrying value and the operating businesses are worth a multiple of their earnings. Berkshire is worth the sum of these two.

The results of this calculation for 1996 would be:

Pretax Earnings Per Share

Marketable Securities Excluding All Income from Per Share

Per Share Investments Multiple Value

____________________ _____________________ _________ ________

28,500 + 421 * 12 = 33,500

Using this approach, Berkshire’s calculated value of $33,500 was very close to the year-end stock price of $34,100. One might question whether 12 is an appropriate multiple to apply when valuing the operating businesses. Twelve times pre-tax earnings (or approximately 18 times after-tax earnings) would generally be considered a fair multiple for the high-quality businesses that Berkshire controls. This multiple also appears to be consistent with several comments on valuation throughout the years. The 1996 annual letter said: “Today’s price/value relationship is both much different from what it was a year ago and, as Charlie and I see it, more appropriate.”

The 2006 annual letter contained the following information:

Pretax Earnings Per Share

Marketable Securities Excluding All Income

Year Per Share from Investments

—— ————————— —————————

1965 .................. $ 4 $ 4

1975 .................. 159 4

1985 .................. 2,407 52

1995 .................. 21,817 175

2006 ................... 80,636 3,625

Compound Growth Rate: 1965-2006 27.5% 17.9%

Compound Growth Rate: 1995-2006 12.6% 31.7%

Earnings from the insurance businesses are volatile, and 2006 was an exceptionally good year. Consequently, Buffett excluded insurance earnings from the 2006 presentation (for the first time).

The presentation also included compounded growth rates for the last 10 and

last 40 years, highlighting how quickly the wholly owned businesses category is growing.

The Assets/Earnings approach resulted in the following valuation as of year-end 2006:

Pretax Earnings Per Share

Marketable Securities Excluding All Income from Per Share

Per Share Investments Multiple Value

_________________ ______________________ ________ _________

80,636 + 3,625 * 12 = 124,136



Glenn Tongue



Buffett and Tongue share a moment before the Berkshire annual meeting in 2007.

Berkshire’s Look-through Earnings

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Look-through Earnings

Berkshire’s Look-through Earnings The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Look-through Earnings



271





BERKSHIRE’S INTRINSIC VALUE


Buffett says that calculating an intrinsic value is the only logical way to evaluate the relative attractiveness of investments. “Intrinsic value can be defined simply: It is the discounted value of the cash that can be taken out of a business during its remaining life” (Berkshire Hathaway Inc., An Owner’s Manual, p. 10).

Intrinsic value is not linked to a stock’s price in the market. Mr. Market can overprice or underprice a stock.

So this begs the question … What’s Berkshire really worth?

Getting at the real worth is tricky because Berkshire isn’t the easiest company in the world to pigeonhole with a price tag. Let’s look at some of the methods used in recent history, keeping in mind the clown whose motto is, “You can’t teach an old dog new math.”

Beemer, the clown/magician who entertained at the fourth birthday party of Buffett’s granddaughter, might have calculated intrinsic value at year-end 1991 by assigning a “reasonable” P/E (where there really are some E’s) to Berkshire’s earnings:

Step 1. Calculate Berkshire’s average investee P/E ratio. Let’s call it 20.



Step 2. Multiply that 20 obtained in Step 1 by the average of the previous two years’ “look-through” earnings of $487.50 per share. Poof! Berkshire’s intrinsic value: $9,750 at year-end 1991, when it was selling at $9,050.



That’s the Beemer I Method.

Then there’s the Beemer II Method. Consider 1993. Take the look-through earnings per share ($740 in 1993) and multiply by the growth rate of Berkshire’s book value since present management took over (23%) and the worth of Berkshire at year-end is $17,020! The actual year-end close was $16,325.

The calculation for 1994 comes out to about $21,400 when Berkshire was trading at $20,400.

In 1996, look-through earnings of Berkshire, which include Berkshire’s proportionate share of the undistributed earnings of its major investees (including Coke, Gillette, etc.), as given by Buffett were $1,522,000,000. But in 1996, Berkshire also had roughly $3.3 billion in stock it owned in smaller holdings—let’s call them minor investees—which probably added very roughly another $200 million to look-through earnings. Add it up, and this brought Berkshire’s total look-through earnings to more than $1.7 billion, which meant that look-through earnings per share were somewhere in the $1,400 neighborhood. Accordingly, at the 1996 year-end price of $34,100, Berkshire’s price to look-through earnings ratio was about 25.

In 1997, look-through earnings of the major investees were $1,930,000,000. But at year-end 1997, Berkshire also had roughly $4.5 billion in stocks it owned in minor investees, which probably added very roughly another $225 million to look-through earnings. This brings estimated total look-through earnings to about $2.1 billion dollars, or look-through earnings per share in the $1,700 range. Accordingly, at a year-end price of $46,000, Berkshire’s price to look-through earnings ratio was about 29.

Berkshire’s 1997 look-through earnings per share of about $1,700, multiplied by Berkshire’s growth rate in book value (now 24%), equaled $40,800—compared to a closing year-end stock price of $46,000.

A lot has happened to Berkshire’s book value and stock price since then. General Re was acquired, as were a host of other businesses; and in the 1998 Annual Report, Buffett took a year off from presenting his usual table setting forth look-through earnings. Although author Roger Lowenstein, in the May 1998 issue of SmartMoney, put Berkshire’s intrinsic value at $53,000 a share; others were saying Berkshire’s intrinsic value was solidly in the $60,000 to $70,000 range.

Look-through earnings were back in Berkshire’s 1999 Annual Report. Total look-through earnings, as presented by Buffett were $1,926,000,000, which included earnings of Berkshire’s major investees and operating businesses. At year-end 1999, though, Berkshire had more than $6 billion in stocks it owned in minor investees, which probably added very roughly another $300 million to look-through earnings. This would bring estimated total look-through earnings per share to about $1,450 based upon the average number of common shares outstanding, which was 1,519,703 for the fiscal year 1999. Accordingly, at a year-end price of $56,100, Berkshire’s price to look-through earnings ratio was about 39, about a 20% premium to the price earnings ratio of the S&P 500. In 1998, Berkshire somehow kept to $84,000 per share and was now heading back down to approach its intrinsic value.

The theoretical way to figure a stock’s intrinsic value is by using John Burr Williams’ method which discounts future cash flows. This is tough because so many variables and uncertainties exist in real life. Future cash flows depend on future competitive positions, future demand for a company’s products, future prices and costs, and other real life factors—things that are hard to quantify until after the fact. It’s an imprecise science and even Inspector Clouseau himself couldn’t come close to this calculation with certainty.

Some say a no-brainer way to get at Berkshire’s intrinsic value is simply to take the total assets shown on the balance sheet with no adjustments per share. By ignoring float and heavily discounting the deferred tax liability, the liabilities left over roughly correspond to the “asset” value of the future float growth.

So here we go! As of December 31, 1996, with assets of about $43.4 billion and about 1.5 million shares outstanding, Berkshire’s per share intrinsic value may have been about $29,000; about $5,000 less than its stock price. By the end of 1997, Berkshire’s assets were about $56 billion, suggesting a per share intrinsic value of $37,333, close to $8,700 less than year-end stock price. But a look at 2002 results reveals a turnaround. Assets at 2002 year-end were about $169 billion. Using this no-brainer method of calculating intrinsic value per share for the approximately 1.5 million equivalent Class A shares outstanding, this asset amount would tally out to a $112,667 per share value, a $40,000 (55.4%) premium to the 2002 year-end stock price. This result may be why some Berkshire pros were saying in that day the stock was worth more than $100,000 per share.

Some say another simple route to Berkshire’s intrinsic value is to multiply 2 x Berkshire’s book value = 2 x about $19,000 a share at year-end 1996 = $38,000 a share. The 1997 book value per share—2 x $25,488—is $50,976, as compares with the closing 1997 stock price of $46,000.

Back in 1996, Buffett said he and Munger wouldn’t buy Berkshire at $36,000. The stock took a big hit, dropping $2,150 the day of that news in March 1996. The stock then languished all that year in an era of “irrational exuberance” leading to disappointment.

The San Diego Business Journal (July 15, 1996), looking at Berkshire as a closed-end mutual fund, concluded Berkshire was only worth about $15,000. “So, in my opinion, you gotta be dumber than a bag of ball-peen hammers to pay a $21,000 premium over NAV to own BRKA,” wrote columnist Malcolm Baker (Janet Lowe, Warren Buffett Speaks, p. 140).

In 1997, Buffett wrote: “In last year’s letter, with Berkshire shares selling at $36,000, I told you: (1) Berkshire’s gain in market value in recent years had outstripped its gain in intrinsic value, even though the latter gain had been highly satisfactory; (2) that kind of overperformance could not continue indefinitely; (3) Charlie and I did not at that moment consider Berkshire to be undervalued.” He continued, “Since I set down those cautions, Berkshire’s intrinsic value has increased very significantly—aided in a major way by a stunning performance at GEICO ... while the market price of our shares has changed little. This, of course, means that in 1996 Berkshire’s stock underperformed the business. Consequently, today’s price/value relationship is both much different from what it was a year ago and, as Charlie and I see it, more appropriate.” In Buffett-speak, that’s probably a buy.

In Berkshire’s June 1996 Owner’s Manual, Buffett wrote: “In 1992, our look-through earnings were $604 million, and in that same year we set a goal of raising them by an average of 15% per annum to $1.8 billion in the year 2000. Since that time, however, we have issued additional shares—including the B shares sold recently—so that we now need look-through earnings of $1.9 billion in 2000 to match the per-share goal we originally were shooting for. This is a tough target but one we still hope to hit.”

Shareholders and Wall Streeters often take stabs at Berkshire’s intrinsic worth and always the question is posed to Buffett at annual meetings. He usually sidesteps the valuation question by explaining that he doesn’t want to “spoil the fun” for shareholders who want to figure it out themselves.

Some say it’s not unreasonable if Berkshire were to trade at twice its book value. So if Berkshire had a book value of $18,000 a share at the end of 1996, the price could have been $36,000; but it ended the year at $34,100.

By the end of 1996, the Berkshire rocket scientists running numbers were coming in at no lower than $30,000 and no higher than $40,000 a share.

Buyers and sellers generally have set a pretty fair value price on Berkshire stock. Buffett has said that he wants Berkshire to trade near its intrinsic value, or real business value in the real world, rather than at some inflated or depressed level. He adds that reasonable businessmen might value Berkshire 10% higher or lower than its intrinsic worth; for instance, he and Munger might differ by 10% about Berkshire’s intrinsic value.

It’s doubtful that even Buffett carries around in his head a precise figure for Berkshire’s worth; although, everyone would sure love to know his estimate. Sometimes Buffett takes this tack: “Well, add it all up and then subtract something because I’m running it.” Anyone can see you should tally it up and add something for Buffett’s gray matter.

Does anyone want to calculate the Munger premium in the stock?

Some people write up Berkshire, and after adding it all up, they subtract a huge number because Berkshire owns big stakes in Coke and Gillette. Presumably the argument is that the Coke and Gillette P/Es are too high.

Forbes columnist Martin Sosnoff, who has on several occasions written that Berkshire glory days are on the wane, offered a unique reason for not buying Berkshire stock in a piece written on January 27, 1997. He suggested that buying into Berkshire is risky because Congress is unlikely to cut the capital gains tax rate.

As noted earlier, occasionally Buffett offers little nudges when the price gets out of whack. He did so after the stock soared to more than $3,000 a share following the excitement over Berkshire’s stake in Cap Cities in 1986. He indicated the stock price was too high.

He again indicated that Berkshire’s stock price too high in late 1989 when it soared to $8,900. That’s when he issued zero coupon convertible bonds tied to Berkshire’s stock price. Because buyers of Berkshire’s convertibles had a right to convert into Berkshire stock and because Buffett does not easily issue new stock, the issuance at that time was probably a sign that he believed Berkshire to be overvalued.

He was right. For about the next two and a half years, Berkshire stock, apparently overpriced, went nowhere.

A Barron’s piece (February 12, 1990), which set forth the proposition that Berkshire was overpriced prompted Buffett to say that he did not necessarily disagree with the conclusion, just with some of the calculations employed to reach that conclusion. Besides telling shareholders, Buffett also told USA Today that the Barron’s piece mistakenly undervalued some of Berkshire’s holdings. “There’s a mathematical error in their numbers,” he said. “The figures are wrong.”

Berkshire was then off its $8,900 high, trading at about $7,900 a share at the time; and the story had sent the stock down $700 in a single day. The writer, Thomas N. Cochran, concluded that Berkshire was worth only about $4,695 a share and that the $7,900 share price was a 68% premium to Berkshire’s real worth, its intrinsic value. Berkshire shareholders and others fired off letters to Barron’s, which chose to publish only a few.

One letter, written by Berkshire shareholder Dr. Wallace Gaye, pitied Cochran: “Poor Thomas N. Cochran. He apparently wouldn’t be able to tell the difference in value between a lump of coal and a diamond because they share a similar structure.”

One problem with the Barron’s story was that it assigned the common stock market value to Berkshire’s preferred stock holdings, as if the preferred could decrease in value like common stocks. It was true that the stock prices of three of the four preferred stock investments were down sharply; however, Buffett explained to shareholders that Berkshire didn’t own the common stock of these companies that had taken a beating.

Berkshire instead owned the preferred stock, which had always continued to earn dividends of about 9%, tax-advantaged at that. There’s little chance that the preferred could drop in value like the common because the preferred stocks can be redeemed for the original face value—short of bankruptcy—which is roughly the same amount Buffett paid.

So there was no loss—although later US Airways was doing so poorly that it temporarily suspended dividend payments, and Buffett wrote down that investment on the balance sheet.

With the conversion privileges these investments offer, not to mention the long periods they had to reach their strike price and become more profitable, Berkshire was sitting on nice investments not available to the general public. The only way to own them was through Berkshire.

Ronald Reagan might have said to Thomas Cochran, “There you go again!” Cochran came back with a story in Barron’s (April 18, 1994), that Berkshire was worth $9,401 a share when it was trading at $16,100.

Letters again were fired off to Barron’s, most centering on the omission of the insurance business. Michael J. Davey, of Sunnyvale, California, wondered why there was no mention of this valuable business when each of the four largest reinsurers in the world buys coverage from Berkshire.

Daniel A. Ogden, president of Dock Street Asset Management in Stamford, Connecticut, offered his two cents worth, “You may be right that Warren Buffett doesn’t deserve a premium to book value, but if that’s true, there are very few stocks worth owning. I’ll do what I did in 1990 when you came to the same conclusion—hold on to Berkshire and worry more about the other stuff in my portfolio.”

Kansas City lawyer Michael Rhodes, told his Berkshire friends he thought most investors “might like the idea of having the world’s best investor working for them with $2 of assets for every $1 of equity, particularly when the liabilities are mostly interest free (deferred taxes and insurance float).”

“MAYBE WE COULD MEET FOR A DRINK”

In the 1993 Annual Report, Buffett told a story that included the Li’l Abner cartoon temptress, Appassionatta Van Climax. This led one shareholder to write: “Mr. Cochran, if you’re right, you must be a pretty rich guy by now. Maybe we could meet for a drink. Signed: Appassionatta Van Climax.”

Cochran made no mention of $1.85 billion in cash, only half mention of more than $2 billion in fixed-income securities and no mention of Berkshire’s valuable insurance businesses; and he left out about $2 billion in calculating Berkshire’s stock portfolio.

Buffett was asked about the 1994 Cochran story at the Berkshire annual meeting that year. You’d think Buffett would be tempted to say something to Cochran but Buffett, ever the gentleman, dismissed it lightly: “I hope he hasn’t been shorting the stock. It’s not the way I’d calculate it ... apparently he forgot we were in the insurance business.” Then Buffett launched into a dissertation about not making stock market decisions based on what others say, only on what you understand about the business.

Understanding the worth of the rest of Berkshire is a challenge. “The hardest value to figure by far is the worth of our insurance business,” said Buffett at the 1991 Annual Meeting. “That doesn’t mean it isn’t valuable. It just means that it’s hard to assess—although it might have a bigger effect on the valuation of Berkshire than See’s Candies or World Book.” Talk about understatement!

He added, “How the insurance table in our annual report (1990) develops over the next 20 years will be a major factor in what the intrinsic value of Berkshire is today.... The source of intrinsic value of the insurance business is the ability to generate funds at a low cost. That’s what creates value... If you can figure out how that table will look in the next 20 years, you’ll have a good handle on our future. We think there is significant potential in it. In terms of dollars, we think that it’s bigger than that of our other directly owned businesses.”

In the first Barron’s article, Cochran assigned a P/E of just 12 to Berkshire’s operating businesses at a time when the market P/E was 14. (In the second story he said Berkshire’s operating businesses were worth $2 billion, probably off by a factor of 2 or 3.) Ask Buffett if he’ll sell See’s, the Buffalo News, or World Book for 12 times earnings, and see how long he stays on the phone.

Cochran used an old earnings figure in the first story; but if it had been the latest, Berkshire’s earnings would have already plowed ahead. If you talk about Berkshire from its latest report, you’re probably millions of dollars behind the times.

For one thing, you’d be looking backwards at lesser numbers because Buffett reports as late as possible, about 45 days after the quarter has ended. You’re even farther behind if you’re citing figures from the annual report that comes out in March and reflects financial position and performance prior to December 31.

Also, at the time of Cochran’s stories, the market was declining; therefore, Berkshire’s tab for deferred capital gains taxes should have been lower than the figure Cochran used. And are deferred capital gains taxes really a 100% liability as Cochran implied? If Buffett sold everything, he would have to pay Uncle Sam a very large tax bill. There is no question about that.

However, Buffett tells us he’s not selling everything today. In fact, he may hold some investments forever. Also, the deferred tax liability is non interest bearing and has no redemption date. If it were a bond, it might be sold for 20 cents on the dollar.

In 1993, the head of Sequoia Fund, Bill Ruane, made a point about Berkshire’s worth and the tax question: “Take its current book value which at the end of the year was $7,850. And that’s after a reserve for taxes of about $2,200 or $2,300. If you add that back—and I’m not saying that you should add it back fully—but the prospects of those taxes being paid in the near future are low. So that money’s really working for you even though it’s not shown in the book value.”

He said Berkshire was selling for a below-market-price-to-book ratio, adding that many of Berkshire’s assets are undervalued on the balance sheet. With Berkshire, he said, you’re getting the “finest security analyst in the world.”

Cochran made no mention of Berkshire’s substantial look-through earnings. Look-through earnings are intrinsic earnings that include important, unrecorded earnings not included on Berkshire’s income statement. These invisible, unrecorded earnings are, in a sense, Berkshire’s proportionate ownership of the retained operating earnings of Berkshire’s major investees; but under generally accepted accounting principles, they are not counted in Berkshire’s earnings per share. Coke, for example, earns more than $4 billion a year; and Berkshire owns 8% of Coke, but generally accepted accounting rules keep Berkshire from including its share of Coke’s income on its income statement.

Berkshire’s look-through earnings are presumably reflected in the stock prices of the corporations in which Berkshire invests and, hence, are included on Berkshire’s balance sheet, even if they are not on Berkshire’s income statement.

It’s a common mistake to dismiss Berkshire as an overvalued closed-end fund, but as Wallace Gaye once said, “Do you know any closed-end fund that internally generates its own funds for investment?”

Berkshire is an ongoing enterprise that invests better and borrows more cheaply than most companies.

The company’s value cannot be measured by numbers alone. Witness the large stock holdings. Berkshire’s commanding stock positions offer an extra kicker. Some suggest attaching a 20% premium for the huge stock positions. Many of Berkshire’s stock positions are so large that they are prized for their semi-controlling nature. Such huge positions have the disadvantage of being less liquid than a small position; but overall that provide an advantage because their size offers more influence over company performance. Witness the buyout of GEICO and the management shakeups at Salomon, Coke, and Gillette.

The future compounding of dividends from Berkshire’s investees could be

another fountain of enormous value.

Berkshire has other beauties as well. Consider how Buffett has structured the debt. He’s paying regular interest rates on Berkshire’s debt. And he has very little debt compared to equity.

Berkshire’s float, with the buyout of GEICO, became about $7 billion. With General Re, it became about $23 billion and in 2011 was approaching $70 billion.

Buffett himself paid $2.3 billion for slightly less than half of GEICO and then wrote in the 1995 Annual Report that GEICO doubles Berkshire’s growing insurance business. Not only that but because of the huge capital of the insurance businesses, Berkshire enjoys the capacity to write business at any time propitious to Berkshire. He said, “There is a hidden potential to write huge business in the future.”

A Berkshire stockholder added, “And the fact that the insurance business has grown over the years—the fact that he can get to this position is indicative of the strength of the insurance business.”

We now come back to the original question: What is Berkshire really worth? Adding the worth of the stocks and bonds is easy enough, even fun. Figure that the Coke investment is worth about $9 billion. We won’t even consider whether the ocean of Coke stock would sell at an even greater premium were it sold as a block to a rich megalomaniac—or to OPEC.

With respect to Berkshire’s operating businesses, you should be able to put 20 times earnings on them to estimate their worth. Berkshire’s group of businesses apparently has among the highest return on equity of any group of businesses. That’s a high return on equity with practically no debt. So let’s loosen up a little and put a healthy P/E on things.

In 1993, The Schott Letter, written by Dr. John Schott, figured Berkshire was worth $20,150 a share; and in 1994, it said it was worth more than $21,000. At the annual meeting in 1995, when Berkshire was trading at $21,600, Buffett said the stock price, relative to its intrinsic value, “offers as much value, or more, than the majority of stocks I see.”

Floyd Jones, head of First Washington Corp., calculates Berkshire’s worth basically by using a comparison to GEICO, which traded at about 2.6 times book value over the years. “GEICO has an outstanding record, but then, so does Berkshire,” he says.

In April 1998, Jones calculated Berkshire’s intrinsic worth at $75,000 compared to a stock price of $66,800, a 12% discount.

Numbers themselves are not the whole answer to valuing a company anyway. Mutual fund leader John Bogle has said, “To believe that numbers—in the absence of the more valuable albeit immeasurable qualities of experience, judgment, and character—are all that illuminate the truth is one of the great failings of our contemporary financial and economic system.”

What about taxes? Buffett is a keen reader of the tax code. Insurance operations get tax breaks. The dividends on the preferred stock investments are largely tax exempt. (Buffett’s investment in low-income housing is another tax break.)

Many of Buffett’s investments, such as stocks purchased by Berkshire’s non-insurance subsidiaries, are carried at cost. Many businesses he purchased a long time ago are also carried at historical cost. Is See’s, bought in 1972 for $25 million, worth more than that today? Of course. Is the Buffalo News worth the $33 million Buffett paid for it in 1977? Better to estimate $600 million, although large taxes would be owed if the newspaper were sold. But then Buffett isn’t likely to sell See’s or the Buffalo News. He’s going to be buried with boxes of See’s, cans of Coke, and a copy of the Buffalo News carrying an obituary saying that he still owns the paper.

You can also bet that Buffett’s accounting is as conservative as it comes.

“And there are no hidden liabilities,” says one Berkshire shareholder. “So many companies have large pension and health liabilities, but Berkshire’s pension plan is overfunded.”

Berkshire has more than its share of diversity: Proprietary investing, real estate financing, commercial and consumer lending, stocks, bonds, cash, banks, newspapers, television and radio stations, razor blades, soft drinks, uniforms, ice cream, candy, brokerage and financial services, paper, steel, jewelry, furniture, encyclopedias, air compressors, vacuum cleaners, electricity, bricks, boots, carpet, rugs, insulation, paint, loans, auto parts, and transportation leasing equipment. Berkshire’s diversity even includes cutlery, spray guns, and activewear. Add in underwear, kitchenware, children’s apparel, and textiles. Don’t forget picture frames and natural gas pipelines. Throw in feeding systems for livestock, as well as mobile homes and grocery deliveries. Was a railroad mentioned?

Berkshire’s triple-A credit rating was a valuable asset in the purchase of Finova in 2001. Essentially, Berkshire applied its strength to the mess (bankruptcy) at Finova, and trusted itself to pay itself back for the cheap bond and bank debt it bought. Its cash provided a huge loan, money which presumably it will get back. In a way, it could be argued that Berkshire bought Finova for nothing and was able to pull such a deal because of its towering financial strength.

Importantly, when Berkshire buys another company, the acquired company’s credit rating rises to Berkshire’s triple-A level, often dramatically lowering the acquired company’s cost of capital. Berkshire can borrow money at low AAA rates rather than high junk bond rates.

Berkshire has flexibility in a number of forms. With Buffett owning almost half of Berkshire’s stock, decision making is almost instantaneous. Buffett can be on the spot with cash in hand, as he was when he bought Scott & Fetzer while other bidders were left in the wings still calculating their offers.

He has no limits on geography or industry like some other money managers. He can buy in Akron or Asia or Orlando or Ephesus—never leaving his office. He can decide quickly whether Berkshire would gain from more media or soft drink properties, or a shoe or food company, should something attractive be offered at the right price.

The accounting is conservative. Goodwill was written down fully when Dexter Shoe wore out. Insurance reserves were increased quickly at General Re when losses mounted. A risky derivatives trading business was shut down. Some transactions actually make the accounting appear worse than the true economics for some of Berkshire’s “pain today, gain tomorrow” insurance transactions. No debate here about expensing stock options. Compensation is always in cash. “Berkshire represents to us a paragon of transparency, conservatism, prudence, and management reliability” (Oak Value Fund report, July 2002).

Berkshire maintains a conservative stand on pension accounting techniques, using an assumed return of only 6.5%, the second lowest of 100 companies surveyed. Only Merrill Lynch was lower at 6% (The New York Times, April 6, 2003).

Is there not extra value because Berkshire’s managers pay themselves so little, and Buffett and Munger serve on the boards of some of the investees? Their talent and time, for a tiny shareholder fee, is most valuable. Witness Salomon.

Don’t forget Munger as a money manager outperformed the S&P 500 by a

factor of about four over a period of about a dozen years, ringing up a 19.8%

average annual return from 1962 to 1975 for his own partnership while the S&P 500 gained only 5.2% annually. For that, let’s assign some value. How much, no one knows for sure, but would you not rather have made 19.8% than 5.2% on your money?

There are some technical things that add to Berkshire’s worth—Berkshire’s

corporate structure enables the insurance vehicle to make investments, which brings Berkshire some tax breaks. Also, Buffett operates with such size and efficiency that it’s difficult to imagine that even his commissions, say, on a billion dollars worth of Coke aren’t lower than any other fund manager’s per share.

It’s Buffett’s “financial engineering” that really gives Berkshire an extra edge, says a report by Dominick & Dominick’s The Value Group (April 8, 1991). The report says Buffett’s record as a stock picker and a runner of businesses has been very good. The report figures that Buffett manages about a 20% return on his stock picking, and his businesses give him about a 21% return. So how has he managed an almost 24% annual return on equity? The article explains:

Low-cost borrowing is the primary advantage of a public company whose primary operating unit is an insurance company. Since insurance companies are nothing more than a good excuse to assemble a pool of investable assets, many successful investors own an insurance company…



Berkshire Hathaway’s second source of long-term no-cost leverage is the U.S. Treasury. Berkshire Hathaway has always used tax laws to its advantage. The most important source of borrowing from Uncle Sam at no cost is a long-term holding period.… Combining long-term holding periods, with effective use of corporate exclusions for dividends, has permitted Berkshire to generate investment income and capital gains which were taxed at the dividend exclusion rate. Tax law has always permitted an intercorporate dividend exclusion. Currently this exclusion taxes only 20% of a dividend received by one corporation from another. Therefore, the effective tax rate of a dividend is approximately 6%. Also, were a shareholder to tender stock back to a company retaining the same percentage of a company after the tender, the sale of the security is taxed as if it were a dividend. This means a corporation can sell a significant piece of a holding and have the gain taxed at 6%, not 29%. Time and again Berkshire Hathaway has used this quirk in tax law to lighten significant positions.



The most obvious examples of this technique were:



1983—GEICO



1984—GEICO



1984—General Foods



1985—General Foods



1985—The Washington Post Co.



[1993—Capital Cities]



The Value Group report stresses the advantages of stock buybacks. “Not only did it buy back its own stock in both 1964 and 1965, improving its returns, most of its important long-term holdings have been companies that buy back their own stock.”

Buffett has gained other “financial engineering” leverage through “tax arbitrage.” The after-tax cost of the zero note borrowing is 3.5%; assume Buffett invests that money in a 9.25% investment in Champion International, 80% tax excluded, giving him an after-tax return of about 8.75%. “This gives Berkshire a 250% after-tax return on its money and an ‘option’ to purchase Champion International Corp. at a fixed price for another eight years.”

There’s more:

The last bit of financial engineering employed by Berkshire Hathaway is its consistent reduction of capital employed to run a business. Almost immediately after assuming control of Berkshire Hathaway, the company reduced its inventory, property, plant, and equipment employed in running the business. It was this cash from the reduction of invested capital that produced the first pool of reinvestable cash.… When Berkshire Hathaway acquired Kirby, the first move Berkshire made was to reduce its invested capital, thereby reducing the purchase price and raising the returns.



Berkshire might one day sell for $200,000 a share. If you are young enough, you might one day see it reach the $1-million-a-share mark. Buffett cannot deliver anywhere near the average annual increase of more than 25% in stock price that he did in earlier years, but Berkshire should continue to outperform the market over the long term.

A sort of X factor with Berkshire comes into play—some proprietary things that Buffett hasn’t explained to shareholders. He has said, “There’s not much of that sort of stuff.” But there is some, and it is unlikely that the worth of it is zero.

Could there be some future synergy? There appears to be very little now at Berkshire—a Coke machine and See’s Candies cart at the Nebraska Furniture Mart, some Berkshire insurance sold to See’s. But what about selling insurance someday to every Berkshire investee: Coke, Gillette, Moody’s? Who knows?

Does it really make much difference what Berkshire is worth now if it can keep outperforming 90% of the world?

Would it have made much difference whether it was slightly undervalued or overvalued in 1965 when it traded at $12 a share? Wouldn’t it have been nice to buy Berkshire at $20 or $200 or $2,000 or $20,000 a share, whether it was a bargain that day or not?

Finally, there is one other value that needs to be considered. Glenn Greenberg says there’s one negative about Buffett: He will be gone one day. A key to Berkshire’s worth, he says, is “Warren Buffett’s brain—whether it’s alive or dead, and he flies around a lot.” The brain may fly around a lot, but it’s not on the balance sheet, either.

So at times there’s a “Buffett Premium” in the stock and, at other times, a “Buffett Discount.” Today, with Berkshire selling at about $120,000, it appears to be selling at a below-market price to earnings ratio, and probably at a discount.

Clearly, Buffett alive is valuable far beyond his stock-picking and managerial abilities. He has established for himself a solid reputation for honesty and integrity and continues to let former owners manage the companies he buys. In addition, he maintains good relationships with many top business leaders in case something valuable should suddenly materialize. Buffett said after the 9/11 tragedy, “Don’t bet against America.” Berkshire shareholder Rick Ebbinghouse added, “Don’t bet against Warren.”

Buffett has an elite circle of friends who retreat every two years to locations such as Lyford Cay in the Bahamas; Dublin, Ireland; Williamsburg, Virginia; the Queen Elizabeth II; Santa Fe, New Mexico; Victoria, British Columbia; and Monterey, California. The host for the event gets to pick the location.

The group that Buffett calls the “Graham Group” and others call the “Buffett Group” (originally called the “Hilton Head Group”) began in 1968 at Del Coronado in San Diego with 13 people (“the intellectual village”) and now has grown to about 60. Its members include Munger, Murphy, Don Keough, Bill Gates, Jack Byrne, Donald Graham, and Lou Simpson. Sometimes Buffett refers to the group as “Our Gang.”

During their retreats, the group holds seminars on public policy, investments, charitable giving (whether to do it early in life or late), and life’s toughest and silliest moments.

One time Munger gave a lecture on Einstein’s theory of relativity. Practically no one was interested but most felt obliged to go. Recalls a member, “If Buffett was there, he probably understood it. I don’t think anyone else did.” Perhaps that is why Munger and Buffett see “value” and opportunities that others don’t see.

Buffett has a wide range of friends. One is business leader Walter Annenberg. In fact, Buffett advised him to go ahead with the $3-billion sale of his Triangle Publications, which included TV Guide, to Rupert Murdoch.

Another friend, Nancy Reagan, once sent her son Ron to Buffett for a little career counseling.

Some descendants of Clarence Barron, one of the early owners of Dow Jones & Co., which publishes The Wall Street Journal and Barron’s, have consulted with Buffett about the company’s performance and stock price (The Wall Street Journal, January 14, 1997).

Some of the country’s best and brightest business folks run attractive ideas by Buffett, but usually he just comes up with one or two big ideas a year on his own.

Buffett’s own unique abilities include the ability to tap others for information on management skills. “Speed of access to key expertise—a distinguishing quality of business intelligence—typifies business stars,” wrote Dr. Daniel Coleman in the introduction to Business: The Ultimate Resource (a 2,172-page opus!).

Buffett’s presence on the boards of some of the companies in which Berkshire has investments is a plus. He can have some say over how their cash flows are invested, possibly bringing greater value to those companies. On the other hand, companies he invests in may have artificially higher P/Es because of his halo effect.

Finally, Berkshire’s sterling reputation has incalculable value. Even in

the precautionary prospectus for the Class B stock offering, its reputation

(as opposed to unit trusts) is explained: “Though the point is impossible to quantify, Berkshire believes that its reputation has added significantly to the Company’s intrinsic value over the years. Berkshire believes that its reputation, if it remains unimpaired, will produce substantial gains in the future as well.”

If Buffett can keep working his magic at anything approaching his past rate of return, Berkshire will continue to make its way, aided by some value for the brand name of Berkshire Hathaway and Buffett’s brain. Still, the true value of Berkshire is in its future cash flows, adjusted for inflation.

If Berkshire could maintain a return of 23% on book value annually, (Buffett says he can’t do it), then by the Rule of 72, (72 divided by 23 is about 3), you’d double your money about every three years. (“Even at half that rate, you’d double your money in twice the time,” Yogi Berra might say. “And it wouldn’t take an Einstein to figure out you’d still be traveling faster than the speed of the market.”)

“Berkshire’s not a company. It’s an adding machine,” says Berkshire shareholder George Eyraud of Birmingham, Alabama.

In 1990, the Florida lottery was at fever pitch, and the payoff was more than $100 million. ABC’s World News Tonight was on the story. You know how those features go—lots of folks in line giving brief interviews about what dream they’d fulfil if they won.

Fleeting fame came to a heavyset, middle-aged man when a reporter stuck a mike in his face and asked what he’d do if he won $100 million: The fellow shrugged and offered this reply before Peter Jennings and all the world: “Run naked through the money, I don’t know.”

After Berkshire’s announcement that it would buy General Re and with Berkshire trading toward $80,000, Buffett was asked about the relationship of price to intrinsic value. He replied: “There’s no question that to date this year, obviously, the price of Berkshire stock has outstripped the gain in intrinsic value. There’s no way we could have increased the percentage value at the same percentage rate. But I can tell you also that no member of my family or any of the management of Berkshire that I know of has sold a share, and we all think that it’s a fine investment for a five or 10 year period. And that’s the way we think about it. Historically, I think if you look back, we think a good bit of the time Berkshire’s been undervalued because many people have looked at it on the basis of liquidating value, as they might have looked at a closed-end investment company. And frankly they were making a mistake if they were looking at it that way, because it was an enterprise that used capital to try to create more value over the years and in most cases it worked out OK, so that our intrinsic value has grown at a far faster rate than it would have been anticipated if you’d looked at it as a closed-end company. But because that attitude prevailed and was written about to some extent, I think that generally Berkshire was undervalued, and I think perhaps the valuation is getting more appropriate now.”

Some people underestimate how Berkshire might fare. In short, they can’t see where it’s all going. That doesn’t mean Buffett doesn’t know.

It is reminiscent of a story about a young girl drawing a picture when an adult asks her what she’s drawing.

“God,” she answers.

“But nobody knows what God looks like,” the adult said.

“They will when I get through,” the girl replied.

Perhaps the King of Berkshire will come to be known in this way. Shareholder Paul Hartman says: “The reason that Berkshire is so successful is because Buffett takes the free cash flow of its assets, and does the next best thing with it.”

Buffett has said that about $100 million pre-tax a week is coming to Berkshire (CNBC, June 7, 2002). More is coming now.

GIFFORD COMBS’S TAKE: $150,000 A SHARE

Harvard grad Gifford Combs, a close follower of Berkshire, pegged Berkshire’s intrinsic value as $150,000 a share or more in 2007. In an interview with Barron’s (August 13, 2007), Combs, who manages $1 billion for Dalton Investments in Los Angeles, painted a glorious picture of Berkshire:

Everyone reveres Buffett but look at his stock price. It sells at a discount to fair value.



It is selling at $112,000 a share, and it is certainly worth somewhere north of $150,000 a share. That value is continuing to compound each year. The operating businesses are a superb collection that earn more than 25% on tangible net worth. They should be valued at 20 times earnings, or about $70 billion. I value the finance and utility businesses at 11/2 times book value—together they are worth about $26 billion.



The majority of the value at Berkshire is in the insurance entities, which hold virtually all of the investments.The insurance business depends upon the value one places on the $58 billion of “float,” the non-interest-bearing liabilities of the insurance companies. Adjusting for the float and making allowances for deferred taxes, I value the insurance operations at nearly $200 billion. The total comes to more than $290 billion, or about $190,000 per share. More conservative assumptions about investment returns over time would lower that value, but it’s hard to get a number much below $150,000 per share.



The Story of Warren Buffett



What’s This Brain Worth?

Buffett grins for the camera before Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1994. What is this brainpan worth? Inquiring investors want to know. Perhaps the answer was suggested when Buffett told Harvard Business students in 2003: “I have in fact made five hundred million off of derivatives in two recent transactions.”

(Photo by

Nancy Line

Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Intrinsic Value



The Theory of Investment Value

by John Burr Williams

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Berkshire’s Intrinsic Value The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Intrinsic Value

Berkshire’s Intrinsic Value The Story of Warren Buffett



Dr. John Schott

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Intrinsic Value

Berkshire’s Intrinsic Value The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Intrinsic Value



272





WHAT’S BERKSHIRE REALLY WORTH?


If you ever tire of Buffett and Munger saying they won’t reveal their exact idea of Berkshire’s worth, here’s a way to get a fairly precise estimate: Look in the newspaper.

Another good way is to establish the worth of this rare collectible note signed by Abe Lincoln when he was the 16th President of the United States: “Sec. of the Treasury, please see this lady (wife of a wounded soldier), who seeks employment. April 25, 1863. A. Lincoln.”

Over time the price of the note and a Berkshire share have been almost precisely the same, according to Tim Burton of Milwaukee, Wisconsin, citing Steven M. Berez’s Profiles in History.

Judge for yourself:

1982 $1,000 $965

1986 3,000 2,925

1992 9,500 9,275

1993 12,000 11,750

1995 25,000-$30,000 32,100

Early 1996 29,500-$33,000 33,000

Another example is The Splendid Civil War Document signed by Abraham Lincoln on October 10, 1863, overturning the death sentence of a convicted Union army deserter. Handsomely framed with the 19th century engraved portrait of the compassionate President, the document was valued as follows:

December 10, 1996 $32,500 $33,200

Early 1997 35,000 36,000

Early 1998 75,000 70,000

In 2002, a page with Lincoln’s autograph ranged from $8,000 to $1 million. Berkshire hovered at about $75,000 a share.

With runaway inflation, however, Lincoln’s signature and perhaps a BMW might beat the pants off Berkshire.

On June 15, 1993, someone called Burton to sell him a Lincoln signature for $15,700. Berkshire closed that day at $15,825. “I almost dropped the phone,” Burton said.

What Berkshire shareholders really want to witness is the stock trading at the recent price of an Abe Lincoln letter and signature: $420,000.

Just to keep Berkshire shareholders on edge, Sotheby’s recently sold a document signed by Lincoln appointing an assistant paymaster in the Navy for only $3,850. (Maybe that compares only with a Class B.) But keeping Berkshire shareholders in high spirits, a page

of Lincoln’s Class A 1858 handwritten “House Divided” speech has commanded $1.5 million.

In mid-2004, a Berkshire Class A traded at roughly the value of an unrestored, unsigned copy of Joyce’s Ulysses. An inscribed copy of Joyce’s Ulysses sold at Christie’s in 2002 for $460,500.

In mid-2004, a catalogue item from rare-book dealer Ralph Sipper in Santa Barbara, California, had this listing:

Joyce, James. ULYSSES. Paris: Shakespeare & Co., 1922. First edition. Printed wrappers. 4to. One of 750 numbered copies on handmade paper. Laid into this copy is the scarce prospectus for the book that prints advance press notices. A truly fine, unrestored copy that manifests the lightest of use, and with the notoriously fragile spine unbuckled. Easily the best copy we have seen in many years. Housed in a custom-made clamshell box. The most influential novel of our time represented here in a copy worthy of its importance. $85,000.



Mid-2006:

Joyce’s 1922 Ulysses—$85,000 Berkshire share — $90,000

Berkshire, at $90,000, has a market cap of about $140 billion. As of January 9, 2006, Google, as a seven-year-old company, matched Berkshire’s market cap.



Abe Lincoln

Lincoln stands as an icon in Americana. Although his formal education ended in the first grade, his eventual command of the English language was second to none.“It is best not to swap horses when crossing streams.” Or better, “Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent...”

(AP/Wide World Photos)

Berkshire’s Unofficial Logo

Berkshire’s fist-full-of-dollars logo, is now a symbol of 21st century America. Buffett, himself an icon in the financial world, has a concise way of describing his buy-and-hold investment style: “The best time to sell a stock is never.”



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Mary Porter)

Collecting Lincoln

Lincoln Collector by Carl Sandburg tells how Oliver R. Barrett, of Pittsfield, Illinois, began collecting everything Lincoln from the time he

was 13. Over his lifetime,

the lawyer put together a massive Lincoln collection.

Of Permanent Value What’s Berkshire Really Worth?



(Photo by Roland Schank)

Ralph Sipper, rare-book dealer in Santa Barbara, California, holds a first edition (1922) of Ulysses by James Joyce. The original prices of that 1922 edition were $12 for the cheapest copy and $28 for a signed copy. So an investment in Berkshire has compounded faster than one of the better investments in the rare book world.



First Edition (1922) of

Ulysses by James Joyce.

A story in British literary circles goes that a customer once asked for Ulysses and was told he was out to lunch.



(Photo by Mary Porter)





PART 3 OF 3





By Andrew Kilpatrick





274





THE WIZARD OF OZ


America’s first fairy tale, The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, appeared in 1900. The best-seller by L. Frank Baum was the first in the series of Oz books.

The Wizard of Oz was known during his reign as the Great and Powerful Oz, or otherwise as Oscar Zoroaster Phadrig Isaac Norman Henkel Emmannuel Ambroise Diggs.

It turned out that the Wizard was a kind. ordinary man from Omaha, the son of a politician.

Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz, which appeared in 1908, was the fourth in the series of Oz adventures. Baum’s introductory remarks to the book refer to “his loving tyrants,” the children who demanded more stories about Oz. Baum said he tried to reply to every letter he received from each child; and in many cases, he incorporated their suggestions into a next edition.

This timeless book, released each year in time for the Christmas buying season, became a classic and the inspiration for the name the “Yellow BRKers,” a world where once upon a time all changed from black-and-white to color, mostly yellow.

The AOL message developed in 1996 out of the camaraderie of some serious Berkshire fans. Charles “Pagewrite” Page of Carmel, California, once explained how he arrived at Yellow BRKers as his suggestion for naming these Berkshire groupies:

Berkshire shareholder John Gartmann suggested that we needed a moniker, a name for the group, and offered a prize for the one who came up with the name which we adopted. Loving word play, I suggested that since Buffett was the Wizard of Om (Omaha) and that we were all going to find the wizard along the BRK road, we should call ourselves the Yellow BRKers. I knew nothing about Doshoes (Buffett’s daughter Susan’s contraction for “Dorothy’s Shoes”) and WEB’s interest in the Wizard of Oz. Gartmann liked the name and the concept and sent me the prize, a glass paperweight with “Berkshire Hathaway” on it, which he had bought at Borsheims.



Gartmann also suggested that since we did not know each other and needed to have a way of recognizing the group, he would wear a yellow hat. So he went to some novelty store and bought the massive hat, which is foam, but it wasn’t yellow. So he bought some yellow spray paint and sprayed the hat, not thinking about the fact that it was porous. Apparently he had a soggy mess with paint all over and it took forever to dry.



In any event, the Yellow BRK Club came into being, named after the yellow brick road that led to the Wizard of Oz. It was on this road that Dorothy traipsed in her newly acquired ruby slippers, encouraged by the Munchkins and accompanied by her dog, Toto. Berkshire’s modern group of characters stay in touch electronically on message board—on AOL and elsewhere.



Wonderful Wizard of Oz Author L. Frank Baum

In 1910, Baum moved to Hollywood with his wife and four sons. There they built “Ozcot,” the home where Baum lived until his death in 1919.



tt



Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz

A first edition from 1908 is whimsically inscribed by L. Frank Baum.

(Photos by Mary Porter)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Cover of

The Wonderful Wizard of Oz

This was the best-selling children’s book in 1900. The wizard himself was a capitalist who has strong words for Dorothy: “You have no right to expect me to send you back to Kansas unless you do something for me in return. In this country everyone must pay for everything he gets.”

(Photo by Mary Porter)



The Powerful

Ruby Slippers

This classic shoe, however, is not stocked by Berkshire. The Oz books (starting in 1900) and the movie (1939) gave the world not only Dorothy, but Scarecrow, Tin Woodman, the Cowardly Lion and of course the Wizard himself.

Of Permanent Value Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz



275





GOING ONLINE WITH YELLOW BRKERS


“We’ve all heard that a million monkeys banging on a million typewriters will eventually reproduce the entire works of Shakespeare. Now, thanks to the Internet, we know this is not true.” (Robert Wilensky)

Years ago a few Berkshire shareholders began getting together through America Online (“America On Hold”) service to talk to one another on the Internet—that important and easy way for teenage boys to find pictures of naked women—about every facet of Berkshire.

For many shareholders, going electronic and tracking every nuance of Berkshire in cyberspace is real fun.

You get an occasional message like this one in 1999 from “MsProf2U”: “Best thing I did all week was take my money out of this dog (BRK.B) and put it in BAMM [Books-A-Million]. Wheeeee!” That post drew this response from “Pagewrite,” “You are so exciting! You light up my life! Run off with me, that is, if you will liquidate your holdings (keeping a stake for day trading) and put them into my name. We can find an enchanting spot where you can day trade while I bungee jump! We will live happily ever after, rather than spend our time sleeping with a BRK portfolio which just compounds at a boring rate of 30% a year! Who needs WEB! I have been searching for a companion just like you. Please send a photo of your stock certificates! Upon receipt of the photo I will file for divorce and meet you on the yellow brick road.”

Some weeks later when Berkshire’s stock rocketed up about $11,000 in three days “Page” offered this post: “This stock is a dog. Remember that comment. Well, that dog is running and hunting! Go Rover.”

Much later someone computed that a portfolio of stocks offered by the “prof” had declined 78.19%.

Long after MsProf2U vanished, a new poster started plastering the board with messages like: “Warren Buffett is a crook.” In response, Buffett’s daughter wrote that she actually missed MsProf2U.

Debbie Cohen, speaking of her husband Larry Oberman, a money manager in Chicago, complained to Newsweek (May 19, 1997), “We used to fool around. Now he just wants to go on America Online and talk about Berkshire stock.”

Oberman concurs, “We’re like a cult. But instead of Kool Aid and pudding, we have Coca-Cola and See’s Candies, and to date Warren hasn’t told us to take the poison yet.” At annual meetings, Larry and his poor wife take the cake for early attendance. As of 1999, he had been first in line six of the previous seven years. “We arrived at 4:30 a.m. this year [1999] and 12 minutes later someone else showed up.”

Over time the online discussions have included sophisticated looks at intrinsic value. Discussions about how to value float and general camaraderie among fellow cult members abound and tend to reach a fever pitch around annual meeting time. E-mails fly furiously, reminding one of the Irish poet John O’Donohue’s comment: “E-mail is like coming home at night after a long day and finding 70 people in your kitchen.”

Shortly before Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1997, someone with the code name of “Doshoes” penned some postings. Doshoes? Doshoes had mysterious powers. Doshoes could even get impossible-to-obtain reservations at Gorat’s.

A Doshoes posting to a request for a table at Gorat’s: “Your timing is amazing. I just stopped at Gorat’s and the doors were locked. So I’ll be stopping by again in an hour or so. Think positive—this might take some begging. I will be at a different table, but I’ll be there. You guys sound like a lot more fun than my group—since three rounds sounds like only a beginning. The table I’m at focuses solely on Coca-Cola products.”

Who was Doshoes? Doshoes offered a few hints. It didn’t take long before Berkshire shareholders could spot it was someone pretty close to Buffett.

More hints. Something about the Wizard of Omaha and being a fan of the Wizard of Oz. Finally her name was revealed as a shortened version of “Dorothy’s Ruby Shoes.” (BUT NEVER FORGET THAT IN THE ORIGINAL BOOK DOROTHY’S SHOES WERE MADE OF SILVER!) It turned out that “Doshoes” was Buffett’s daughter, Susan!

Yellow BRKer Page says that Buffett loves the Wizard of Oz and used to read it to Susie when she went to bed. “She has a big collection of Oz paraphernalia.”

Later she invited those on the Yellow Brick Road—Yellow BRKers—to Mr. Toad’s watering hole near the stadium where Buffett used to throw the first pitch of a baseball game as part of annual meeting festivities.

Susan has been monitoring the comments on AOL and showing them to her father who said, “These guys know more about Berkshire’s intrinsic value than I do.”

Buffett stopped in briefly at Mister Toad’s in 1999, where his daughter and some of her family and friends had gathered with a clan of “Yellow BRKers.” Buffett, dressed in a baseball jacket, said, “Hi, everybody, I’m her dad.” He shook hands with folks and dashed off to his baseball game.

At the Mister Toad’s gathering, the Yellow BRKers presented Debbie Bosanek with a T-shirt that said, “Ms.Sec2U,” as in Ms. Secretary to you—a spoof on the cantankerous “Ms.Prof2U.” On the back of Debbie’s shirt, was inscribed: “My secret. … I read all WEB’s mail.” When Buffett and Susie arrived, Buffett was given a shirt that said: “5 Cokes a Day will Keep the Hair Away” and featured a picture of a bald Buffett as he appeared as Daddy Warbucks in a local rendition of Annie.

Among the most avid Yellow BRKers was Berkshire shareholder John Gartmann, a retired mechanical and electrical engineer from Delran, New Jersey.

Certainly the slant on the AOL message board is toward owning Berkshire, although there is plenty of skepticism tossed in about whether Berkshire or some of its holdings are overvalued.

One of the more lucid series of “postings” has come from “Tode” who in real life is Michael Rhodes, a lawyer in Kansas City.

Here are portions of Tode’s first entry of December 1, 1996:

I am new to this posting board but have been a BRK shareholder since 1985. Just spent part of this weekend reviewing the messages from this group since last May. Lots of interesting analysis about what the intrinsic value of BRK is—a question I have been very much interested in for a long time.



I saw a lot of argument on how to value the insurance float. It appears this group has reached a consensus—the float is worth somewhere between a negative $6.9 billion and a positive $15 billion.



May I offer my two cents worth? The float is very valuable, but its value is reflected in the look-through earnings. That is, the total look-through earnings per share includes the earnings generated from both assets that are owned by shareholders (equity) and assets that are “owned” by others (float and deferred taxes). The look-through earnings also reflect the cost of OPM (other people’s money) that the shareholders get to use, i.e., if the float is generated with an underwriting loss, the loss reduces the look-through earnings, and if it generates an underwriting profit, the profit shows up in look through earnings as well…



Rather than trying to specify a number for the value of the float per se (which results in confusion at best and double-counting at worst), it is better to accept the fact that all of the factors which determine the float’s value will be reflected in the multiplier on this company. 25 times 1,400 look-through earnings for 1996 gives you $35,000 a share. Another useful benchmark is twice book. Book value on 9/30/96 was 17,500 and now is north of 18,000. Twice book puts you over $36,000 a share. The stock is a buy.



In later postings Tode says he thinks Buffett’s method of calculating look-through earnings is too conservative, “mainly because he ignores the retained earnings of the $5 billion of equities not identified, and the subtraction he does for the tax that would be owed by BRK if all earnings were paid out in dividends ignores the fact that the earnings are actually being plowed back into the business and inuring to BRK’s benefit.”

Another poster wrote: “Actually, without the $6.9 billion of float, Berkshire’s investment portfolio would perhaps be $15 billion less since the float increments have historically been reinvested and grown just like any other component net cash inflow; but in the case of float, the corresponding cash flows have been generated at zero cost and so represent a pure and undiluted free cash flow.”

Yet another posting:

One of the early no-brainer valuation methods I used was future look-through earnings. Keep things simple. My best guess for 1996 look-through earnings is about $1,400 per share. Just multiply this number by the correct P/E multiple and presto, you have the intrinsic value.



What’s the correct multiple? Reasonable minds differ, of course. If KO and G are worth 30 times next year’s earnings, the same multiple should apply to their share of the 1,400 total (which you can compute easily enough). Other holdings are worth maybe 10 to 15 times earnings. You could calculate the average weighted P/E ratio for the entire equity portfolio if you are feeling energetic enough. Then you have to add something to reflect the leverage on the balance sheet from float and deferred taxes. This is BRK’s secret weapon and it is much more valuable now than it was five years ago. A lot of Wall Street experts just don’t get it—they say BRK is a closed-end fund and therefore should sell at a discount to its net assets. A better analysis is a margin account with Buffett investing two dollars of assets for every dollar of equity. But even this analogy falls short of describing reality because the margin debt is interest-free (the deferred taxes cost nothing and with the addition of GEICO the float will likely be generated at an underwriting profit for the foreseeable future). PLUS, the pool of OPM is constantly growing—the float should increase about a billion dollars a year. Don’t forget that GEICO’s share of the auto insurance market is tiny and they have only begun to tap the standard and non-standard driver markets where they are now growing at a rate of 29%…



One of the early no-brainer valuation methods I used was simply to take total assets (as shown on the balance sheet with no adjustments) per share. It has the virtue of simplicity and in a rough way tracks with the arguments that have been presented in these postings, i.e., that the liabilities are not real and should be ignored. If you ignore the float liability and heavily discount the deferred tax liability, the only liabilities that remain roughly correspond to the “asset” value of the future float growth. As of 9/30/96, BRK has $32,671 assets per share. Here are the numbers going back several years, all at year-end:



1995 $25,214





1994 $18,114





1993 $16,570





1992 $14,909





1991 $12,618





1990 $ 9,310





1989 $ 8,253





Compared to the highs each year for BRK’s stock price:



1995 $33,400





1994 $20,800





1993 $17,800





1992 $11,750





1991 $ 9,130





1990 $ 8,730





1989 $ 8,900





There has been a rough correlation over time. Buffett’s infamous “do not buy my stock” remark last spring should not have come as a shock to anybody. It was grossly out of its normal range, measured by assets per share, book value per share, look-through earnings per share or any other measure. I would argue it is now back in the normal range.



Here’s a posting from JTayan on February 21, 1997:

I think the comment by WEB (“I never give stock tips, but if I die, buy the stock.”) was in response to numerous comments from numerous people asking what would happen to the stock if he died. He was trying to say that there was value in the company without his being there.… I think if he died the stock would fall, at least initially, more than 25%. I think it would fall below book value. However, his next in command would probably use the large cash flow to buy back stock at that severely discounted price and I would see it eventually recovering to at least 80 or 90% of intrinsic value. That is why it is important to keep an eye on intrinsic value.



“Pagewrite” offered this posting on April 9, 1997: “I had a friend who was a successful investor and once I asked (after I heard of Buffett and BRK) if he knew of Buffett. He said: ‘Please don’t ever mention that name to me.’ I asked, ‘Why not?’ His response: ‘Someone told me about Buffett and how smart he was in 1965 and said how he now has gone public. You can buy shares in his company. I bought 5,000 shares at $12 a share. My broker who had helped me make a lot of money said the way to lose money is to get greedy. So if a stock doubles in value sell and get out. So when BRK hit 28 I sold, had more than doubled my money. I was happy. Please don’t talk to me about Buffett and BRK’!”

Here’s an unusual posting. It comes from RAD4IU (Robert Dykstra of Fort Wayne, Indiana) on May 7, 1997:

Since I am not able to add anything to the intrinsic value discussion (I feel a little bit like Charlie Munger after WEB answers a question at the meeting—“I have nothing to add.”), I will attempt to interject a bit of humor. If this offends anyone let me know. Here goes:



Top 10 Reasons to Own Berkshire Hathaway Stock:



10 Between your shares and WEB’s you control the company

9 Omaha Steaks



8 Feel good everytime you shave, drink a Coke, or have a burger



7 900 million servings of Coke products sold every day



6 Buffett family are great people



5 High dividend yield on stock—one hot dog and Coke per year



4 Frees up time to play golf



3 Never have to pay a seller’s commission on stock



2 Charlie Munger’s dry wit



1 WEB is your partner!



You think Letterman would use this material?



One fellow wrote that his mother had the good sense to buy Berkshire early on, one that basically Berkshire was their entire net worth. Suddenly there were messages from folks saying they wanted to marry her.

The son finally revealed her portfolio as follows:

SECURITY WEIGHT





Cash 0%





Bonds 0%





International equities 0%





Coke .023%





Gillette .0137%





Berkshire 99.633%





Cherry Coke 6 cases





It’s also fun to watch beginners learn about Berkshire with such

questions as:

Was Katharine Graham related to Ben Graham? (No.)

Another rookie was thrown by all the references to “WEB”: “I’m new to online. What is a WEB? Is it online talk or an index on the American Stock Exchange or none of the above?”

Immediate response: “WEB=Warren E. Buffett, Chairman of Berkshire Hathaway.”

On July 26, 1997, Tode weighed in with:

It sounds simplistic and obvious that the true value of BRK is the confidence shareholders have that cash flows will be reinvested at returns that far exceed the LTGB [long-term government bond] rate. But that’s it. What other company can provide this same assurance for the long term? Compare BRK to a zero-coupon treasury bond with a 12% coupon. I have always felt BRK to be superior. First, there is the tax advantage of being able to defer taxes until you decide to sell. Second, while there is no “guarantee” BRK will achieve 12% return on reinvested cash flow, it seems highly probable. Third, it is impossible for a 12% zero treasury bond to earn MORE than 12% if held to maturity, while BRK historically has done far better than 12% and has a very good chance in my opinion of achieving WEB’s goal of 15%. And yes, there is a real possibility, more than a pipe dream, that despite WEB’s disclaimer, it just may beat 15%.



Most importantly, a zero-coupon bond has zero brains. There is no intellect to guide the reinvestment of capital every six months. No matter what opportunities Mr. Market may serve up, the zero-coupon bond will pass them up and mindlessly compound at the guaranteed rate until maturity. While no-brainer investments have their place in the investment universe (no brains often are preferable to the average professional money manager) you pay a very heavy price for the certainty that you will do no worse than the coupon rate.



With BRK, you have the best brains in the business world scouring Mr. Market every day looking for a mispriced bet. You have buckets of free cash flow cascading in every morning. You have lots of dry powder (GEICO’s bond portfolio) available to deploy if a mispriced bet appears. You have WEB tap-dancing to work every morning, a man on a mission who is doing what he loves to do. Almost unbelievably, you not only have the best brains and complete focus on the task at hand, you also get a very rare commodity in today’s business world—INTEGRITY. You can be certain that management will not dilute future shareholder returns by lining their own pockets with excessive compensation and stock options, and you can be certain management will not try to mislead shareholders.



Put it all together and it’s worth a lot. A whole lot. Name another company that can compare. Despite what we read about Buffettmania, what is amazing is that intelligent people who spend a lot of time studying the menu of investment selections day in and day out, almost invariably pick Company X over BRK. Perversely, the smarter they think they are, the greater the odds they will make the wrong decision.



Following Berkshire’s announcement of its huge silver purchase in early 1998, “Marlinls” (Marlin Stockwell of Trinity, Florida), who has a Yellow Berkshire Club website at www.geocities.com/marlinls.geo, filed this posting:

We were shocked about zeros and now the silver. Forget the closing price for the end of ’98. I think it would be more fun to guess what’s next. Will he buy farmland, pork bellies, a country, a Caribbean island, Trump’s casinos, a cruise-ship line, a national football team, hotels? The possibilities are endless.



Yellow BRKer Rich Rockwood of Indianapolis, Indiana, operates two web sites. One is www.focusinvestor.com which has to do with focus investing and sells used business books. Rockwood’s other site (www.geocities/rrockw) has information about Buffett and value investing. His focusinvestor.com was listed as a top web site by Forbes (Summer 2001).

Jerry Chuong in Toronto runs a site devoted to Berkshire happenings called ticonline.com.

Another web site full of links to stories about Berkshire is FUTILE FINANCE at wwww.futile.free.fr/. The site’s BRKNEWS section offers news links about Berkshire. The address is www.groups.yahoo.com/group/brknews. Eric Balandraud, who lives in Beaumes De Venise in the Southeast of France, operates BRKNEWS, which has more than 300 members.

Another site with about 1,500 members is “chucks angels”

at www.financegroups.yahoo/group/chucks_angels/ and also www.cornerofberkshirefairfax.ca/forum/ with 600 members.

Here’s a posting on the “Berkshire message board” from Don Danly:

I agree … that the price has gotten well ahead of the historical trend line. A least-squares regression line for the logarithm of the year-end BRK price versus the year for the period 1982–1996 leads to the following equation:



Year-end price = 10^(3.7636-0.1148 [year-1989])

The predicted prices are:

Year Predicted Actual Error

Price Price (P-A)/A

1982 912 775 17.7%

1983 1188 1310 -9.3%

1984 1547 1275 21.3%

1985 2015 2480 -18.7%

1986 2625 2820 -6.9%

1987 3420 2950 15.9%

1988 4454 4700 -5.2%

1989 5802 8675 -33.1%

1990 7558 6675 13.2%

1991 9844 9050 8.8%

1992 12823 11750 9.1%

1993 16703 16325 2.3%

1994 21757 20400 6.7%

1995 28341 32100 -11.7%

1996 36917 34400 7.3%

1997 48087 46000 4.5%

1998 62637

The predicted price is within 13% of the actual for the past eight years. There is a big deviation in 1989 (and maybe the same will occur in 1998), but the historical trend line predicts a year-end price of 62,637 for this year. This ain’t all bad—it works out to 30% APR over the 16-year period.



Danly quickly made this amendment:

In case anyone actually tries to use my regression equation for the BRK A price, I need to correct a typo I made. I gave the equation as:



Year-end price = 10^(3.7636-0.1148 [year-1989])



The minus sign was a typo; try:



Year-end price = 10^(3.7636 + 0.1148 [year - 1989])



(note 10^p denotes 10 raised to the p power)



The first equation will give a BRK A price of $22.53 in the year

2010, while the correct equation gives $1,494,170. Sorry for the minor discrepancy.



The posting drew this response from Michael Rhodes:

Donald D—I confess that my education so far has not included square regressions and logarithms. But thanks anyhow. I agree with your conclusion that the price is ahead of its long-term trend, even if I don’t understand your advanced math (anything beyond counting bunnies and the Rule of 72 is advanced in my book).



After word got out in 1998 that Berkshire would buy General Re, one posting requested the origin of the H. in Jesus H. Christ.

Answer: Hathaway.

A posting on July 16, 1998 offered:

10 Questions Never to Ask on the

AOL BRK Board

(or at the annual meeting):

10) When will the stock split?

9) Isn’t it too late to buy Berkshire shares?

8) Buffett’s just been unusually lucky, hasn’t he?

7) Isn’t Buffett an idiot for not buying technology stocks?

6) Shouldn’t I wait to buy until the price drops? It’s so high right now!

5) Isn’t Berkshire Hathaway just a glorified mutual fund?

4) Why don’t any brokers recommend Berkshire shares? That CAN’T be good!

3) Doesn’t the high PE ratio mean the stock is overvalued?

2) Buffett’s success is due to insider information and other sleazy tactics, right?

And the one question which must NEVER, EVER be asked:

1) What happens when Warren Buffett dies?

Even Buffett himself has posted the board through Debbie Bosanek.

After a group of Yellow BRKers sent him a box of See’s candy for his birthday, Buffett told the board: “Many thanks for the box of See’s. You’re definitely off to a good start. Next year, may I suggest an Executive Jet gift certificate. Warren Buffett.”

Later a group of Yellow BRKers sent Buffett some peanut brittle. Here’s the thank-you Debbie Bosanek posted on the board: “Warren and I have just received a generous supply of peanut brittle. We want to thank all of you for this much needed (and appreciated) nourishment. Productivity at headquarters has leaped to a new high, thanks to you.”

Yet another Buffett posting on November 5, 1998: “I’ve received the yellow roses (through Don and Vera [Danly]) and want to pass along my thanks. It was nice to have my old Rolls Royce chauffeur remember me.”

Amidst the gloom and doom of the financial crises of 1998, “Neuroberk” (Dr. Sam Park of Tulsa, Oklahoma) wrote:

Imagine you have just returned from a nine month trip to a remote location and looked up the financial news for the first time in nine months.



You would be pleased to find out that BRK went up by 29.3% while DJIA went down by 1.6% and S&P 500 went up by 3.3% so far this year.



To your pleasant surprise, you found out that BRK is acquiring GRN, increasing invested insurance assets by $25 billion and per-share book value by $12,902.



You are also excited to learn that WEB is sitting on a cash horde of $9 billion, not including the newly available investable funds from GRN, and the proverbial buying opportunity for WEB is on hand with the general pessimism in the financial market.



Wouldn’t you be puzzled if you find some BRK shareholders worrying about “inverted yield curve,” “25% paper loss in the last 2 months” or the “Y2K problem” instead of rejoicing their luck?



The Berkshire board posters even include a farmer—BRKFarmer1. Lyle McIntosh is president of Rockford Farms, an area covering 15 miles, in Missouri Valley, Iowa where he grows corn and soybeans and has a Pioneer seed sales and farm real estate business. A portion of the money from those enterprises goes to buy Berkshire.

It was BRKFarmer1 who posted this account of Buffett playing Daddy Warbucks in Annie, December 14, 1998:

It’s all over folks. We’ve lost WEB. His new career started last night at the Rose Blumkin Performing Arts Center. His singing and performance as Daddy Warbucks in Annie had critics marveling and the teenage girls in the audience shrieking with delight. I doubt any entertainer since “ole blue eyes” has created such a stir among the female gender. (And that was even with his “skin head” wig.) When he stepped up and belted out strains of “Tomorrow” security had to restrain the more excitable ones.



Seriously, it was great fun. He was joined, among others, by Susan Jacques of Borsheims, Chris Blumkin of the Furniture Mart, and Senator Bob Kerrey as Franklin Roosevelt.



The Rose is a magnificent landmark work of art. The restoration of the old theater and the intricate carvings and designs are worth stopping by and seeing if you get the chance. It is the home of the Omaha Theater Company for Young People and was initiated by a large grant by Rose Blumkin. Our own Doshoes was responsible for the successful fund-raising campaign.



Looks like BRK may now be leaderless, as after the show WEB was surrounded by a score of talent scouts and agents, each trying to sign him up.



A post from Jack Benvent addressed the problems facing Berk Heads and their dating life:

St. Valentine’s Day has brought a big issue into focus. As a single male out there in the dating world I am wondering—just how do you explain to potential significant others about Berkshire and Buffett? I’ve met a couple of nice women lately and I’m certain they’ll think I’m certifiable. I’m afraid that if the topic of Berkshire and Buffett comes up (I avoid the topic at all costs) I’ll come across like one of those Star Trek people who attend conventions wearing Spock ears or full Capt. Kirk attire.



I think it is probably best if I don’t “come out of the closet.” How do you explain the shelf full of annual reports that you won’t let them touch? How do you explain that you have to be online on a Saturday in March because it’s “really important”? How do you explain that you HAVE to go to Omaha every year? How do you explain the closet full of Berkshire Hathaway active wear? (Forget even trying to explain the guy in the yellow hat—that defies explanation!)



My mother (who is convinced I’ll never get married) and I thank you in advance for any advice.



Signed, “Sleepless in NJ”



Two days later, he posted his own possible solution: “I’m thinking about changing my pick-up line to, ‘Wanna come upstairs and see my A share?’ ”

Berkshire reported profits of $2.8 billion on March 9, 1999 for 1998, and the stock dropped, triggering this post from “MrDougFLA”: “So why is it DOWN on the news? Because profits are bad, losses are good.”

Net annual profits:

BRK $2,830,000,000.00

AMZN [Amazon.com] $0.00

BAMM [Books-A-Million] $34.79

The board also has been a place where some hide behind aliases in order to say things they might not under their own names. It’s also been a place rampant with rumors that Buffett was buying Qualcom or Amazon.com. Perhaps the most egregious act was a post on the Yahoo board purporting to be a Berkshire press release saying Berkshire planned to sell 200,000 shares because the stock was overvalued. The boiler plate information was typical of a real Berkshire release. Close inspection showed the poster to be “Mr. and Mrs. BS” and the item was released well before its posted time of release. The bogus item was designed to look like an authentic Berkshire release.

Another message posing as an official Berkshire release said the company was planning to buy back 200,000 shares.

One report, which apparently originated on the Yahoo message board on February 8, 2000, said Buffett was in an Omaha hospital in severe condition. Soon the Omaha World-Herald reported that Buffett’s friends said he was fine. Berkshire doesn’t generally comment on rumors; but on February 20, 2002, it released a press release saying:

Recently certain rumors have surfaced on the Internet regarding share repurchases and Mr. Buffett’s health. While it has been a long standing Berkshire policy to not comment on rumors, we are making an exception with respect to these recent rumors. All rumors regarding share repurchases and Mr. Buffett’s health are 100% false. We encourage shareholders and others who are interested in obtaining information about Berkshire to visit our Web site (berkshirehathaway.com) where all press releases are posted concurrent with their release to the media.



After the rumors of her father’s ill health, his daughter, Susie, showed up to a charity benefit sporting a badge which said, “My Father is Fine” (Omaha World-Herald, February 17, 2000). Buffett himself said, “That was something. I should have been checking my pulse all through this thing to see if I’m still here.… I feel terrific.”

The board can become a place for bickering and sniping, particularly when the stock is down. Here’s some back and forth from August 24, 2000:

“What a pompous ass you are. You say people are mentally ill because they question why a stock is down for an extended period of time. I think the sick people are the ones that have nothing else to do all day but calculate and recalculate IV… post it on these boards, and thank each other endlessly.”

“Thanks for that interesting post.”

“Thanks for the insight.”

“Thanks for that link.”

“Thanks for the road apples.”

“I’ve instructed my wife to shoot me if I get that nasty when I retire.”

“Tell her to go ahead and shoot.”

One poster on January 30, 2001, wrote that he’d like someone to give him five shares of Berkshire. “If someone would give me five shares of this stock, I could buy a nice little house, some furniture, and maybe a dog.… I am quite serious.”

One poster replied: “Would you like fries with that?”



The Brains Behind Buffett

Some Yellow BRKers got together at Gorat’s on September 15, 1998, before Berkshire’s special meeting the next day. At the table, starting at left, clockwise, are David and Cathy Hayden, Carol Meduna, Jim Maves, John Gartmann, Frank Fitzpatrick, Bryan Sedway, Jill Silverman, Dr. Sam Park, Michael Rhodes, and Lyle McIntosh.

(Photo by John Gartmann)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Going Online With Yellow BRKers

Mister Gecko in Disguise

Mister Toad’s watering hole in Omaha



(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)



Another U2 Secret Mission

Buffett’s assistant, Debbie Bosanek, receives a “Ms.Sec2U” shirt from yellow BRKer Lyle McIntosh at annual meeting festivities in 1999.

(Photo by Mary Houbolt)

The Next David Ogilvy

Yellow BRKer John Gartmann of Manahawkin, New Jersey, astride his Segway.



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Going Online with Yellow BRKers The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo courtesy of AP/Wide World Photos)

The Apple Never Falls Far from the Tree

Presidents Bush 1 and 2, who are not yet Yellow Brkers, try out the Segway at Kennebunkport, Maine, during Father’s Day weekend in 2003.



(Photo by Mary Porter)

A Mad Hatter’s Tea Party from

Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

Of Permanent Value Going Online With Yellow BRKers



(Photo courtesy

of Charles Page)

Listening?

Charles Page looks like a cross between Mark Twain and The Wall Street Journal’s Al Hunt. Page was a good friend of Frank Wells, the No. 2 man at Disney who died in a helicopter crash in 1994. Wells was a year behind Page at Stanford Law School. In 2002, Page self-published a book called Listen.



Listen by Charles Page

Going Online with Yellow BRKers The Story of Warren Buffett



Yellow BRKer Trio

Buffett’s daughter, Susie, Charles Page, and Marlin Stockwell at a Yellow BRKer reunion the weekend before Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1999

(Photo courtesy of Marlin Stockwell)

Of Permanent Value Going Online With Yellow BRKers

Here’s an entry from August 5, 1997: “I love this reoccurrence. For 14 years I have been asking stockbrokers and investment counselors if BRK would be an attractive purchase. To a man and woman, every time, at every level, the response has remained the same. ‘No, it’s too pricey, overvaluated [sic], overrated, ridiculous, and at insane levels.’ I have never, not once, been told the opposite.”

Amid the slew of online well wishes on Thanksgiving 1997, a posting came from Doshoes who predicted Nebraska would beat Colorado in their football game. She added “Happy Thanksgiving to all of you. I’ll keep an eye on the Chairman’s gravy intake—it’s sometimes a bit excessive.” Months later she made this posting: “It took me until the age of 20 to realize gravy is not a beverage.”

On December 5, 1997, someone e-mailed the Berkshire message board: “What is Berkshire Co? Saw this stock for the first time last night and it was selling for 46,600.”

These were among the answers:



1 One must discover Berkshire for himself. Nobody



can explain the price!”



2 “[The price] is the sound of the stock clapping.”



3 “Berkshire is an experience of the mind.”



4 Check out www.berkshirehathaway.com. It’ll be like getting a drink of water … from a fire hydrant.





Berkshire is My Bag.

Rich Rockwood has written a 113-page self-published book about GEICO.

(Photo courtesy of Rich Rockwood)



The Focus Investor

by Rich Rockwood

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Going Online with Yellow BRKers The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Going Online With Yellow BRKers



The Father of

High IQs

Neurologist Dr. Sam Park and thus his Internet name of “Neuroberk”

(Photo by

John Gartmann)



The Bread Basket

of America

Left to right are Tom McIntosh, John Gartmann, and Lyle McIntosh. Brothers Tom and Lyle played hosts to John Gartmann at their farm one day in 1998. Fun-loving Yellow BRKer Gartmann passed away of cancer toward the end of 2005.

(Photo courtesy of John Gartmann)

Going Online with Yellow BRKers The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Dara Zapata)

Young Warren Buffett

Here, young Andy Zapata, son of Yellow BRKer Dara Zapata, appears as young Warren Buffett in a “Living History Museum” project. Students had to read at least one book about the person they were to portray in a paper and in a speech for a sixth grade class at John D. Runkle School in Brookline, Massachusetts.CBS’s Mike Wallace is a graduate of the school, as is Pulitzer Prize winner Jared Diamond, author of Guns, Germs and Steel, and The Third Chimpanzee, books that Munger recommends. A summa cum laude graduate of U Mass. Amherst, Zapata is now in Champaign Urbana contemplating a career in law.

Of Permanent Value Going Online With Yellow BRKers



Wild and Crazy in Omaha

The Yellow BRKers are a wild and crazy bunch. Sherrie Gregory, lower right, received an e-mail from a well-known camel driver in early 2004 saying: “Dear Sherrie, Would you please pass along my thanks to all the Yellow BRKers for the great Coke playing cards? I definitely promise to put them to good use. They will replace the marked cards I have used in the past. This year’s meeting will be even bigger and better than ever, and I’m hoping to get the chance to see many of you during the weekend. Thanks, again, for the thoughtful gift. Warren”

(Photo collage compiled by Marlin Stockwell)



(Photo by Marlin Stockwell)

What’s in the Book, Alice?

Former Morgan Stanley Dean Witter analyst Alice Schroeder at the Yellow BRK party April 28, 2000 where Berkshire shareholder Lyle McIntosh was the master of ceremonies.

Yellow BRKers Unite!

Ken Shubin Stein, Stefan Rosen of Compo Asset Management, Dale Wettlaufer of Legg Mason Fund Advisors, Whitney Tilson of Tilson Capital Partners, and Jack Benvent gather at a New York Security Society Analysts meeting about Berkshire Hathaway on December 3, 1999.



(Photo courtesy of Whitney Tilson)



Berk Heads

Yellow BRKer Marlin Stockwell (left) jokes that Buffett begged to be in this photo with him. Dr. John Houbolt is to the right.

(Photo courtesy of Mary Houbolt)

Going Online with Yellow BRKers The Story of Warren Buffett



The Yellow Brick Sidewalk

This cartoon by Mark Parisi with Atlantic Feature Syndicate originally ran June 27, 1997 with a caption saying: “Slight change of plans, folks... From now on, we follow the Yellow Brick Sidewalk.” Some Yellow BRKers asked him to revise it to reflect Berkshire’s misfortunes of 1999. Yellow BRKers gave Buffett a copy of the cartoon at their party April 28, 2000.



The Wizard of Om

On the road again, Mark Parise drew the cartoon for the Yellow BRKers in 2001.



(Photo by

Charles Page)



(Photo courtesy of Chris Page)

Joy in Carmel

Charles Page, whose first wife died of cancer, remarried at his Carmel home in May of 2002. Here he and Linda are shown after the wedding. Reports were that Page quoted himself from a conversation earlier in the day with the Cowardly Lion from the Wizard of Oz when they both said: “There’s just one more thing I want you to do for me... Talk me out of it.”

Party Central

Sherrie Gregory of Lincoln, Nebraska, hosted the Yellow BRKer party in 2001.

Here was her take on the burning issue of whether to wear Fruit of the Loom to the annual meeting in 2002:

“We don’t really care

What the heck you wear

As long as you’re there

And not totally bare!

So be there—or be SQUARE

So says A Sher!”



(Photo by

Nancy Line

Jacobs)

I Believe in Bricks

Acme Brick CEO Harrold Melton believes in following the Yellow Brick Road.



The Fourth Chimpanzee

Since Pepsi’s chimp Kendall didn’t cost Berkshire $1 billion in its lottery, he’s being considered as a future Yellow BRKer.

Of Permanent Value Going Online With Yellow BRKers



276





HARVARD IT IS.


Sarah Park, daughter of Dr. and Mrs. Sam Park of Laguna Beach, California, scored a perfect 1,600 on the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) in 1998—800 in both math and verbal tests.

Several years later her brother, Daniel, came within a hair of the same remarkable achievement, making 1,560.

When Sarah took the test, she was a junior at Washington High School, a public high school in Tulsa.

The SAT was taken by 1.2 million students in 1997–98. Of those, only 673 achieved a perfect score on the test (Tulsa World, December 19, 1998).

“I was not expecting a 1,600,” Miss Park, 16 at the time, told the newspaper. “I had hoped to do well, but I know it’s easy to make a mistake on the SAT. To be honest, I had hoped to get the SAT over with before next year so it would not be something I would worry about.”

Miss Park was in the middle of four Advanced Placement courses, Calculus II and an art elective, while pursuing interests in French, Spanish, painting, and fencing. Oh, and she found a little extra time to start a student literary magazine, The Sting.

Sarah went to Harvard and then on to Harvard Law School specializing in international law. She owns one share of Berkshire’s Class A stock. That’s pretty smart.

Sarah was chosen as a 2000 Presidential Scholar. Only two students from each state are selected. Sarah and her father attended a Medallion ceremony at the White House in late June 2000. President Clinton presided over the ceremony.

In 2002, Sarah’s brother, Daniel, was accepted to Harvard and is now majoring in Film and Studio Art and is one of the editors of the Harvard Lampoon. Although Sarah edged her brother out in the SATs, their father describes Daniel as “a little more creative.” As a high school senior, Daniel created and marketed a fantasy board game called Magefire.



Above Average IQs

This photo, shot at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1997, shows, from left, Mrs. Sam (Eunna) Park, Daniel Park, Dr. Sam Park, Sarah Park, The Washington Post’s Katharine Graham, and Buffett. Park got Buffett’s autograph on the photo in 1998 at Gorat’s. Sarah attended Harvard Law School, and Daniel is an undergraduate at Harvard. Sam Park turned from medicine to investments and is widely followed for his Internet postings about Berkshire.

(Photo courtesy of Dr. Sam Park)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Clinton’s Book My Life

(Photos by Mary Porter)



(Photo courtesy of Dr. Sam Park)

My Life

Scholar Sarah Park is congratulated by President Bill Clinton at a White House ceremony June 27, 2000. Maybe Clinton said something like this: “Sarah, congratulations on having an A share.... Sorry, I meant on making all As.” Maybe Sarah told Clinton, “Mr. President, your penmanship needs work.” It all made little difference. Sarah went on to a distinguished career at Harvard. Clinton would later have lunch with Buffett and write My Life.



This book was signed by Clinton at Brentano’s Book Store in Los Angeles on June 26, 2004.

Of Permanent Value Harvard Has It.

Long on IQ, California, and Berkshire

Sam, Eunna, Daniel, and Sarah Park at Laguna Beach, December 2006.



(Photo courtesy of Dr. Sam Park)



277





WASHINGTON AND LEE UNIVERSITY


Ernie Williams, Class of 1938 at Washington and Lee University in Lexington, Virginia, was a beneficiary of the school to which he and his family were devoted. He, however, more than repaid the school years later when he and his wife, Marjorie, handed over 1,000 Class A shares of Berkshire to W&L for professorships and scholarships. The gift was the second largest in W&L history.

“I was certainly surprised at the amount of capital gains he had in the Berkshire stock,” said David R. Long, Director of Planned Giving at W&L. “I had known for some time he had a large position in the stock and was thinking about giving some of it to W&L.… All along Ernie had wanted it to be anonymous, but we convinced him to make an announcement to help with publicity in the fund-raising campaign. He’s very emotional when it comes to helping W&L.”

How did Williams come by 1,000 shares of Berkshire stock?

“I read a story in the October 1977 issue of Fortune magazine by Warren Buffett,” Williams recalled. “The logic of it overwhelmed me. I must have read it three, seven, or 10 times.” Williams noticed in the “pink sheets” that a friend of his made a market in Berkshire stock. Soon Williams bought some Berkshire for himself at about $80 per share. Then in April 1978, he headed for Berkshire’s annual meeting where he met Buffett. “I had about 150 shares, and I really went out to see if I should buy more.

“There were 17 people at the meeting held in the National Indemnity headquarters building. Buffett was sitting one chair from me and never left and never said a word. There was a clock there on the wall behind Ken Chace, who conducted the meeting. The meeting started exactly at 10 a.m., and it was over in exactly 10 minutes and Buffett left. I got him out in the hall and said I’d flown all the way out and would he talk to me. We talked. I doubt it was more than 15 minutes. Mainly he told me that short-term there would be some problems at the Buffalo News but that things might work out well there in the long run. That was before the other paper—The Courier—folded.”

Williams, former president of the old Mason & Lee brokerage house in Lynchburg, Virginia, said there was nothing specific that Buffett said that made him realize Buffett was special. Still, something inspired Williams to immediately call his office to buy more Berkshire stock, saying, “I want you to clean up the market for Berkshire.”

When his office called back to say they had filled his order, he said, “Now I want you to go out and buy more Berkshire.”

“I then flew on to Chicago in a snowstorm that day and I got there about 2:30 and I called my office and said I wanted to buy more Berkshire. I was told it was trading at a higher price. I said I want you to go out and buy.” At the time the stock was trading without any fanfare in the pink sheets.

In those transactions, Williams picked up about 150 shares at an average cost of about $152 a share. From that day forth until 1983, when Berkshire was trading at more than $1,300 a share, Williams continued to buy. At that point, Williams held about 1,500 Berkshire shares and became a multimillionaire.

All of Williams’ family members are wealthy, and W&L is a major beneficiary of his farsighted investment in Berkshire. “That’s what Warren Buffett did for me,” he said.

Over the years, he followed Buffett into certain Berkshire investments such as GEICO.

For many years, Williams lived on Hilton Head Island, South Carolina, on Laughing Gull Road. Buffett and Williams occasionally were in touch. “He joked with me about my address,” said Williams, who later lived in Village of Golf, Florida.

Williams related another Buffett story about buying his first shares through his friend, Archie MacAllaster. MacAllaster is chairman of MacAllaster, Pitfield, MacKay in New York City, a firm specializing in over-the-counter securities, mainly bank and insurance issues.

Williams said that MacAllaster, who is often interviewed by Barron’s magazine, was well-regarded for his knowledge of insurance stocks. He once met Buffett and they discussed them. “MacAllaster came away from a luncheon thinking he didn’t know a thing about insurance company stocks compared to Buffett. He said Buffett knew more about insurance stocks than anyone he’d ever met,” Williams recalled.

MacAllaster agreed and noted he was a market-maker in Berkshire stock at a time when Williams was putting in buy orders for Berkshire. “I was a little nervous about holding Berkshire.”

After Williams died at his Florida home on January 28, 2005. W&L’s School of Commerce, Economics, and Politics was renamed in his honor recognizing his endowments for professorships, scholarships, and library acquisitions.

On February 24, 2006, a group of W&L students in the Williams Investment Society, in a combination meeting with a group of students from the University of Minnesota, had the privilege of meeting with Buffett in Omaha.

Williams would have been pleased to have been a part of making that happen.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Ernie Williams

(Photo courtesy of Ernie Williams)

Of Permanent Value Washington and Lee University



278





SIR, WHAT IF YOU DIE?


Sir, what if you die?”

This touchy question gets posed to Buffett almost every year, although usually more subtly.

First of all, Buffett says he has no plans to leave Berkshire. (Are there some shareholders singing the “Hallelujah Chorus” here.) At a gathering of friends in Arizona two years ago, however, he held aloft an envelope and announced that it contained his succession plan. The room fell silent as he tore open the envelope and read aloud its contents: “Check my pulse again” (The Wall Street Journal, October 17, 2000).

During a discussion about how Buffett’s journey to investor nirvana might affect Berkshire stock, Buffett quipped, “It wouldn’t be as negative for the holders as it will be for me.” He made that comment from his front row seat at a conference held October 27, 1996, at the Benjamin Cardozo School of Law at Yeshiva University in New York City. (One hundred fifty people stood in line for two days to get into the conference.)

“Here comes the ‘If I get hit by a truck’ question,” Buffett has said under his breath when he gets it at annual meetings. Imagine how that must feel.

Rob Sullivan, who runs Sullivan Consolidation Inc., in Springfield, Massachusetts, jokes that he takes exception to the hit-by-a-truck question. “I run a trucking company, and I’ve instructed our drivers to be careful not to hit [Buffett and Munger] because they [the drivers] have Berkshire and Wesco in their pension plan.”

Buffett wrote Sullivan after the annual meeting in 1995: “Thanks for your note and the bunnies you sent. They were a big hit with the little kids at home and also the big kids here in the office.… P.S. No more mention of ‘truck’! ”

It’s highly unlikely that Buffett will die by being hit by a truck. But his intake of See’s Candies, Cokes, and Dilly Bars, make tooth decay a strong possibility.

“Nothing will be forced by estate taxes. I owe that to people in case I step in an elevator shaft absentmindedly,” Buffett said at the Berkshire annual meeting in 1986.

Asked at the annual meeting in 1991 what would happen to Berkshire if he died, Buffett deadpanned, “Our businesses are run as if I am not there. So the exact location of my body shouldn’t matter.”

Buffett later told CNBC’s Ron Insana, “I’ll put my ashes in a little urn there and keep my eye on things” (June 7, 2002).

Buffett has assured shareholders that nothing will happen to his Berkshire stock if he were to march through the cosmic gate. “Not a single share of my stock will be sold,” he said. At that time, all his Berkshire stock was slated to go to the Buffett Foundation, but the latest plan for Buffett’s stock is for it to go to the Gates Foundation.

“It’s a marvelous society that lets me do what I do. I wouldn’t be worth a damn in Bangladesh or Peru or some place. The fact that I have a lot of fun with it and can consume some of it, I think I should give it back to society. I see no reason why I should create some dynasty of wealth that can go around fanning themselves,” he said on Adam Smith’s Money World show in connection with Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1990.

“I don’t do the normal exercise, and I don’t eat a normal diet. But we do have someone in mind who would be our successor if Charlie and I were to die at once. And on my death, not a share of stock has to be sold. I have promised people that my affairs will not cause people any surprises,” Buffett said at the annual meeting in 1988.

At the meeting in 1991, he said, “You have two questions as shareholders that you have to think about: Will the owners behave any different as owners? And will the managers behave any different as managers?” He believes the answer to both questions is “no.”

Munger followed, “I think it’s obvious that if Warren died tomorrow the prospects of the company would be somewhat reduced. Certainly the capital allocation process couldn’t be made better under any foreseeable scenario. However, I do think a company like Berkshire would have a lot of time to find a successor. And you only need one.”

Buffett interjected, “Maybe less.”

Munger continued, “And I don’t think that you should assume that the personality who put the whole thing together would be incapable of finding a successor.”

Buffett wound up the discussion by minimizing his role: “It’s an easy company to run. And the capital allocation process may be self-defeating anyway over time. And there’s nothing that says we can forever allocate the capital better than you.

“So as the years go by, it’s not inconceivable that we could have a policy on dividends that would be dramatically different than the present one because we believed you could do a better job of allocating the capital than we could—partly because the sums would be so large. And Charlie says we’re looking forward to that day.”

Even if Buffett stepped into an elevator shaft tomorrow, his current investments would live on. People will go on drinking Coca-Cola, shaving with Gillette, buying World Book products and using their American Express cards.

Berkshire probably would hit some air pockets if Buffett were to depart, and some suggest a huge stock price drop, knocking out what many observers call “a Buffett premium.” Such fears were summarized by Allan Sloan, a columnist at Newsday at the time of this comment: “I’d sure hate to find buyers for large blocks of Berkshire stock if Buffett weren’t there.” Still, that might be the best moment to buy.

At the annual meeting in 1987, Buffett, after giving an explanation about how, if he should go, Munger would run things, said, “and we have a provision beyond that.” Next, he said that he had almost never given a stock tip in his life, but he quickly added, “When I die, buy the stock.”

Buffett always means what he says and says what he means.

“When I die, buy the stock.” What does that mean? No one knows for sure. But, with Buffett saying it, it means what it says. One shareholder says, “He probably means that if Berkshire took a big dip upon his death, the stock would be undervalued and be a buy.” His comment suggests some finale.

Munger has said, “Berkshire’s chairman may get older, but the assets aren’t going anywhere. And the nature of the Berkshire game is that we do not have to replace armies to make it work well. We’ve run so lean over the years that over time we’ve only got two or three crucially important bodies to replace.”

Munger has also stated, “We’ll get somebody like Warren.” There’s the rub, of course.

Says one Berkshire shareholder, “Munger can do everything Buffett does except be funny at the annual meeting.”

Beyond Munger, will Berkshire find some superb individual to allocate the

capital? Sure. But just who that will be has long been a mystery.

In Berkshire’s 1995 Annual Report, Buffett indicated that the “immediately available” person is GEICO’s Lou Simpson, calling him someone who could handle Berkshire’s investments should anything happen to him and Munger.

Ever since Buffett taught investment courses in his early days in Omaha, he has been a teacher of sorts. His occasional talks, his writings, his fielding of questions at annual meetings all show characteristics of a teacher. Berkshire shareholder Judith Goodnow Prus believes Berkshire’s denouement to the Buffett era will strike a theme of Buffett-as-teacher.

Indeed Prus said: “It seems to me the reason he was so quick to accept the Salomon challenge … it was a made-to-order opportunity to teach some ethical as well as economic lessons. I think he seized the opportunity for this reason, not just to protect an investment…

“I think he is so intelligent and so rational and so realistic, that he must understand that he is in a unique position to teach and has a responsibility to do so.... Perhaps it doesn’t make any sense for him to teach in the usual sense—that is, one teacher with a few pupils—but perhaps some day soon, with the new methods of communication, he would be able to invest some limited amount of time and reach a lot of people at once.

“Anyway, perhaps the denouement will be one big lesson. I hope so,” Prus said.

John Train (Money Masters of Our Time, p. 50) sees less of a legacy for Buffett: “Where does Buffett stand in merit with other public figures? Essentially, he has succeeded in transferring a large sum from the pockets of less-skillful investors to those of himself and his followers. His part will someday be turned over to his estranged wife, for this purpose an unknown quantity, and then to trustees to manage for objectives of uncertain importance. But will the whole exercise have been productive? That’s not Buffett’s concern. He is running up a prodigious score, not building Jerusalem.”

“The other significant question about Berkshire is to figure out how to recognize the next Warren Buffett,” said a Berkshire shareholder, adding that he has often tried to convince others of the appeal of Berkshire with almost no results.

“I have seen so many people pass it up,” said one Berkshire shareholder. “I would like for my children to be able to recognize the next Berkshire that comes along.”

Of course, one answer is to recognize this Buffett and not worry too much about searching out another one. It’s the same proposition for those investors who try to figure out where Buffett is investing or how to copycat his investments.

The way to be sure you are doing what Buffett is doing is simply to be a Berkshire shareholder—just sit back like you’re on a Greyhound bus and leave the driving, the investing, to him. Why try to second-guess Buffett? Just enjoy the ride.

At Sequoia’s annual meeting in 1998, Sequoia Fund President Bob Goldfarb commented on the uniqueness of Berkshire: “Periodically, you read about a company that is characterized as the next Berkshire Hathaway. There is no next Berkshire Hathaway.”

At Sequoia’s 1999 Annual Meeting, Goldfarb stated a similar thought: “A friend of mine has commented that everybody is always looking for the next Warren Buffett. The fact is that there is no next Warren Buffett.”

Occasionally, rumors that Buffett is up for a government job or is under consideration to head the New York Stock Exchange start circulating; but he has sidestepped all that with the assurance, “I’ll keep doing this [allocating cash at Berkshire] as long as I live” (Linda Grant, Los Angeles Times, April 7, 1991).

“I think he’s an American genius.… He has a sterling reputation,” said Kahn Brothers’ Irving Kahn, who added that his only bone to pick with Buffett is why, as he’s gotten older, Buffett has continued to concentrate on amassing wealth rather than giving more consideration to what that wealth can do for society. Kahn said:

After all, it’s money he’s made from other people. He didn’t create the telephone or invent something.… Sooner or later some of that money should go back to society. Warren Buffett looks good versus the other nefarious collectors of corporate shares. Yet his gains equal the losses of all who sold to him.… Maybe after so many brilliant achievements, Warren Buffett will use his energy and brains for broader and deeper national problems.



One problem Buffett could address might be solving the longevity problem for human beings. At the time of his quote, Kahn, being 95 years old, had the clear edge. He and his siblings, all of whom were approaching 100 years of age, at the turn of the century, were the subject of a Harvard study into longevity (The Wall Street Journal, August 27, 2001).

Buffett agrees with Bill Gate’s comment that 5,000 years ago, Buffett would have just been some animal’s lunch. “It would not have done much good to tell the animal you really ought to see me allocate assets,” Buffett added.

Buffett may feel that the more wealth he can accumulate, the more he can help the world. And, of course, Buffett has already offered a lot by setting examples in social and financial behavior for all. The Buffett/Berkshire story, like James Joyce’s Finnegans Wake was called during its writing, is a work in progress.

Almost everyone’s first question about Berkshire is what happens when Buffett passes on. The query persists though Buffett is most assuredly not on his deathbed. It may well be that Buffett plans on surprising people by doing what he’s doing until a very late age. Perhaps a good response to the “what if he dies” question is, “What if he lives?” He seems to be a healthy, happy, and energetic man, and he just may live beyond the next quarter’s earnings statement.

And how might Berkshire do if Buffett lives a long life? “Berkshire will generate significant sums of investable capital, and Buffett will deploy this money successfully,” says Steve Wallman, who heads Wallman Investment Counsel in Madison, Wisconsin. Unfortunately, we can’t put a number on this success. There’s every reason to think the investments will do better than average, but there’s no telling how much better, or what average will be.

Wallman adds, “Most people looking at Berkshire seem to suffer from a lack of imagination. They don’t have the vaguest idea of where Buffett is taking the company, so they conclude that Buffett doesn’t know where he’s going either.”

Buffett himself has given every indication that he has a few more chapters in his book, more painting to do on his Berkshire canvas.

“His integrity seems to me to be involved in his plans for the ultimate future of the company when he is not there,” Prus said. “Everyone who knows him seems to feel comfortable about whatever plan he might have for the company; we all seem to feel that it will be right, honorable, and good. We trust his goodness.”

One Berkshire shareholder said that Buffett is not so much about money as he is about love. As Einstein says, “Try to become not a man of success, but try rather to become a man of value.”

Even if he didn’t invent penicillin, what Buffett has reaped from society will be entirely given back to it. Buffett has an admiration for those who take a little from society and give a lot back.

Buffett eulogized Peter Kiewit in a January 20, 1980 letter to the Omaha World-Herald, reprinted in part in the The Kiewit Story by Hollis J. Limprecht. Kiewit was the former head of Peter Kiewit Sons’ Inc., which was founded in 1884 when Peter Kiewit and his older brother Andrew formed Kiewit Brothers, an Omaha masonry contracting partnership.

Pete Kiewit was overwhelmingly a producer, not a consumer. Profits went to build the capacity of the organization, not to provide opulence for the owner. In essence, one who spends less than he earns is accumulating “claim checks” for future use. My guess is that he left claim checks worth some $150 million at the time of his death.



During his lifetime, he and his family probably personally redeemed something like 3% of the claim checks that he produced. Upon his death, he left another 5% or so to his family. The balance was left to his community through a foundation whose intent, I believe, is to utilize a significant portion of those claim checks—stored-up consumption, in reality—for the benefit of the people of the Midlands.



The bricklayer of 1920 turned out to be an extraordinary endowment manager, indeed. And now, at his death, that estimated $150 million endowment has been turned over to a group of foundation trustees who are likely to achieve Kiewit-type results in maximizing the flow of benefits to society from those funds. Peter Kiewit could not have better served his community and his compatriots (p. 276).



That last line could someday be a well-deserved epitaph for Buffett. Munger expanded on this theme in his 1990 letter to Wesco shareholders:

This eccentric who heads Berkshire Hathaway, Wesco’s parent corporation, believes for some reason that accumulated wealth should never be spent on oneself or one’s family, but instead should merely serve, before it is given to charity, as an example of a certain approach to life and as a didactic platform.



These uses, plus use in building the platform higher, are considered the only honorable ones not only during life but also after death. Shareholders who continue in such peculiar company are hereby warned by our example in writing this section: some of the eccentricities of this fellow are contagious, at least if association is long continued.



If Warren were a homespun philosopher running a small creamery, who’d pay attention to what he says? The money gives him the base to communicate his ideas. Berkshire is, in many ways, an exercise in didacticism (U.S. News & World Report, June 20, 1994).



Herein is the permanent value that Buffett and Munger have so brilliantly created.

Buffett told Columbia business students October 27, 1993, that Berkshire would be easy to run; and he went on to explain why and how:

Berkshire would be pretty easy to run. It’s in marvelous financial shape, has a great set of managers in the operating businesses.



The person that ran it would have to do two things. They would have to basically keep the present managers motivated and happy doing what they’re doing. And that basically means leaving them alone and judging them by the right standards.



And then they’d have to allocate capital. They could partially solve the capital allocation by simply establishing a significant dividend policy for one thing.



They’d have to get one good idea a year on capital allocation. And the managing would be very simple.



Buffett wrote of his role in running Berkshire and of succession plans in Berkshire’s “owner’s manual” in June 1996:

Charlie and I mainly attend to the capital allocation and the care and feeding of our key managers. Most of these managers are happiest when they are left alone to run their businesses, and that is customarily just how we leave them. That puts them in charge of all operating decisions and of dispatching the excess cash they generate to headquarters. By sending it to us, they don’t get diverted by the various enticements that could come their way were they responsible for deploying the cash their businesses throw off. Furthermore, Charlie and I are exposed to a much wider range of possibilities for investing these funds than any of our managers could find in his or her own industry.



Most of our managers are independently wealthy, and it’s therefore up to us to create a climate that encourages them to choose working with Berkshire over golfing or fishing. This leaves us needing to treat them fairly and in the manner that we would wish to be treated if our positions were reversed.



As for the allocation of capital, that’s an activity both Charlie and I enjoy and in which we have acquired some useful experience. In a general sense, gray hair doesn’t hurt on this playing field: You don’t need good hand-eye coordination or well-toned muscles to push money around (thank heavens). As long as our minds continue to function effectively, Charlie and I can keep on doing our jobs pretty much as we have in the past.



On my death, Berkshire’s ownership picture will change but not in a disruptive way: First, only about 1% of my stock will have to be sold to take care of bequests and taxes; second, the balance of my stock will go to my wife, Susan, if she survives, or to a family foundation if she doesn’t. In either event, Berkshire will possess a controlling shareholder guided by the same philosophy and objectives that set our course.



At that juncture, the Buffett family will not be involved in managing the business, only in picking and overseeing the managers who do. Just who those managers will be, of course, depends on the date of my death. But I can anticipate what the management structure will be: Essentially my job will be split in two parts, with one executive becoming responsible for investments and another for operations. If the acquisition of new businesses is in prospect, the two will cooperate in making the decisions needed. Both executives will report to a board of directors that will be responsible to the controlling shareholder, whose interests will in turn be aligned with yours.



Were we to need the management structure I have just described on an immediate basis, my family and a few key individuals know who I would pick to fill both posts. Both currently work for Berkshire and are people in whom I have total confidence.



I will continue to keep my family posted on the succession issue. Since Berkshire stock will make up virtually my entire estate and will account for a similar portion of the assets of either my wife or the foundation for a considerable period after my death, you can be sure I have thought through the succession question carefully. You can be equally sure that the principles we have employed to date in running Berkshire will continue to guide the managers who succeed me.



Lest we end on a morbid note, I also want to assure you that I have never felt better. I love running Berkshire, and if enjoying life promotes longevity, Methuselah’s record is in jeopardy.



Methuselah, you will recall from your careful reading of the Bible, lived to be 969 years old.

In 2003, Buffett said he had four possible successors in mind to run Berkshire. He noted they were not in their 60s because he wanted his successors to have a long run. In any event, one should not wish Buffett to be in any hurry to leave. Rather, we should wish him immortality as he has wished it for his managers. We should fully enjoy the presence of this genius while we can.

The words John Buchan wrote in Pilgrim’s Way of the genius of Lawrence of Arabia (p. 217) aptly apply to Buffett: “If genius be, in Emerson’s phrase, a ‘stellar and undiminished something,’ whose origin is a mystery and whose essence cannot be defined, then he was the only man of genius I have ever known.”

Or, as Ben Jonson said of Shakespeare, let it be said of Buffett: “He was not of an age, but for all time!”

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Sir, What If You Die?

Sir, What If You Die? The Story of Warren Buffett



Steve Wallman

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

Of Permanent Value Sir, What If You Die?

Sir, What If You Die? The Story of Warren Buffett

Pilgrim’s Way

John Buchan’s (Lord Tweedsmuir) Pilgrim’s Way, an exquisite personal odyssey, was one of President John F. Kennedy’s favorite books. Buchan was a Renaissance man—a novelist, poet, historian, fisherman, explorer, member of Parliament, Governor-General of Canada, and friend of President Franklin Roosevelt. This is a first edition (1940) copy from the Roland Schank Collection.



(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Sir, What If You Die?



279





“YESTERDAY I DIED”


Buffett was asked the if-you-get-hit-by-a-truck question once again in 1998, when he and Bill Gates appeared at a symposium at the University of Washington.

The question was posed even more directly under the assumption that Berkshire’s success depends on Buffett. The question ended: “What will happen when you’re gone?” Buffett has been known to reply to such questions by saying, “I hope the stock doesn’t go up too much,” but his reply to this 1998 question as reported in Fortune (July 20, 1998), included some practical remarks along with his usual lighthearted ones: “Your assumption is wrong. I will keep working until about five years after I die, and I’ve given the directors a Ouija board so they can keep in touch. But if the Ouija board doesn’t work, we have outstanding people who can do what I do. People are not going to stop drinking Coca-Cola if I die tonight, they’re not going to quit shaving tonight, they’re not going to eat less See’s candy, or fewer Dilly Bars, or anything of the sort. Those companies have terrific products, they’ve got outstanding managers, and all you’ll need at the top of Berkshire is someone who can allocate capital and make sure you have the right managers down below. We’ve got the people identified to do that, and the board of directors of Berkshire knows who they are. But apparently those selected do not know who they were at the time of this published statement.

“In fact, I’ve already sent out a letter that tells what should be done, and I’ve got another letter that addressed that will go out at the time, and it starts out, ‘Yesterday I died,’ and then tells what the plans of the company are.”

Buffett, at a later date, said, “Then I go on and explain what is going to happen. I know that is one time they [shareholders] will be really interested in hearing from me” (London Daily Telegraph, September 23, 2002).

The handwritten letter tucked in an envelope inside Debbie Bosanek’s desk begins: “Yesterday I died. That is unquestionably bad news for me but it is not bad news for our businesses” (The Wall Street Journal, October, 17, 2000).

Berkshire will be fine, Buffett has said, after he is “laid to rest in Chicago—in the Democratic Party tradition” so that he can continue to vote for the party.

Buffett has said his son Howard would become chairman of Berkshire and has indicated Lou Simpson would run the investment side. So who would be the CEO? The Wall Street Journal (October 17, 2000) reported: “The name in the envelope in his secretary’s desk belongs to a man who doesn’t know—and won’t until Buffett dies—that he is the next Berkshire CEO. ‘When the envelope is opened it will be like the Miss America pageant,’” Buffett says.

Buffett said he did not want to make his decision known in case he wants to change his mind. The length of Buffett’s tenure will make a difference in his choice: “The answer is certainly different if I die in 28 years vs. 28 days.”

One person who has seen the secret letter is Charles Munger, but he is not the man named. “At 76, Mr. Munger isn’t a candidate for the top job. Lately, he has been very involved with Berkshire’s philanthropic efforts,” according to The Wall Street Journal .

“Berkshire does not stand to lose with Warren’s ultimate demise,” says Mr. Munger in The Wall Street Journal article which goes on to say, “One of the people involved [in the succession plan] in some respects is better than Warren.”

Names tossed about as the next CEO include Ajit Jain, who runs Berkshire’s reinsurance group; Tony Nicely, the co-CEO of GEICO; Matt Rose, CEO of Burlington Northern, and Greg Abel, CEO of MidAmerican Energy.

The end of Buffett’s last letter says: “Dictated but not read.”

Buffett, when asked how he would know if he were losing his mental edge, responded, “I have assigned my family to do that. They have to tell me as a group. If only one tells me, he’s out of the will” (Talk to Wharton Business School students, October 10, 2003).

Speculative stories about Buffett’s possible retirement and succession come and go in the press. During a rash of such stories about the time of Berkshire’s 2004 Annual Meeting, Buffett was again asked about his succession plans. “Buffett simply smiled and said, ‘You’ll be interviewing me 20 years from now’” (Margery Beck, Associated Press, May 22, 2004).

So far, so good.

Buffett told Charlie Rose (August 15, 2011) that Berkshire’s board would name a successor “within an hour” should the need arise. He added that the board has several names, but “there is one person they all agree on.”

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value “Yesterday I Died”



280





SUBTLE CHANGES


At the time of the Berkshire—Blue Chip merger in 1983, Buffett set down 13 owner-related business principles. Later, in 1996, Berkshire issued a booklet, about the principles entitled An Owner’s Manual. Subtle changes to the manual in Berkshire’s 2003 Annual Report were first pointed out by Mick Rhodes, a lawyer in Kansas City.

“It is funny how these little changes can sneak in under everybody’s radar screen even though thousands of people are dissecting every word.” Rhodes said. “I stumbled across it by accident...reading the part about Berkshire governance in the letter. I noticed WEB used the term ‘successor’ instead of ‘successors’ and wondered if he was changing the plan. I then looked at the Owner’s Manual at the end of the report (which I had not bothered to read before) and there it was, spelled out as clear as night and day.” Rhodes continued:

In the part of the manual dealing with succession of WEB, it used to say that his “job will be split into two parts, with one executive becoming responsible for investments and another for operations.”



In this year’s manual it changes “another for operations” to read, “another, who will be CEO, for operations.”



Some people have expressed concern with the idea that two people would be acting as co-CEO’s after WEB is gone, a model of management that rarely has worked well in the real world. I think the change in wording may be aimed at reassuring investors that while both officers will work closely together, especially on acquisitions where their roles will overlap, there will be one and only one CEO. I like this clarification.



The same theme is stressed in the letter. In the discussion of Berkshire governance, WEB says the “primary job of our directors is to select my successor.” No plural–just one successor, the CEO. He says the board has identified four internal candidates to replace him and discusses their strengths and weaknesses at board meetings. “I’m totally comfortable about it being done well by any of the four candidates we have identified.”



Note the job description of the CEO successor: “He or she will need to maintain Berkshire’s culture, allocate capital, and keep a group of America’s best managers happy in their jobs.” Again, WEB is explicitly stating that the CEO in charge of operations also is responsible for allocation of capital. The investment officer’s capital allocation role, it seems to me, will be focused primarily on passive investments (much as Lou Simpson’s role at GEICO is presently defined). The broader issue of how capital is allocated in new acquisitions or expansions of existing businesses will be the primary responsibility of the CEO.



The old version of the manual also said: “Were we to need the management structure I have just described on an immediate basis, my family and a few key individuals know who I would pick to fill both posts. Both currently work for Berkshire and are people in whom I have total confidence.” This year’s new version substitutes “our directors” for “my family and a few key individuals.” And instead of saying “both currently work for Berkshire,” it says “all candidates currently work for Berkshire.”



Lou Simpson was long ago identified by WEB as the investment officer who could succeed WEB’s investing role if the truck then arrived. But given Lou’s age (only six years younger than WEB), I think it is unlikely that he will be the investment officer successor.



One last change I stumbled across. The manual said before this year that upon WEB’s death, “only about 1% of my stock will have to be sold to take care of bequests and taxes.” Now it has been changed to read: “None of my stock will have to be sold to take care of bequests and taxes.” Interesting.



It seems to me that WEB is adding several touches to this year’s letter and revised Owner’s Manual to reassure investors that his departure will not be as disruptive as many have feared. These changes in wording are part of the effort. But by far the bigger part of the effort lies in the table of operating earnings growth rates on page 4. The message is clear that WEB wants the market to understand that Berkshire is not just his personal investing account—it is an OPERATING company with rapidly growing OPERATING earnings. His emphasis that “I don’t believe that using 2003 as the terminal year distorts our calculations” further drives the point home that these earnings are going to keep growing. As he says in the section dealing with his CEO successor, “The train is already moving at a good clip down the track.”



An all but unnoticed change in the manual in 2006 said, “All Berkshire shares will be left to one or more foundations [italics added]. In this way, Berkshire will be left with a long-term very substantial shareholder [The Gates Foundation], guided by the same philosophy and objectives that now set our course” [2005 Annual Report].





Reader of Fine Print

Mick Rhodes

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Subtle Changes



281





THE BUFFETT FOUNDATION


The bulk of Buffett’s wealth, the fruit of his lifetime of long-term investing, was slated to go to the Buffett Foundation and then back to society at the time of his death, but plans sometimes change. As of 2006, the majority of his wealth was redirected to go to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, with portions still slated to go to four Buffett family foundations The timing of this distribution was changed from the time of his death to beginning the distribution right away, but in increments.

Buffett has been known to call his fortune, “a fund that’s not yet activated” (Omaha World-Herald, October 4, 1993). That is no longer the case; now it is activated through the Gates Foundation.

Buffett’s foundation, renamed the Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation in honor of Buffett’s first wife after her death in 2004, could have easily wound up as the largest on earth, dwarfing even the legacies of Rockefeller and Ford. With Susan Buffett’s endowment of $2.7 billion alone (before Buffett’s slated distribution), the Foundation was required to give away $150 million a year to keep its tax-exempt status. But then Buffett shifted his thinking and decided to leave most of his money to the Gates Foundation, making it far and away the biggest.

The nine largest foundations in the United States, according to The New York Times in 2006, are as follows:

Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation

Ford Foundation

J. Paul Getty Trust

Robert Wood Johnson Foundation

Lilly Endowment Inc.

William and Flora Hewlett Foundation

W. K. Kellogg Foundation

David and Lucile Packard Foundation

Andrew W. Mellon Foundation

The question of whether to leave a fortune to society sooner or later is always a good debate. Fortune summarized the issue (March 15, 1999): “Buffett says it’s a good thing Gates waited as long as he did. ‘If he had given away 90% of his money 10 years ago, it would have been at a huge cost to society,’ says Buffett. ‘Giving away that money early on might have cheated the world out of $100 billion. Instead he has been running the best-performing endowment fund in the world.’ The counter-argument is that there is a time value of money to charity as well. That is, if Gates had given away, say, $50 million 10 years ago to eradicate a disease, and that money had found a cure, and the cure had saved 100,000 lives, let alone saved $1 billion in health-care costs, how do you assign a value to that? There is no right answer, of course.”

Gates said most of his money will go to charity, mainly to health and education causes, instead of his children. Gates already has given large sums to various efforts, including combating AIDS in India and particularly vaccination efforts in Africa.

Gates, sounding like Buffett, said, “I don’t think it’s constructive for children to grow up having billions of dollars … certainly I’ll make sure they [his three children] are taken care of in a sense that they can have a very comfortable life.”

The Buffett Foundation supports Planned Parenthood and tries to reduce the risk of nuclear war and promote education. At that time, the foundation gave away about $11 to $12 million a year with most of the money going to family-planning services, including abortions (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

“His big interest has always been the problem of world population growth. He thinks it’s a danger to the world... that you can have it all but if you have overpopulation the world will struggle with problems like housing,” says his sister, Doris Bryant.

The foundation has no grant guidelines except for its college scholarship program, nor does it accept applications for grants other than for college scholarships. The scholarship program, which was expanded in 2008, pays the full cost of tuition to the University of Nebraska for in-state students, typically from lower-income families.

Formed in 1964, the foundation is run from a one-person office in Berkshire’s headquarters by Allen Greenberg, the former husband of Buffett’s daughter Susan. Greenberg took the job in 1987. For years the foundation was on the second floor but was moved up to the headquarters’ floor early in 2003. Greenberg is paid about $160,000 a year to run the foundation.

Greenberg was raised in New York City where his father owned a newspaper distribution business. After graduating from New York University Law School, he began a career in public-interest law and worked as a legislative aide to Representative Charles Schumer, now a New York Senator. Greenberg also worked for activist lawyer Ralph Nader.

Buffett’s daughter, Susan, and Allen Greenberg were married 12 years before their divorce in 1995. The marriage pleased Susie’s parents who took to calling Greenberg “Allen-the-perfect-son-in-law.”

In 1999, Business Week reported on the Buffett Foundation inner workings:

Of the $17.6 million that the Buffett Foundation donated in the fiscal year ended June 30, nearly $3.8 million went to Planned Parenthood. This ranked the Foundation among the federation’s top three contributors. But what truly sets the Buffett Foundation apart is that it involves itself directly at the clinic level by making project grants to local affiliates across the country—17 of them this year alone. Over the years, Buffett money has enabled dozens of Planned Parenthood clinics to add abortion to their panoply of services.



Buffett indicated a new willingness to make a large, direct gift to the foundation before his death. “If my wife and Allen had projects they felt were tenable right now, I would consider it,” Buffett says. Indeed, the foundation’s annual giving has risen, of late, to a level that may soon force the issue. The $17.6 million in donations made in fiscal 1999 represented a 41% increase over the previous year. If Greenberg maintains this pace the existing endowment might well be exhausted within a year.



The foundation’s assets are currently a hodgepodge of stocks. Warren and Susan Buffett have made donations through Berkshire’s charitable giving program. So far the foundation has been the recipient of millions of the Buffett’s billions.

The assets of the Buffett Foundation, only $1.4 million in 1981, grew to $8.4 million in 1986, largely because of good return on investments and Buffett’s own contributions through Berkshire’s shareholder-designated contributions program.

The Forbes story about Buffett being the richest person in the country (in October 1993), figured that the Buffett estate could be worth $100 billion in 20 years, dwarfing the legacies of Rockefeller, Ford, and Carnegie.

Buffett, sometimes criticized for not giving away his money during his lifetime, said, “I wouldn’t want to transfer Berkshire Hathaway shares to anyone while I’m alive. If I owned a wide portfolio of securities I could give them away. But, I don’t want to give up control of Berkshire Hathaway.… I’ve got this fund that’s not yet activated, and it is building at a rate greater than other endowments, like Harvard’s. It’s growing at 25% to 30%.”

On June 30, 1990, the Buffett Foundation had assets of $15.2 million, according to foundation incorporation records. In the 12 months ending then, the foundation made contributions and paid grants totaling $1.4 million to more than 80 entities. Operating and administrative expenses during this period totaled $131,382. The largest of the grants was $200,000, and the smallest was $280 to Rudyard Theatre. Average amounts fell in the $1,000 to $10,000 range.

If that doesn’t tell a whole lot, it still serves as a tantalizing blueprint of future giving. What is known about the foundation is that, on the asset side, its stockholdings show Buffett to be a stock market junkie.

The foundation’s Form 990-PF for the year ended June 30, 1990 showed about 200 stock positions ranging from 200 shares of Abbott Laboratories to 110 shares of Zenith National Insurance Co. Berkshire itself also has owned stocks from A to Z. And, the foundation has found everything in between: 200 shares of American Brands; 10 of Cap Cities (now Disney); 75 of CBS; 600 of Coca-Cola; 200 Freddie Mac; 100 GE; 100 J&J; 100 Eli Lilly; 750 Loews; 200 Melville Corp.; 150 Morgan Stanley Group; 800 Philip Morris; 100 Playboy Enterprises; 100 Ralston Purina; 100 Rockefeller Center Properties; 100 Salomon; 100 Sears Roebuck; 100 Tiffany; 100 Torchmark; 200 Wal-Mart Stores; 10 Washington Post Co.; 100 Wells Fargo; and many others.

The recipients were equally eclectic that year. Form 990-PF report showed the following were among the recipients of the Foundation’s contributions and grants:

ACLU Reproductive Freedom Project—$15,000



Alan Guttmacher Institute—$100,000



Cancer Research Institute—$1,000



Caring for Children—$1,000



Girls Inc. of Omaha—$20,000



International Projects Assistance Services—$200,000



Omaha Zoo Foundation—$9,500



Planned Parenthood of Mid-Iowa—$30,000



Planned Parenthood of New York City—$100,000



Salem Baptist Church—$5,000



Sexuality Information and Education Council of the United States—$15,000



United Way of the Midlands—$122,411



Another recipient is the Alice Buffett Outstanding Teacher Awards—$10,000 each to 15 recipients, which the foundation gives annually. Alice Buffett was Buffett’s aunt, who taught in Omaha for 35 years. In fiscal 1991–92, the foundation gave 73% of its donations, totaling $2.2 million, to groups involved in limiting population (Omaha World-Herald, July 24, 1992).

The largest recipients were the Center for Reproductive Law and Policy, New York, which received $500,000; and International Projects Assistance Services, Carrboro, North Carolina, which received $250,000 to train doctors and health professionals and provide equipment for medical clinics in developing countries.

A story in The New York Times (December 3, 1995) gave a good look at the Buffett Foundation. “On June 30, 1995, the Buffett Foundation had assets of $21.6 million, according to the latest tax returns. About $7 million of that was invested in a smorgasbord of 184 stocks. “But despite the variety, one stock, General Dynamics, dominated the foundation’s equities, accounting for $5.63 million, or more than 80% of their total worth. Loews was the far-distant, second-largest holding, with a value of $90,750 as of June 30.”

The other main holdings were 1,200 shares of Coca-Cola, 800 shares of Philip Morris, 375 shares of American International Group, 900 shares of Pepsico, 800 shares of Campbell Soup, 600 shares of Anheuser-Busch, 600 shares of Hershey Foods, and 600 shares of Leucadia National. The cost of three major holdings was $2.65 million and the worth on June 30, 1995 was $6.08 million.

The Times story painted an interesting picture of some of Buffett’s wheeling and dealing:

Aficionados speculate that the foundation … may be [Buffett’s] research vehicle, a means of keeping track of annual reports from companies he likes to follow.



The nation’s best known investor keeps only 32% of his foundation’s money in stocks. Most of the money, 57%, is in Treasuries, with the balance in cash and other assets …



Companies can deduct the full value of an appreciated stock without paying capital gains on the appreciation, up to 10% of their taxable income. For example, two years ago, at Mr. Buffett’s election, Berkshire donated 110,485 shares of Torchmark, an insurance company, to the foundation. The stock cost Berkshire $2.1 million, but the company got to deduct from taxes $4.8 million, the shares’ value at the time of the donation, and did not have to pay the 35% tax on the gain.



The nonprofit foundation, which then sold the stock, paid just the 2% gains tax to which it is subject. To top it off, Mr. Buffett got to direct the flow of nearly 5 million philanthropic dollars at a cost to Berkshire of just $2.1 million. (The New York Times, December 3, 1995)



Buffett often speaks of working with people he likes, admires, and trusts, so it’s no surprise that he has chosen people close to him as officers and directors of his foundation. The officers of the Buffett Foundation are: Susan T. Buffett, president (until her death); Warren E. Buffett, vice president & treasurer; Gladys Kaiser, secretary; and Allen Greenberg, executive director. The directors of the Foundation are Buffett; his daughter Susan; his son Peter; Carol Loomis; and Tom Murphy.

In addition to its involvement with population control, the foundation has approved efforts for the prevention of nuclear war. The Buffett Foundation paid more than half the first-year costs for tests needed to bring the French abortion pill, RU-486, to the U.S. market (Omaha World-Herald, April 21, 1996). “The Buffett Foundation gave $2 million in 1994 to fund clinical trials for the pill, which is called mifepristone in the United States. The money went to Population Council, a nonprofit research group in New York that holds the U.S. patent rights to the pill,” the story said.

“The $2 million the Buffett Foundation gave for the clinical trials was in addition to more than $5 million it contributed in 1994 to various organizations that work to limit population growth.” In 1997, the foundation gave about $8 million to family-planning causes (Barron’s, December 8, 1997).

The foundation has paid $200,000 toward risk reduction centers in Moscow and Washington, equipping them with faxes and phones, and enabling communication in an emergency situation (John Train, Money Masters of Our Time, p. 48).

In 2000, the foundation gave Family Health International a $2 million grant to seek approval to market quinacrine as a nonsurgical sterilization method.

Berkshire’s proxy for 2001 reported that a shareholder objected to the company’s donations to Planned Parenthood and asked the company to stop making charitable donations of any sort.

“People did not invest in this company so it could be given to someone else’s favorite charity,” shareholder Gloria J. Patrick said in a statement filed with her proxy.

Patrick, of West Milton, Ohio, who owned 2 class B shares, said she objected to Berkshire’s contributions to Planned Parenthood because of that organization’s support of abortion rights. Berkshire recommended voting against the proposal, saying that shareholders determine the company’s discretionary philanthropy and “the many gifts made upon our shareholder designations display differing philosophies.”

In Berkshire’s 2001 Annual Report, Buffett responded to that type of criticism:

I get a few letters every week criticizing Berkshire for contributing to Planned Parenthood. These letters are usually prompted by an organization that wishes to see boycotts of Berkshire products. The letters are invariably polite and sincere, but their writers are unaware of a key point. It’s not Berkshire, but rather its owners who are making charitable decisions—and these owners are about as diverse in their opinions as you can imagine. For example, they are probably on both sides of the abortion issue in roughly the same proportion as the American population. We’ll follow their instructions, whether they designate Planned Parenthood or Metro Right to Life, just as long as the charity possesses 501(c)(3) status. It’s as if we paid a dividend, which the shareholder then donated. Our form of disbursement, however, is more tax-efficient.



A Barron’s story (December 8, 1997) suggesting that problems other than overpopulation needed Buffett’s attention, quoted him as saying: “Certainly I consider population and reproductive rights to be important issues, and I may write about them one day. But until then, I don’t want to comment on the question or become a spokesman. I’d end up getting 50 letters a day. It would change my life too much.” It’s enough to ring Buffett’s chimes.

On March 2, 1999, Buffett told Nightline’s Ted Koppel: “I enjoy the idea of building an endowment fund up for society. I mean I enjoy the process by itself. But if you think about it, if I’d done all of that 15 years ago society would have had a few hundred million dollars of claim checks and now if I died tonight they’d have $30 billion of claim checks. So it’s not a bad endowment fund. I have six very bright, high-grade people whose thinking above ground will be a lot better than my thinking six feet underground, and I’ve given them a few guidelines but nothing that ties their hands in any way. I want them to tackle big problems. I want them to tackle problems that generally don’t have a funding constituency so that they’re not the kind of things that government can attack well and that are not being attacked by philanthropy generally. I want them to try and do something big.”

Buffett said increasing his wealth affects only the amount he will be able to give, not his lifestyle: “It just doesn’t make any difference. It will make a difference to the size of my foundation when I die. It has no consequence for me whatsoever” (Financial Times, May 17, 1999).

In a statement December 27, 1999, Buffett said that he and his wife had donated 2,500 Class A shares, worth about $134 million at the stock price then, to four unnamed charities.

He said he was disclosing the fact so that investors did not think he was selling.

“Mr. and Mrs. Buffett are making this announcement because there have been occasions when gifts by them have been reported in the media as sales,” the statement said. “Mr. and Mrs. Buffett have never sold any Berkshire shares.”

The statement said the charities receiving the stock have agreed not to sell more than 10 shares during any one-week period.

One Berkshire shareholder noted on AOL’s Berkshire message board that he was notified by his designated charity it had received the donation from Berkshire in General Dynamics stock.

Another shareholder posted a lighthearted hypothesis: “I didn’t realize Berkshire ever made stock contributions instead of cash, but this makes sense for the same reason it makes sense for an individual to donate appreciated securities. You effectively sell the stock and avoid the capital gains tax.

“For years we have debated how to handle the deferred tax liability in intrinsic value calculations. Now we see that with this nifty trick the tax liability on Coke and others can be avoided—just give all 200 million shares of Coke away to charity in annual increments spread over the next 10,000 years and voila, the capital gains tax liability is zero! Cool.”

Buffett has praised Bill Gates for his philanthropy, paying tribute in an article he wrote for Time (April 26, 2004):

A few years ago Bill and Melinda Gates asked themselves how they could dramatically help the lives of the most people per dollar spent—and then set out to spend more dollars on the idea they came up with than has ever before been devoted to any philanthropic effort. From the start, they agreed that their money was not to be allocated based on recognition or applause they might receive, nor on the race, color or creed of the recipients. Rather, the cash would be channeled so as to address the vital needs—indeed, in many cases the very survival—of people around the world. With breathtaking speed, they turned those thoughts into reality by focusing on global health and learning issues. In 1999 their foundation made one of the largest charitable pledges ever: $750 million for child vaccines.



“IT MAY MAKE SENSE TO DO SOMETHING

VERY SIGNIFICANT BEFORE I DIE.”

A hint about Buffett’s mega-announcement concerning the Gates Foundation came when Fortune (October 17, 2005) reported the following exchange about charitable giving between Buffett and Gates the day they talked to students at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln.

FORTUNE: You have different philosophies about philanthropy, with Bill giving a lot of his money away today, and Warren waiting until he dies to give it away. What arguments would you make to the other that your way is the right way?



BUFFETT: Well, I think his way is better. He and Melinda, they’re devoting a huge amount of money, terrific brains, and heart to it. That’s a great combination. I couldn’t have done that when I was in my 40s and added anything meaningful. At my age now, you can argue that a very significant percentage of the money has been made. And I don’t need the stock to control Berkshire, so it may make sense to do something very significant before I die.



FORTUNE: Is this a change for you?



BUFFETT: It’s an evolution.



GATES: In 1998, I was just getting started [in philanthropy], and back then I would have said, “Look, it’s too confusing and distracting to be asking for money and giving money away at the same time.” I didn’t think I could spare the time. As my dad encouraged me to jump in, as Melinda weighed in on that side, and both of them were willing to put time into it, we got a great person in Steve Ballmer, who actually I’d known at Microsoft a long time, the pieces really fell together. I’d always thought that I would wait until I was done working full-time before I’d do a lot of philanthropy. But it’s worked amazingly well to be able to do some of both.



BUFFETT: Bill’s got a better mind for it. I couldn’t do what he does. I wouldn’t get any enjoyment because I would know I wasn’t that good at it. I want to see the money used intelligently. I don’t regard my death as being the perfect timing, necessarily.



FORTUNE: Do you two talk about this?



BUFFETT: Oh, sure.



GATES: Absolutely.



FORTUNE: Are you trying to persuade Warren to be as hands on in philanthropy as you are?



GATES: No, but I share the enjoyment I get out of it and some of the fun dynamics, the dynamics of what works and doesn’t work. It’s a lot like the world of business—not enough that you can just walk into it, but you learn some of the specifics and then the experience of business applies.



BUFFETT: Berkshire is so much a part of me that I never could walk away from it. But I don’t think that I’m going to quintuple [my personal fortune] in six or eight years. The amount is big enough now to do very significant things and way different than when I was in my 40s. I mean, if I had done this in my 40s, it might have been $20 million. Now we’ve got a sum that can do something significant. And I don’t need it to control Berkshire. Nobody’s going to take over Berkshire at its present size, which was not the case 20 years ago.



GATES: I’d never thought that giving wealth to my own kid could be

disadvantageous until I read a Fortune article.



BUFFETT: “Should You Leave It All to the Children?” [September 29, 1986].



GATES: Right. Warren was a strong voice in that article. And after I read it, I thought, Wow, it would be a mistake as you get past a certain amount [to hand it all down]. So this idea that it should all go back to society, Warren influenced me dramatically on that.



BUFFETT: And he’s doing a better job. [Laughter.] It’s interesting that the same people who talk about the terrible cycle of dependency that welfare brings will then hand their kids when they emerge from the womb a lifetime supply of food stamps. But some poor woman who’s had two pregnancies by the time she’s 17, they say, Oh, this is terrible to give her anything.



The change of Buffett’s heart in giving revealed in this 2005 discussion came into fruition in 2006, when he disclosed his plan to give the majority of his fortune to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.

HOWARD WARREN BUFFETT

Howard W. Buffett, Buffett’s grandson, was named executive director of the foundation headed by his father, Howard G. Buffett.

Twenty-seven-year-old Howard W. earned a BA at Northwestern, then a master’s at Columbia’s Public Affairs School. He followed that with a stint on the Barack Obama campaign team in 2008. After a time at the Department of Agriculture, he started work at the White House as a policy advisor. Then he moved to the Department of Defense. Before leaving Washington, he ran the department’s development of agriculture in Afghanistan and Iraq.

After moving back to Omaha, he took a job with his father’s foundation for $95,000 a year, a job earmarked for $135,000. Howard G. was quoted as saying, “He’s young and although I think he would be worth anything we paid him, right now I just feel that’s a more appropriate number” (Forbes, June 14, 2011).

The Story of Warren Buffett

He Writes the Checks

Buffett Foundation’s Allen Greenberg



(Photo courtesy

of Omaha

World Herald)

Of Permanent Value The Buffett Foundation

The Buffett Foundation The Story of Warren Buffett

Buffett had the tiny Sherwood Foundation directed by his children and Astrid Menks. For the year that ended July 30, 1993, it had assets of $584,000 and gave away about $370,000 (The New York Times, December 3, 1995). “Buffett contributes $500,000 a year to a Sherwood Foundation so that each of his children and his companion, Astrid Menks, can make contributions of their own totaling $100,000 a year or so. Buffett does not check how the contributions are made” (Janet Lowe, Warren Buffett Speaks, 1997, p. 51).

In late 1999, Buffett’s three children formed separate foundations to replace their shared Sherwood Foundation. The Howard Buffett Foundation held 500 Berkshire Hathaway A shares, a gift from Mrs. Susan Buffett. Howard Buffett said (Omaha World-Herald, February 16, 2000) that the new foundations simply allow contributions to be made individually rather than by committee. “Not a lot has changed. This gives us the ability to do things a little bit more on our own, that’s all.”

Buffett said most of the contributions he will make will go to “conservation, education, and kids.” Beneficiaries include Ecotrust, a Portland, Oregon, conservation, group; the World Wildlife Fund; and the DeWildt Cheetah Sanctuary in South Africa, as well as other groups, including a teacher awards program in Decatur, Illinois.

Of Permanent Value The Buffett Foundation

The Buffett Foundation The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Buffett Foundation



282





SECOND CHANCE


The Buffett Foundation gives $250,000 annually to support Second Chance, an effort led by Retired Air Force General Lee Butler to reduce nuclear weapons. However, the following account was mistakenly reported by U.S. News and World Report (January 4, 1999):

Renowned investor and billionaire Warren Buffett is close to announcing the creation of a new foundation devoted to disarmament and nuclear issues paid for with a personal check for $1 billion. “The Omaha Project”—its tentative name—would be based in the Nebraska city that is home to Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway Inc. Retired Air Force Gen. Lee Butler, an advocate of cutting nuclear weapons and the former head of the U.S. Strategic Air Command based near Omaha, is the leading candidate to head the project, sources tell our Warren P. Strobel.



Almost immediately a poster wrote: “I had no idea. I have been an admirer of Warren Buffett for a long time and have made a lot of money investing in Berkshire. If this is true, I will sell my Berkshire shares immediately because I have no desire to be mixed up with someone having the communist sympathies that this would indicate.”

Buffett confirmed he had given some money to the Lee Butler effort during an interview with Nightline anchor Ted Koppel (March 2, 1999). Buffett told Koppel he wanted his fortune to go to society to attack big problems that are not funded by government.

“The number one problem of mankind, but I don’t know how to attack it with money, I think is the spread of nuclear knowledge,” Buffett explained. “I mean I think that the greatest danger that mankind faces is the fact that more and more people will know how to build weapons of incredible destruction and the knowledge won’t go away. I don’t know how to attack that problem with money.

“There’s an organization formed, that’s in the process of being formed by Lee Butler, who was the former commander in chief of what was the Strategic Air Command, now is STRATCOM. He calls it Second Chance. He’s devoting his energies and I’m devoting some money to working on that problem. There’s nobody better qualified than Lee to be working on it.”

Buffett has lamented over the nuclear weapon issue: “A nuclear bomb is the ultimate depressing thing. It will happen. It’s inevitable. I don’t see any way it won’t happen. But we can reduce the probabilities. You can’t get rid of the knowledge. You can try to control the materials. You’ll never get rid of the intent. It’s the ultimate problem of mankind” (Fortune, November 11, 2002).

Over a five-year period, Buffett is giving $2.5 million to back a group headed by Ted Turner and former Senator Sam Nunn. Nuclear Threat Initiative (NTI), the Washington-based nonprofit group, work to reduce the threat of nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons (The New York Times, October 4, 2002). Buffett has backed a film produced by the Nuclear Threat Initiative called Last Best Chance.

“It’s not that much money,” Buffett was quoted as saying, but he said he was doing it “to encourage other businessmen to get involved.”

“The genie was let out of the bottle in the 1940s. While there is no way of putting it back in the bottle, the best answer is what Sam Nunn is doing.”

Buffett added, “You don’t want an Eastern or a Russian biological warrior to be starving.”

The story in the Times said Buffett supported President Bush’s stance on Iraq, arguing that limiting the threat of Saddam Hussein’s unconventional weapons might limit the danger he posed. “If I thought the probability was high that a nation of some resources was developing really potent weapons to use against me, and that there was a high probability that he would use them, I think you have to act preemptively.”

The story said Buffett declined to discuss what impact a war against Iraq would have on the economy. “People think I know what I’m talking about so I have to be careful.”

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Second Chance



283





PUBLIC POLICY


PUBLIC POLICY

In recent times, bumper stickers have appeared with this disclaimer: “Don’t Blame Me. I Voted for Buffett.” Another version runs, “Don’t blame me, I voted for Jimmy Buffett.”

Buffett has always been interested in public policy and politics. As far back as 1968, he served as the state chair for Senator Eugene McCarthy’s failed presidential campaign.

People may or may not agree with Buffett on public policy, but people take note of his ideas, which are widely quoted not only in financial, but also in political circles. A few rabid fans actually have written in Buffett for presidential elections.

Were Buffett a candidate for president, his platform would include population control and nuclear weapons disarmament. One way he addresses the population issue is by focusing a great amount of his charity efforts toward reproductive freedom. Buffett is prochoice. As for the arms issue, terror attacks from nuclear and biological weapons are “the plague of mankind,” Buffett says. One of his activities in the direction of arms control has been to support the establishment of an international nuclear fuel bank.

His concerns extend beyond the major issues of population control and nuclear weapon disarmament to health care reform, tax policy and reform, political elections, economic reform and stabilization, campaign finance reform with limits on “soft money” campaign contributions, gambling, and education.

For example, Buffett, along with U.S. Senator Bob Kerrey and some health care CEOs, had dinner at Senator Daniel Moynihan’s home in Washington, D.C. on November 24, 1993. The talks covered a number of issues. One topic of importance was the war on drugs. Everyone agreed it was a huge health care cost.

In 2001, President George W. Bush made an effort to repeal the estate tax. Ironically, a number of the nation’s super rich, including Buffett, stood up against the repeal. A number of people—George Soros, Paul Newman, Bill Gates Sr., and some Rockefellers—signed a letter of protest. Buffett, however, didn’t sign, saying he felt the letter didn’t go far enough. Buffett felt that the repeal of the estate tax might keep wealth in the hands of a few and stall efforts to make the U.S. even more of a meritocracy than it is.

In 2003, Buffett said that Bush’s plan to cut the dividend tax would benefit the rich unfairly. He told a group of senators that getting rid of the dividend tax, the centerpiece of Bush’s $726-billion tax-cut proposal, would slice Berkshire’s tax bill by $300 million, but he added that meant that he would pay proportionately less in taxes than his secretary (Bloomberg, March 13, 2003). Buffett and some other business leaders called on Congress not to pass an economic stimulus bill, particularly the provision repealing the tax on stock dividends. Buffett was quoted as saying, “There may be some stimulus needed, but I don’t think that the policy that’s been put forth is a good tax policy or a good stimulus policy.”

Going further, he wrote in a column in The Washington Post (May 20, 2003) that the plan to eliminate taxes on dividends amounted to “Voodoo Economics”—a term Bush’s father once used to describe trickle-down “Reaganomics.”

The Senate decided that the dividends an individual receives should be 50 percent free of tax in 2003, 100 percent tax-free in 2004 through 2006, and then again fully taxable in 2007. The mental flexibility the Senate demonstrated in crafting these zigzags is breathtaking. What it has put in motion, though, is clear: If enacted, these changes would further tilt the tax scales toward the rich …



Suppose this measure goes through and the directors of Berkshire Hathaway (which does not now pay a dividend) therefore decide to pay $1 billion in dividends next year. Owning 31% of Berkshire, I would receive $310 million in additional income, owe not another dime in federal tax, and see my tax rate plunge to 3%.



And our receptionist? She’d still be paying about 30 percent, which means she would be contributing about 10 times the proportion of her income that I would to such government pursuits as fighting terrorism, waging wars and supporting the elderly. Let me repeat the point: Her overall federal tax rate would be 10 times what my rate would be.



Fortune reported (August 11, 2003): “The U.S. Congress hangs on Buffett’s words too … just days before lawmakers voted on the Bush tax bill, Buffett wrote an op-ed piece in the The Washington Post that pointed out what he perceived as the folly of eliminating taxes on dividends. The tax cut, Buffett argued, would mostly benefit the wealthy. Powerful stuff coming from Buffett—powerful enough to persuade certain members of Congress to water down the final version of the tax cut.”

As for tax cuts, they don’t help much, especially if the cuts mainly assist the wealthy. But he doesn’t worry too much about some federal deficit spending because the assets of the country are so large. It is a problem though if debt constantly rises as a percentage of the economy.

“The country is so strong that you can do a lot of things, and it just moves along,” he says.

Over the years Buffett has helped Jews be admitted to the Omaha Club, raised money for peace candidate Eugene McCarthy (1968), and contributed small sums (so as not to be classified as soft money) to about a dozen or more political candidates.

Buffett appeared at a press conference on April 29, 2001, on behalf of Sen. Bob Kerrey. The story broke that in 1969 Sen. Kerrey led a SEAL squad raid in Vietnam in which women and children were killed. Kerrey was defended by Sen. John McCain in a piece in The Wall Street Journal. Buffett said at the press conference that he totally agreed with what McCain said and called Kerrey “a perfect friend.”

Buffett has supported Florida Sen. Bob Graham since he first ran for governor in 1978. Graham is the half-brother of Phil Graham, late husband of Washington Post’s Katharine Graham. Buffett has been a friend of the Graham family for decades.

A Business Week article (November 6, 2000) found that many CEO’s have spotty voting records, but credited Buffett as being a “sterling citizen,” who voted in every federal, state, and local election. In 2000, Buffett supported Al Gore over George W. Bush because of Gore’s stance on abortion rights and campaign-finance reform (The Wall Street Journal, November 2, 2000).

In an article for The Washington Post (September 14, 1993), Buffett wrote that one way to keep the federal deficit under control was to pass an amendment making legislators ineligible for re-election if during any year they served the deficit was more than 3% of GDP.

Buffett was among 19 CEOs who appeared in an ad in The Wall Street Journal on July 14, 1997, calling for an end to soft money donations to political campaigns (Omaha World-Herald, August 29, 1997).

His opinions about soft contributions were among those verified by the U.S. Supreme Court in 2003 as they heard arguments regarding the McCain-Feingold Campaign Finance Reform Act.

In a friend-of-the-court brief, attorneys for Buffett said he thought that even prominent business leaders—those perceived to benefit the most from access and influence purchased with soft money—do not wish to continue funding an unrestricted campaign arms race.

They referenced Buffett’s op-ed piece to The New York Times (September 10, 2000) in which Buffett recounted that a fundraising senator once jokingly told him, “Warren, contribute $10 million and you can get the colors of the American flag changed.”

Supporters of the McCain-Feingold Act say it would prevent corruption in

politics. But opponents argue it would criminalize free speech and the right of groups to associate with the government.

Over the years Buffett has backed various political candidates. including Bill Clinton. Other Democrats that Buffett has supported in addition to Kerrey are New York Senator Hillary Clinton, Florida Senator Bob Graham, and former presidential candidate Bill Bradley.

He has backed Republicans Chris Shays (R-Connecticut); Tom Osborne (R-Nebraska), the former University of Nebraska football coach; and Senator Nancy Kassebaum (R-Kansas).

In 2006, Buffett said he’d switch to the Republican party to vote for Osborne in his run for governor. Further, Buffett pledged to oversee Osborne’s proposed performance audit of state agencies and programs.

Buffett’s influence has extended to advising Gov. Schwarzenegger about California’s financial woes to prescribing ways for the U.S. to reduce its trade deficit, saying the country is becoming dangerously in hock to the rest of the world.

In a videotaped message shown November 20, 2003, Buffett addressed Nebraska state senators at their annual retreat, touching on a number of public policy issues. He told them, “I wouldn’t count on a big jump in the economy” (Sioux City Journal, November 22, 2003).

Concerning sales, property, and income tax, he said raising the tax on income is the most fair option. Buffett praised the lawmakers for their efforts to balance Nebraska’s budget, adding that “California tried to fix much of their budget with smoke and mirrors when we’ve done actual cutting and tax increases.” Buffett said he was against giving away the store to entice new business into the state.

As for casino gambling, he said it would be a good source of revenue for the state, however, he thought casino gambling was unjust because the people who spend the money there are the ones who can least afford it. “I wouldn’t blame you if you did it, but personally, I can’t support it” (Sioux City Journal, November 22, 2003). “If I was bored stiff in Las Vegas, I wouldn’t drop a dollar in a slot machine.” In 2004, Buffett gave $10,000 to help defeat two gambling proposals in Nebraska.

He and Nancy Osborne, wife of Nebraska Representative Tom Osborne, spoke out against gambling in TV announcements in 2004. Buffett said he has wagered on the golf course and even bought his children a slot machine when they were young because he wanted them to learn about gambling. At the 2007 Annual Meeting, Buffett related this story: “Now I can give my kids any allowance I want as long as it’s in dimes because I’ll have it back by nightfall and I had a lot of fun with it. But in the process I taught the kids a lesson: You can’t beat that machine.”

PRIVATE POLICY

If he could write one piece of legislation, it would be to require each person to send their children to public school. “If you think the cost of a good education system is high, I just invite you to look at the cost of a bad one,” he said.

Buffett has many views on raising children and the lessons they should learn. Probably his most famous view, regarded as eccentric by many parents, is that children should not inherit great wealth. He believes children should be left enough to cope with necessities but not really large amounts.

BUFFETT’S EFFORT TO CURB NUCLEAR FUEL

Buffett was part of a group that pledged $50 million to help set up an international nuclear fuel bank that countries could turn to for reactor fuel instead of making it on their own. His aim, press reports said, is to curb risks of nuclear proliferation by offering an alternative to the kind of in-country production of nuclear fuel that Iran and some other countries have been pursuing.

“The pledge is an investment in a safe world,” Buffett was quoted. Others joining the effort were CNN creator, Ted Turner, and former Senator Sam Nunn. Other donors include the U.S. and the European Union.

“The concept of a backup fuel reserve has been discussed for many years,” Buffett said. “Its creation is inherently a governmental responsibility, but I hope that this pledge of funds will support governments in taking action to get the concept off the ground.”

His pledge came at an international conference in Vienna (September 19, 2006) in which nations were exploring how to create multinational fuel banks as a way to aid nuclear development while avoiding new risks. The pledge was made to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Channeled through the Nuclear Threat Initiative based in Washington D.C., the money would be used to fund the nuclear fuel bank under the supervision of the IAEA.

The agency voted in 2010 to tap a $150-million fund to buy low-enriched uranium.

NONPROFIT IPO

Buffett bought the first share of the nation’s first nonprofit IPO in California when Homeward Bound of Marin (County) launched an effort to provide shelter for the homeless. However, rather than being an initial public offering of shares in a company, this IPO represented an “Immediate Public Opportunity.” Up to 200,000 fundraising shares were made available at $32 a share to finance the construction of affordable housing and a job-training complex in the Bay Area.

WOWING THE DEMOCRATS

In a rare appearance to headline a Democratic fundraising event in New York, Buffett drew huge praise among the 400 party donors.

“He wowed ’em. He wowed ’em,” Senator Chuck Schumer (D-NY) was quoted as saying (Omaha World-Herald, May 16, 2007). “Everyone said he just totally knocked their socks off.”

Senator Mary Landrieu (D-LA) was quoted as saying she found Buffett “so engaging and so enlightening.” She went on to say, “It was the first event I’ve ever gone to where the senators did not filibuster.”

Buffett talked for about two hours saying, in part, “The Democratic Party, overall, has a better sense about justice and opportunity.” Buffett planned to help both Senators Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama with fundraising efforts for their presidential bids, saying that both “would apply enormous energy toward the right goals.” He further stated, “Either would make a great president.”

On June 16, 2007, Buffett appeared with Senator Clinton at her fundraiser in New York, which raised more than $1 million. Then, on August 15, 2007, Buffett held a fundraiser for Senator Obama in Omaha. On December 11, 2007, Buffett held a second fundraiser for Senator Clinton—in San Francisco—again raising about $1 million.

At the Omaha fundraiser, Buffett brought down the house with this tale:

“(a) Trader goes home and tells his wife that they are really struggling, coming into a tough time. ‘Honey, if you could learn to cook, we could fire the chef.’ She says, ‘Yes, if you could just learn how to make love, we could fire the gardener.’ Buffett’s post-punchline: ‘What we’re gonna do is fire the administration.’”

But when it appeared that Obama was close to winning the Democratic nomination, Buffett backed Obama, saying, “He [Obama] is my choice.”

AGAINST ELIMINATING ESTATE TAXES, AGAIN

Buffett testified before the Senate Finance Committee on November 14, 2007, that he opposed eliminating the nation’s estate taxes as advocated by President Bush. Buffett said Congress should consider giving lower-income families (specifically 23 million households in the U.S. with an annual income of less than $20,000) a $1,000 annual tax credit rather than repealing the federal estate tax.

Buffett said that of the 2.4 million Americans who died in 2006, only about 12,000 paid estate tax. “You’d have to attend 200 funerals to be at one.”

A DOUBLE FUNDRAISER FOR OBAMA

Buffett played a doubleheader for Obama in Chicago July 2, 2008, by appearing at two $28,500 per person events. He was the headliner at a dinner at the home of Obama’s national finance chair and Hyatt hotel heiress, Penny Pritzker. Before the dinner, Buffett spoke on a 90-minute “economic roundtable” at the offices of John Rogers’s Ariel Investments.

Although an individual can give a maximum of $2,300 per candidate per election or $4,600 for a primary and general election, an individual can give up to $28,500 to the national party each calendar year. Since Obama had already been named the Democratic presidential nominee, the events basically raised about $2.75 million for Obama.

When interviewed for CNBC (July 9, 2008), Buffett said he had “some opinions on vice presidential candidates.” He added, “I think there’s four or five of them that I would be quite enthusiastic about, but I don’t think I’ll name them now [Laughs].”

The interview continued, digging for specifics:

CNBC: One or two?



Buffett: [Laughs] Well. No, I think I better not. I’ve given that information privately to some people.



CNBC: Do you think they’re going to take your advice?



Buffett: No. [Laughs]



Later Buffett told CNBC his choice for Obama’s vice-presidential running mate was former Georgia Senator Sam Nunn. Obama picked Delaware Senator Joe Biden.

MAYOR BLOOMBERG OR BUFFETT: NATIONAL ECONOMY CZAR

Buffett floated the idea that New York Mayor Mike Bloomberg ought to take the helm of a new nonpartisan federal agency to manage the nation’s financial crisis that threatened world markets in 2008. McCain posed the idea that maybe Buffett should be in on the job. Oilman T. Boone Pickens suggested Buffett as well.

TAXING THE RICH

After Buffett said in 2011 that the rich should be taxed more, President Obama proposed a new tax on those making more than $1 million a year.

The Administration wanted to call it “The Buffett Rule” and Buffett said that he was fine with that because “it’s what I believe in.”

Buffett hosted a fundraiser for Obama on October 2, 2011 at the Four Seasons restaurant in New York. The event raised $1.5 million for the president’s re-election campaign and Buffett held another fundraiser later same month at the home of investment banker Byron Trott in Winnetka, Illinois, on Lake Michigan’s shoreline. Filmmaker George Lucas attended.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Public Policy



Recommended Reading

Buffett recommends reading Graham Allison’s Nuclear Terrorism: The Ultimate Preventable Catastrophe.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Public Policy The Story of Warren Buffett



Pit Stop

This cartoon by Jeff Koterba ran in the Omaha World-Herald on August 19, 2007. “I’m sort of a political bigamist,” Buffett has said.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Public Policy



Obama and Buffett are shown talking at The Washington Post in 2008 (Daylife.com). The two met again in the Oval Office on July 14, 2010 to talk about economic policy. Details were few at first except for the tidbit that Obama gave Buffett a new red tie because the one he wore to the White House was frayed. Later Obama said that Buffett told him, “We went through a wrenching recession, and so we have a long way to go.” Obama said Buffett told him the collapse of housing prices was the cause. “What Warren pointed out was, look, we’re gonna get back to 1.2 million {homes being built a year}, but right now we’re soaking up a bunch of inventory.” On December 14, 2010, Buffett, Gates, and Melinda Gates, met with Obama at the White House about how to get the economy moving.



Buffett for President

This Omaha World-Herald (September 25, 2008) cartoon by Jeff Koterba shows Buffett’s ever-growing stature in the world.

(Photo by Mary Porter)



284





TAXES: BUFFETT, OBAMA, BOSANEK, AND TIME MAGAZINE


It’s well known that Buffett advocates higher taxes for the rich. He has said that’s the logical place to get the money and he’s also said it’s unfair for his tax rate to be lower than his secretary’s.

To correct things, Buffett has said he and other wealthy people should pay higher taxes. President Obama has agreed and has proposed a “Buffett Rule” that would impose higher taxes on those making more than $1 million a year.

In Obama’s effort to set up a deficit reduction plan, he proposed higher taxes on the rich and went on to say, “Warren Buffett’s secretary shouldn’t pay a higher tax rate than Warren Buffett.”

That triggered frantic calls by reporters to reach Buffett’s administrative assistant, Debbie Bosanek, who had nothing to say to the deluge of reporters requesting interviews. Still, viral videos sprang up on the Internet, some saying, “I’m Warren Buffett’s secretary.” The videos gave a look into the lives of ordinary Americans and became a sort of commercial for a tax-the-rich campaign. Bosanek was portrayed as a heroine of the middle class getting a raw deal on taxes.

Bosanek won global fame for one news cycle before things quieted down.

At the height of the swirling publicity, Bosanek put a message on her voice mail that said she was out of the office for two weeks consulting with her tax advisor.

As curiosity rose about Buffett’s assistant, Slate.com mentioned a photo of her was on a Web site run by Berkshire shareholder Marlin Stockwell, who lives in Trinity, Florida. Afterwards, Stockwell reported that almost 5,000 people hit on his site in an apparent effort to find out more about her. “They were from all over the world,” Stockwell said. “From Switzerland, Sweden, Turkey, China, Australia, Austria, Germany, France and England—everywhere.” Bosanek’s photo is on the Berkshire Hatahaway page of Stockwell’s website, Marlinsweb.com.

INGENIOUS TAX SYSTEM: CONTRIBUTIONS

Buffett offered to match voluntary contributions by congressional Republicans during an interview with Time magazine.

Buffett has criticized the tax system as favoring the rich and after some Republicans, including U.S. Representative Michelle Bachmann, said if Buffett wants to address the deficit problem then why didn’t he hand over his fortune to the government.

“If we go to a contribution system, I’ll match the total contribution made by all Republican members of Congress and I’ll even go 3-for-1 with McConnell,” referring to Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell.

Buffett has called for tax increases on the wealthy, but McConnell has said tax hikes on job creators would be counterproductive.

“It’s kind of touching, this faith he [McConnell] has in the American public, with a $1.2 or $1.3 trillion deficit, that he thinks Americans are so wonderfully spirited that they would just solve it all by contributions. That’s a tax policy ‘only a Republican could come up with.’”

Time noted that if McConnell takes up the challenge, he’s worth at least $10 million. Replied Buffett: “I’m not worried.”

A McConnell spokesman said Buffett should look to Democrats for deficit reduction contributions. Congressman Scott Rigell (R-Va.) reportedly offered to contribute and wrote Buffett, “I appreciate and gladly accept your generous offer to match contributions ... I voluntarily contribute 15% of my congressional salary to pay down the debt,” adding, “My contribution in 2012 will be approximately $26,100.” Buffett wrote (Fox News, January 18, 2012) that he was “delighted to match” Rigell’s 2011 and 2012 contributions which totalled about $49,000.

Rigell and Buffett met in Omaha on January 23, 2012 and reports said that Buffett had decided to up the ante with an offer to donate 15% of his annual income if at least 50 Capital Hill lawmakers do the same. Buffett’s adjusted gross income the previous year was about $63 million. If the deal were to come to pass, his donation would be about $9 million.



Tax Me I Will



Bosanek’s New Uniform

After the tax hoopla, a friend gave Bosanek this “I pay a higher tax rate than Warren” T-shirt, which she wears to World Headquarters on occasion.

(Photo courtesy of Debbie Bosanek)



No Comment

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Taxes



Marlin Stockwell

(Photo courtesy of Marlin Stockwell)



Time Magazine Cover —The Optimist, January 23, 2012

(Photo by Mary Porter)



285





PUMPING UP ARNOLD’S CAMPAIGN


Bodybuilder-turned-action-film-star-turned-California-governor-candidate, Arnold Schwarzenegger, tapped Warren Buffett to become his economic adviser for his dramatic run for the top political post in the nation’s most-populated state.

While the land of Schwarzenegger is the country’s richest state, it is also beset by seemingly intractable financial problems that only a monumental effort could mend.

“If Warren Buffett thinks Arnold Schwarzenegger has the chops to run the world’s sixth largest economy, I would take that as quite an endorsement,” political analyst Bill Whalen of Stanford University’s Hoover Institution was quoted as saying.

Schwarzenegger, a Republican, and Buffett, a Democrat, seem to be an odd couple; yet they’ve been friends since the mid-1990s.

For Buffett, this was a case of out of Omaha and off to Hollywood.

“I have known Arnold for years and know he’ll be a great governor. It is critical to the rest of the nation that California’s economic crisis be solved, and I think Arnold will get the job done,” Buffett said in a statement.

Buffett added, “It’s up to Arnold. If he asks me for ideas, I’ll be glad to help supply them.” But he admitted there were no magical ideas that would solve California’s budget crisis. “They [Schwarzenegger and his campaign team] don’t need my ideas. They need good ideas, and if the two coincide, that’s fine” (Omaha World-Herald, August 15, 2003).

“What Buffett will be doing is assembling other prominent leaders and economists and setting up a team to address the issues facing California,” a Schwarzenegger spokesman said.

Schwarzenegger also named George Shultz to the team. Shultz served as Secretary of State under President Reagan from 1982 to 1989, and his sterling résumé includes a stint as professor at Stanford Business School. (His résumé includes listings of many other prominent institutions and positions, such as Princeton, Marine Corps, MIT, University of Chicago, Secretary of Labor, Director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), Secretary of Treasury, Bechtel Corp., and Hoover Institution, is only slightly less impressive than Ben Franklin’s).

Schwarzenegger has described Buffett as “the greatest investor ever, my mentor, and my hero” (The Wall Street Journal, August 14, 2003).

In his own right, Hollywood’s Schwarzenegger has been an excellent businessman reaping millions from movies and generally investing well in the stock market and real estate. However, his foray into the Planet Hollywood restaurant business with Bruce Willis and Sylvester Stallone was a flop. Buffett has been quoted as saying he did not understand the rationale for that business.

Buffett suggested in an interview (The Wall Street Journal, August 15, 2003) that raising California’s property taxes might be a way to solve the state’s massive budget crisis. Buffett suggested California property taxes should be higher but stopped short of calling for a repeal of Proposition 13. (See Buffett’s response to this Journal story in the next chapter.)

California’s Proposition 13, passed in 1978, long has limited property tax hikes.

The Journal quoted Buffett as having said his home in Omaha is valued at about $500,000 with a tax bill of $14,401; but his California home in Laguna Beach, worth about $4 million, or eight times as much, has property taxes of only $2,264.

Buffett added that, taxes on his Omaha house rose $1,920 during the previous year, compared with a $23 rise on the Laguna Beach home.

In the interview, Buffett also said people had approached Berkshire Hathaway in recent months on behalf of California, seeking to secure buyers for the state’s bonds if necessary. A crucial subject for California to address has been the rapidly sinking credit of its bonds, which trade at near junk bond levels.

“California was looking in the financial market for, in effect, a ‘put,’ or guarantee, by financial institutions that they would be able to come to market with bonds about nine months hence,” Buffett said. California was willing to pay 75 basis points, or about $80 million, to firms such as Berkshire if they would agree to buy between $10 billion and $11 billion in bonds.

“That’s a lot of money to pay for a put,” Buffett continued. “It’s a couple bucks for every citizen of California.” A year earlier, the fee for such a put was just 18 basis points Buffett noted. “I thought about doing it,” he said, but he decided against it. Berkshire, he said, “owns no California bonds.”

Schwarzenegger, Buffett, and Shultz held a press conference in Los Angeles on August 20, 2003. Buffett said California was suffering from the worst credit rating in the nation, using a credit card that was no longer acceptable, coupled with the cost of debt service spiraling ever higher. Shultz said the issue boiled down to one four-letter word: jobs, or the creation of them. Schwarzenegger said the problem was not insufficient taxes but overspending by politicians, and that California needed to reclaim its birthright as a “place of great dreams.”

Schwarzenegger took exception to the idea Buffett floated about raising property taxes: “From the time they [Californians] get up in the morning and flush the toilet, they’re taxed. When they go to get coffee, they’re taxed. When they get in their car, they’re taxed. When they go to the gas station, they’re taxed. When they go to lunch, they’re taxed. This goes on all day long. Tax. Tax. Tax. Tax. Tax.”

The Tax Terminator said that short of an earthquake or a terrorist attack, taxes in California would not be raised in his administration. “I told Warren if he mentions [anything against] Prop 13 [which keeps taxes in check] one more time, he has to do 500 sit-ups.”

“Since then, Buffett has not uttered a word about Proposition 13. ‘Warren didn’t have to be told—seeing the firestorm his remarks created—that it wasn’t an idea whose time had come,’ said Robert Denham. The Los Angeles lawyer whom Buffett had brought in to help rescue the scandal-plagued Salomon investment bank in 1991; Denham later became a Schwarzenegger financial adviser. ‘I was delighted, though, that Warren said it, because at least it reminded people that there’s this giant gorilla in the closet that has to be dealt with sometime.’ He paused and added, somewhat ruefully, ‘Don’t know when and how’” (New Yorker, June 28, 2004).

Berkshire has interests in California, including stakes in Wesco Financial Corp., See’s Candies, and Wells Fargo. Others include MidAmerican’s Kern River Transmission Co. which operates a pipeline that feeds into the San Joaquin Valley near Bakersfield.

“The truth is California has got very serious financial problems. It’s an economy that’s the size of France and there’s no way the U.S. is going to have a healthy economy if California continues to have the problems it has,” Buffett said. “I’ve got a selfish interest in this country doing well, no doubt about that” (The Wall Street Journal, August 15, 2003).

If the tax problems weren’t complicated enough, California faces huge economic black clouds from a variety of fronts including the high costs of a global recession, port closings, energy, and workers’ compensation. Costco, the largest wholesale club operator in the U.S., which traces its corporate beginnings to San Diego more than 25 years ago, said it may have to cut jobs in California because of the state’s skyrocketing workers’ compensation costs (Reuters, September 7, 2003). As of the end of 2002, Berkshire owned a small stake in Costco on whose board vice chairman Charles Munger serves.

The workers’ compensation cost in California has ballooned from $9 billion in 1995 to $29 billion in 2003, prompting Costco and other businesses to consider moving operations out of state unless the troubled insurance system is fixed. Costco delivered 50 boxes containing 150,000 signatures to Governor Gray Davis, California’s troubled governor at that time, and state legislators urging the system be reformed.

If that weren’t enough, gasoline prices in the state are extremely high. A link exists between taxes and energy in California because the state had to go into the power-buying business after the two largest utilities lost their creditworthiness in 2000–2001. Much of the then state budget surplus went to pay for expensive electricity. Some of that was going to come back through legal proceedings against the power suppliers, some of whom went bankrupt. Some will come back through electric rates, but there’s still a gap which contributes to the budget shortfall. California tried an especially high-wire version and got burned by a combination of their own mistakes, market manipulation, and weather.

Overall, California is becoming known not so much for its sunny skies as for the black cloud over its business climate and the ever present threat of litigations.

With the bust in Silicon Valley where billions of dollars were lost in the high-tech bubble (not to mention the potential higher tax revenues that would have been forthcoming had the businesses fared better), some businessmen at the board level were saying: “California is hostile to business,” and, “Not one more dollar for capital expenditures in California.”

Columnist Robert Novak reported (Chicago Sun-Times, August 24, 2003) that Donald Trump had telephoned his friend Schwarzenegger and told him to get rid of Buffett as his economic adviser if he wanted to be elected governor of California.

Team Schwarzenegger faced a daunting task.

Buffett said workable solutions must be found for the sake of California as well as the nation, but he took a heap of criticism for his property tax idea launched in The Wall Street Journal (August 15, 2003).

But Schwarzenegger stuck with his choice. Donald Luskin, CIO of Trend Macrolytics, wrote the Journal:

Some have speculated that Mr. Buffett would bring Wall Street credibility to a Schwarzenegger administration that will have to peddle $10 billion in bonds. That’s a fantasy. Wall Street won’t mistakenly believe that Mr. Buffett knows anything about public finance, just because he’s made some smart investments in razor blades. Mr. Buffett will be at a similar loss to advise Mr. Schwarzenegger on reinvigorating California’s sputtering growth engine, considering its high-tech sector. Berkshire’s chief has famously said, “Technology is something we just don’t understand.”



Jack Valenti, CEO of Motion Picture Association of America, wrote a rebuttal that was subsequently published in The Journal (August 25, 2003):

The best Mr. Luskin could do was to quote Mr. Buffett saying, “Technology is something we just don’t understand.” Well, of course, I was present when Mr. Buffett essentially said he was leery of investing in any company whose business he did not understand and whose durable assets he could not find, answering a query as to why he hadn’t put money into the dot.coms then riding an ever-rising curve, which of course was never going to come down. A few months later the bubble burst and the smart gurus were buried in the debris of emaciated high-tech enterprises flailing about like dry leaves in a high wind. So whose financial advice would you value most, Mr. Buffett’s or the CFO’s who put the knock on him and whose dot.com stock options now sleep with the fishes?



Buffett later minimized his role in the Schwarzenegger campaign, saying he was only one of 18 economic advisers. “He’s serious about taking in everybody’s views, and mine is just one of 18,” Buffett said at a groundbreaking ceremony for a Berkshire-owned MidAmerican electricity plant in Council Bluffs, Iowa (Associated Press, September 9, 2003).

Buffett answered questions about how seriously Schwarzenegger was taking his advice but declined to comment about Proposition 13. He did, however, joke: “I couldn’t do 500 sit-ups between now and the election.”

A federal appeals court panel of three judges postponed California’s October 7, 2003, election saying the vote shouldn’t occur because of the use of outmoded punch-card ballot machines like those in Florida that caused such a controversy in the presidential election in 2000 between George W. Bush and Al Gore. Later, an 11-judge panel of the appeals court ruled the October 7 date should stand.

The bizarre campaign gave birth to many memorable lines, but none better than the one from former Texas Governor Ann Richards. Campaigning for Governor Davis, she pointed out that California was not alone in its financial struggle: “I know you all are worried about the economy in California, but I want to assure you that it’s all over the country. In fact in Texas the price of gas has gone up so high that women who want to run over their husbands are carpooling.”

The some 135 candidates running for governor of California in 2003 included a porn marketer, a comedian, a Sumo wrestler, a former child actor, and a stripper.

Schwarzenegger, amidst allegations he groped women, acknowledged that some of the incidents were true and apologized for past bad behavior.

But once the votes were counted, it was a Hollywood ending for Schwarzenegger. The small-town boy from Austria, ambitious for fame and power in America, had written a big chapter in his life as he ascended to governorship of the mighty state of California.

“I came here with absolutely nothing, and California has given me absolutely everything. And today, California has given me the greatest gift. You have given me your trust by voting for me,” he said.

By a 55% vote, the recall effort to oust Governor Davis succeeded. Schwarzenegger, with his outsized personality, won a smashing 48% of the vote to become the Golden State’s governor. He was sworn into office on November 7, 2003. Buffett was among the 9,800 invitation-only guests, along with such celebrities as Danny DeVito, Jamie Lee Curtis, Linda Hamilton, and Vanessa Williams, who sang the national anthem.

Buffett and Schwarzenegger met for lunch in New York on February 25, 2004, to try to sell Wall Street on a proposal for a $15-billion bond sale, a difficult proposition with California’s triple B credit rating, the lowest of the U.S. states and the same risk rate as bonds sold by South Africa and Tunisia.

The luncheon was attended by money men from such financial powerhouses as Goldman Sachs, Citigroup, and J.P. Morgan. With about 25 of Wall Street’s most powerful executives listening, Schwarzenegger talked about the disclosure as to how many years the $15-billion bond should be spread over, saying that California legislature leaders were seated at a conference table arguing whether the bond offering should stretch out to only seven years, or to 15 or 20. “And I said, ‘Guys, I have somebody who may be a better expert than we all are,’ and I just pressed the button and there was Warren Buffett on the phone. He explained in five minutes why it was better to have a 15-year bond, and he cleared up the whole thing” (Reuters, February 25, 2004).

When Buffett addressed the New York luncheon, he likened Schwarzenegger’s first 100 days in office to those of Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s first days in 1933 at the height of the Great Depression: “Arnold has just finished 100 days yesterday, and he has replicated in Sacramento what Franklin D. Roosevelt did in Washington.”

On March 2, 2004, Californians passed Proposition 57, allowing the state to borrow up to $15 billion in bonds to refinance the state’s existing debt in what would be the largest municipal-bond offering ever.

As for Schwarzenegger’s start as governor, Buffett said, “He’s landed on Normandy Beach. He hasn’t marched through France yet. But the result will be the same—victory” (Fortune, August 9, 2004).

In 2004, Schwarzenegger created a new group called the Council of Economic Advisors. Eight of the 16 members serve as Fellows of the Hoover Institution at Stanford University. Former U.S. Secretary of State George Shultz is co-chair of the group with Buffett. Also on the council is Robert Denham, a partner of the Munger, Tolles & Olson law firm and former Salomon chairman.

Schwarzenegger was reelected in 2006. He has found California’s financial situation to be tougher to deal with than he initially believed, making it necessary to change his tone from negative to positive when saying tax, tax, tax, tax, tax.



Threat of 500 Sit-Ups

California gubernatorial candidate Arnold Schwarzenegger, former President Reagan’s Secretary of State George Shultz, and Buffett held a press conference in Los Angeles on August 20, 2003. Schwarzenegger said that Shultz was to his right and Buffett to his left for a reason, and he joked that if Buffett said anything else against Proposition 13, he was going to have to do 500 sit-ups. Seated at the conference table in this picture may be the best résumé, the best body, and the best mind in the land.

(AP/Wide World Photos)

The Story of Warren Buffett





Arnold

“Buffett believes that Schwarzenegger’s ability to virtually will himself into stardom stems directly from bodybuilding. ‘Have you ever lifted weights?’ Buffett asks. ‘When he talks about that last rep, you know, when you’ve curled however many pounds 16 times and your body’s screaming at you—he did that. He always visualized success... That really is the kind of thinking that gets things done. If you think you’re going to succeed, you will.’

“As it turns out, Buffett and Schwarzenegger had something in common. As a kid, Buffett was so taken with weightlifting that he twice hitchhiked from his home in Washington, D.C., to the York Barbell Company in York, Pennsylvania, to hang out with, as he puts it, ‘the gods of weightlifting’ and their legendary coach, ‘Uncle Bob’ Hoffman. ‘I didn’t do that last rep, though.’ laughs Buffett. ‘I had to find others ways to impress the girls’” (Fortune, August 9, 2004).

82Of Permanent Value Pumping Up Arnold’s Campaign

In 2010, Jennifer Bestor wrote to Buffett about her reserach showing that Proposition 13 has shifted the state’s property tax burden away from commercial land owners with adverse consequences to schools, towns, and public utilities. Ms. Bestor urged Buffett to take up the cause again. Bestor wrote, “Please let me know how I can help you with the sit-ups,” according to a story in the Almanac News (April 2, 2010).

Buffett wrote back, “Dear Jennifer: I’m going to be 80 in August. 500 sit-ups are out of the question. If you get me in trouble promise me that you will do at least half of them.”

She wrote back to him to ask if she could publicize the letter and he replied, “If you publicize my first letter, maybe we’d even get 498 volunteers who will each contribute one sit-up and thereby bring our requirement to a manageable level.”

Pumping Up Arnold’s Campaign The Story of Warren Buffett

Power Couple

Arnold Schwarzenegger and Maria Shriver, a network journalist and member of the Kennedy family, were introduced by Tom Brokaw. Schwarzenegger made

his surprise announcement to run for governor on August 6, 2003, on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno. Buffett, apparently liking what he heard, couldn’t resist endorsing Arnold. The couple separated after 25 years of marriage shortly after Schwarzenegger served two terms as governor.



(WireImages.com Photos)

82Of Permanent Value Pumping Up Arnold’s Campaign



The Stuff of Movies

Arnold Schwarzenegger, with his wife, Maria Shriver, beside him, enjoys a victory celebration October 7, 2003, after decisively winning the race to become governor of California. Members of the Kennedy and Shriver families and Jay Leno (“Tonight is a testament to just how important one appearance on the Tonight Show can be.”) joined the former Mr. Universe for the big moment as Schwarzenegger proclaimed, “I won’t let you down.”

(AP/Wide World Photos)

Pumping Up Arnold’s Campaign The Story of Warren Buffett



A Dynamic Duo

Deja Vu—Buffett is back with the help of the Terminator, a.k.a. Arnold Schwarzenegger, a customer of Berkshire Hathaway’s NetJets. Here Buffett and his personal I’ll-be-back trainer entered Waddesdon Manor in London on September 23, 2002, to attend a NetJets business forum for Europe’s elite. In 2003, Buffett became an economic adviser for the Terminator’s campaign for governor of California. After a rollicking political race, the action-film star ousted incumbent Gray Davis.

(AP/Wide World Photos)

82Of Permanent Value Pumping Up Arnold’s Campaign



286





THE SONS OF STANFORD


Revered Stanford Business School in California long has been seen as a bastion of efficient-market thinking. Indeed, two finance professors, Bill Sharpe and Myron Scholes, have won Nobel prizes—a record for business schools—by advocating that markets are efficient, and that stock prices accurately reflect all information. However, another Stanford faculty member, Professor Jack McDonald teaches that markets are not always efficient, and that discrepancies can occur which allow a serious student of fundamental investing to buy a dollar for 50 cents.

“Jack is lonely at Stanford,” both Buffett and Charles Munger have said of McDonald. He is the only professor at Stanford teaching fundamental investing, value investing, offering a bottom-up, company-oriented approach.

Using such texts as Benjamin Graham’s The Intelligent Investor (1949), Phil Fisher’s Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits (1958), and Charles Mackay’s Extraordinary Popular Delusions (1841), McDonald believes that gaps of value can be ferreted out. Those willing to do the homework of examining the intrinsic value, the real worth, of an enterprise and comparing it with its market price, may be able to capture the gap in value.

For 40 years (since 1968), McDonald has taught investment and finance classes (sort of like a Cal Ripkin of finance), with a little help from his friends.

Buffett, Munger, and Fisher, who have all spoken to McDonald’s classes over the years, say that while the market may be largely efficient, it is not always so. Buffett has taught one class regularly with McDonald at Stanford for more than 30 years, Munger has taught a class in recent years, and Fisher, a longtime friend, gave his last talk to McDonald’s class in 2000 at the age of 93.

Fisher, who was born in 1907 and died in 2004, had been a student at Stanford Business School in 1929.

McDonald’s connection with Buffett came about by personal introduction: “In the mid-1970s, I was introduced to Warren and Susie Buffett by Stanford’s Dean Arjay Miller, who served on the board of The Washington Post with Warren,” said McDonald. “Peter Buffett was a student of music at Stanford.

“Warren Buffett has been coming to my classes since 1976 when the Berkshire stock price was $60. A whole generation of Stanford MBAs has learned from Warren’s great wisdom in the classroom. Berkshire’s stock price has increased more than 1,000-fold since Warren first taught with me at Stanford.”

Buffett has kidded McDonald that the two of them have been “teaching together for more than 10% of the history of the country.”

As for Munger’s contributions, McDonald said, “Charlie is great in class and has been a terrifically wise and tough-minded lecturer in my investment classes.”

Born in Stockton, California, McDonald went to Stanford University, where he earned a BS in engineering. He began his career with Hewlett-Packard while continuing his education and received an MBA at Stanford in 1962. After U.S. Army duty as an officer in the 25th Infantry Division and a year’s work as an analyst, he returned to Stanford and completed his PhD in 1967. McDonald, a Fulbright Scholar, has also been a visiting professor at Columbia and Harvard. For years, he has been a successful investor.

McDonald caught the fundamental investing bug from Phil Fisher, a classmate of McDonald’s late father, Earl, in the year of the Great Crash of 1929. Fisher was asked in the early 1960s to come to Stanford to teach investment management because of the success of his book, Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits. Fisher taught for two years, and McDonald was fortunate to be his student.

Fisher, in his 90s and ill when he last spoke to McDonald’s class in 2000, emphasized, as always, the importance of looking at suppliers, customers, and competitors, but “first is outstanding management” (Outstanding Investor Digest, Volume XV Number 7, 2000). Fisher said he didn’t want a lot of good stocks, but rather a few outstanding stocks. “I believe strongly in diversification, but I do not believe in over-diversifying.… My basic theory is to know a few companies and know them really well.”

Since 1968, McDonald has taught MBA courses and executive programs in three subject areas: investment management, entrepreneurial finance/private equity, and corporate finance; all with a global perspective (e.g., case studies of Honda and Porsche).

As the Industrial Bank of Japan Professor of Finance, McDonald places a special emphasis in his courses on a global perspective in equity investing. Many of his students are from Japan, Korea, China, and Taiwan, as well as the U.S., Europe, and Latin America.

In 1989, McDonald was named Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the National Association of Securities Dealers, which owned the NASDAQ Stock Market.

In the interview, McDonald stated that he agrees with Warren Buffett: “The essentials of financial analysis and the basic tools and disciplines that one must learn in becoming a fundamental investor are not really all that new. They are essentially the same as they were 30 years ago, although the setting continually changes.

“I am a big believer in the case method, and I love to write new cases. Our problem today as equity investors is not one of the technology or the latest quantitative method; our problem is one of learning discipline and execution as investors in real life, in a changing world. Through new cases, I am proud to teach the classes fundamentals stressed years ago by Benjamin Graham and Philip A. Fisher ...

“I am personally convinced that corporate finance skills must come first—that is, understanding how companies work as viewed from the vantage point of the chief executive officer and the chief financial officer, who are trying to balance the needs for investment and financing and allocate capital so as to achieve the business objectives of the company and create value for shareholders. Those skills are primary. That was the case 30 years ago; I believe it is still the case today.”

McDonald’s wife, Melody, went to an East Coast business school: Harvard. After earning a doctorate in musicology at Stanford on the West Coast, she switched to investing, earning her MBA in 1986, where she marched at the head of her class into graduation in Harvard’s 350th year. She was the Harvard Business School Class Marshall, the second woman ever to have that honor. She joined RCM Capital Management in 1986 and is a managing director there. In May 2002, President George W. Bush appointed her to the seven-person Advisory Board of the government’s Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp. (PBGC) in Washington, D.C., which looks after defined benefit pension plans. She was named by Bush as chair of that advisory committee in 2004.

The McDonalds celebrated their 37th anniversary in 2010.

TOM RUSSO

One of McDonald’s students in the early 1980s was Tom Russo. Russo is a partner with the Gardner Russo Gardner firm in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and runs Semper Vic Partners. Russo helps manage about $3 billion.

In an interview, Russo shared a McDonald metaphor that helped him steer clear of dangerous single-parameter investing:

Investment insight which helped me most to avoid such single-parameter investing during the heady days of the Internet bubble was provided by my investments professor at Stanford Business School. Professor McDonald has long distinguished himself, teaching fundamental principles of investment analysis to students... a remarkable feat, considering that Stanford is known as a home for Modern Portfolio Theorists, for whom fundamental analysis is largely irrelevant. (After all, since markets are efficient, then why bother analyzing individual companies.) Professor McDonald, however, provides in his investment course a metaphor which, if applied, would have allowed investors to stay clear of most of the air pockets caused by the single-minded investment emphasis of the past several years.



Investing, Professor McDonald maintains, is like piloting an aircraft. To arrive safely, one must scan all dashboard gauges simultaneously, never fixing on any one. Single-minded focus on the speedometer can only assure adequate speed. Failure to simultaneously observe the altimeter, however, might lead one to fly quickly into a hill. While a well-timed look at the compass will assure that you remain on course, failure to observe the fuel gauge could lead to running out of fuel. A look at the gyroscope can help assure that you are flying on an even keel, but not that you are flying fast enough to stay aloft. An occasional simple scan away from the dashboard altogether could keep one away from obviously threatening storm clouds on the horizon, and so on.… Not one of the above gauges alone is sufficient. All are collectively essential.



Scanning has similar value to investors. Singular emphasis on growth rates of revenue or of earnings per share is no different than focusing on speed alone, as managements can show growth in both without having an eye towards long-term direction of their company. More importantly, without regard to the balance sheet to check up on cash levels, an investor might find that one’s seemingly fast-moving investment runs out of money, with consequences of crashing and burning, as has happened recently to countless formerly high-flying stocks when their underlying business “ran out” of financial fuel.



Born in Janesville, Wisconsin, Russo graduated from Dartmouth before heading to Stanford. He tells of the day Buffett showed up in McDonald’s classroom. “He said to think of two ships departing from England—one a row boat and the other the Queen Mary. As they headed to the U.S., the row boat grew to become a Queen Mary and the Queen Mary gradually became a row boat.” Buffett made the analogy to businesses that prosper by good management, focus, and wise reinvestment in contrast to those that decline for lack of attention and execution. Boat 1, said Buffett, was Capital Cities, a business constantly growing under the management of Tom Murphy, and Boat 2 was ABC, a business gradually losing market share. Five years after Buffett made these comments—and using those names specifically at that time—for boats 1 and 2—Cap Cities bought ABC.

Russo recalls another example of Buffett’s simple responses. It occurred when fellow student Terry O’Toole asked Buffett a question. Buffett had been talking about the willingness to work for free as long as you work at your passion. O’Toole, a top student, asked what Buffett would do if he wanted a job in media, and Buffett said, “Well, the best businessman in media is Tom Murphy of Cap Cities,” indicating what Buffett later stated—work for someone you admire. O’Toole then went to see Murphy but wound up having a distinguished career as a partner and principal investor at Goldman Sachs.

Buffett told the class that Wall Street rarely realizes whether a business is really growing or slowing, but he said that Bill Ruane and the folks at the Sequoia Fund (ironically where Russo worked from 1984 to 1988) understood which direction businesses were moving.

Russo, who earned a combination MBA and law degree from Stanford in 1984, says being a lawyer is an asset to being an investor. “It’s building a case for why to make an investment.” He adds that people might ask a standard set of questions about an investment, but it’s the art of listening to the answers that’s the key. “You’ve got to say, ‘Wait a minute, what did you just say?’”He went on to say that “The study of law provides a way to listen for the important responses.” He’s skeptical when he’s told that he should look at losses to see how well the company is investing, or promises of 50% over market returns. At that point, he knows to run for the hills.

“Jack provided cases highlighting the investment process. It might be in electronics distribution, exploring capital spending that was out of control and leading to financial distress,” Russo says.

Russo, whose Semper Vic Fund (which holds 250 Berkshire shares) had returned more than 17% annually over the years, says it is because McDonald has been an investor himself that makes him somebody who can “do” rather than just “talk.” He walks the walk.

Years ago, McDonald made a successful investment in a French champagne firm, Veuve Clicquot, by recognizing that valuable acreage, reserves, and global distribution network were not shown on the balance sheet.

McDonald, who taught the Veuve Clicquot case to Russo, summarized it this way: “In the 1960s, I wrote an investment case in France on Veuve Clicquot Champagne, the last of the Big Three Champagne companies to come public in an initial public offering (IPO) in Paris (Moët and Mumm, Nos. 1 and 2, were already public). I bought some shares after the IPO in Paris in the 1960s; I spoke French and taught at the French business school HEC before joining the Stanford faculty. The Veuve Clicquot case is a classic long-term valuation case, with some good comparable companies to study. Positive factors: The Champagne land, the franchise value as a luxury goods platform, sustainable growth potential, good management, and reasonable stock valuation made Veuve Clicquot a great long-term holding with a large ‘margin of safety.’ VCC eventually became a part of LVMH—[Louis Vuitton Moet Hennessey], and we made about 70x our money on VCC over more than two decades of investor patience, and of teaching the Veuve Clicquot [Widow Clicquot] case study.”

McDonald’s emphasis on foreign investments has stuck with Russo. Indeed, one of Russo’s biggest and longest holdings is Weetabix, a British cereal company he feels has traded significantly below intrinsic value. Weetabix was bought out at a significant premium in 2003 by private equity firm Hicks, Muse, Tate & Furst.

Generally, Russo likes to stick to investments in the food, beverage, tobacco, and media sectors. That’s his circle of competence, a concept Buffett teaches.

Another successful investment of Russo’s has been The Washington Post. In an interview with Barron’s (September 16, 2002), with The Post trading at $626 a share, Russo estimated the breakup value of between $800 and $900 a share. He advocated its shares because the company uses conservative accounting and expenses options, maintains a hugely overfunded pension fund, and has an investment in Berkshire stock. Russo also said he favors family-owned companies because they generally allocate capital well and will deploy new cash for the benefit of owners rather than managers.

Russo said McDonald also stressed in class that one should not be so caught up with success and money as not to allow “following your one folly.” McDonald tells his students that his folly is golf.

OK, Tom, what’s your folly? “Well, I’m looking for mine. It’s my family. It’s not a folly, but it’s a pursuit.”

Russo is a member of the California Bar Association and Board of Visitors for Stanford Law School and is a charter member of the Advisory Board for the Heilbrunn Center for Graham & Dodd Investing at Columbia Business School.

BILL OBERNDORF

Bill Oberndorf, originally of Cleveland, Ohio, graduated from Williams College in 1975 and Stanford Business School in 1978. He then joined another Stanford Business School graduate, John Scully, who was running Texas Partners.

Texas Partners, founded in 1971 by former Stanford business students Sid Bass, Richard Rainwater, and John Scully, morphed into Main Street Partners with Texas investor Robert Bass. Oberndorf participated in originating the investments made by the Bass Brothers in the group’s public and private equity investments.

In 1991, Oberndorf became a managing director of SPO Partners of Mill Valley, California. SPO stands for former Stanford business students John Scully, Bill Patterson, and Bill Oberndorf.

The 30-year investment record (1971–2000) for Texas Partners and Main Street Partners is 30% (before fees and expenses). In late 2001, SPO II Partners was formed and has had positive returns in a sharply dropping market.

“Buffett was on the advisory council of Stanford Business School along with people such as Katharine Graham and Robert McNamara,” Oberndorf said. “In the spring of 1978, a handful of students had a sandwich lunch with Buffett, and he also spoke to Jack’s class at that time. He was less well-known then. He talked about how buying a dollar for 50 cents was easier than trying to make a dollar out of 10 cents.” Oberndorf said he was immediately struck by Buffett’s different mind-set and clear focus, and how Buffett was trying to analyze something that already existed and figure out how to close a gap to the real worth. In doing so, a dollar could turn into $2, $3, or $4.

“The clarity of what he was saying and the combination of humility and sense of humor had a great impact on me,” said Oberndorf, who has followed Buffett’s career as a Berkshire shareholder.

“He and I have never made an overlapping investment,” said Oberndorf, even though value investing is what both do.

One investment Oberndorf originated in 1982 was Pier 39, a real estate shopping endeavor on the wharf in San Francisco, a successful business today.

Oberndorf took part in a classic 1991 investment in Plum Creek Timber Company of Seattle, which owned large tracts of timber lands in Oregon, Washington, Idaho, and Montana. “It was actually Jack’s idea,” said Oberndorf. The investment was made during the Spotted Owl controversy with environmentalists fretting over the bird’s fate. “Government-owned timber was off the market. It was closed to timber harvesting,” Oberndorf said. Private timberland became much more valuable because 60% of the market (the government land) was closed.

SPO Partners bought 7.5% of the limited partnership units of Plum Creek Timber and later approached the owners about buying the company. Eventually it did so, paying $55 million for the assets to acquire the partnership interest which effectively controlled the company. The general partnership interest, of which SPO acquired 100% from Burlington Resources, had an “embedded promote” of 35%. In other words, the general partnership shared in 35% of the incremental profits generated by the partnership. Over the next decade under excellent management and with Oberndorf, Scully, McDonald, and Patterson on the board, the value increased 10-fold. Plum Creek is now the largest independent timber owner in the U.S., with more than eight million acres.

Oberndorf said SPO Partners makes only four or five investments a year. “Our business is making capital allocation decisions and working with talented people.”

In 2002, John Scully, Oberndorf’s partner, was given the Stanford Business School Ernest C. Arbuckle Award, named for a former dean. In his acceptance speech, with Oberndorf, McDonald, and 200 other friends in attendance, Scully mentioned Oberndorf by name:

I would also recommend the students in attendance tonight read my partner Bill Oberndorf’s classic work published in 1978, the year I hired Bill upon his graduation from the GSB. That was, of course, the timeless piece, “The Fallacy of High Starting Salaries—You Too Can Live on Pennies.” See, I was very penurious then, a fact many of my friends here will vouch for.



Oberndorf said the reference to the salaries story was actually one Scully wrote. It turned out that when Oberndorf took a job with Scully, Oberndorf had an offer for twice the salary with McKinsey & Co. “I was the lowest paid in my class,” Oberndorf laughed.

Oberndorf said he would have found a way into the business world with or without McDonald and Buffett, but that they made the real difference. “Jack knew so many people and has a fabulous network and was so curious. He really cared about teaching. Value investing is what worked for me. I owe so much to Jack and it was a seminal event to meet Buffett.

“No one is smarter or has better people skills than Warren,” Oberndorf said. “Investors such as myself have benefited enormously by the example Warren has set of disciplined investing combined with the highest ethical standards.”

JOHN BRENNAN

Hailing from Central Falls, Rhode Island, John Brennan graduated summa cum laude in 1981 from the University of Rhode Island College of Engineering. He then worked in General Electric management programs for several years before going on to Stanford Business School.

Brennan recalls a time that Buffett came to McDonald’s class of 60 people and spoke about long-term investing:

He told us about the performance of his partnership relative to the performance of some mutual funds, one of which was Massachusetts Investors Trust, which I later went to work for.



He told us how important it is to have little turnover, saying that compounding works much better without transaction fees and taxes. Even making an extra percentage point over time can amount to big money years later.



He went through his evolution of buying hard assets like Ben Graham and of recognizing that buying good businesses at reasonable prices can be even more valuable.



Buffett, with Munger encouraging him, came to see that the durability of the company and its opportunities to reinvest cash flow profitably mattered. Finding a business that would have good cash flow five and 10 years later could make for an investment with a big payoff.



He used the example of GEICO, which was undervalued in the early 1970s. I viewed him as someone who had a successful way of looking at things. He made a lot of sense.



Buffett also talked to the class about risk, saying that theoretical factors about how stocks trade, their volatility, and beta and all, meant little compared to a real understanding of a long-term investment. Brennan said McDonald excelled at teaching conceptual material, but he kept the focus on real-world investing. Brennan recalled that at one point, McDonald brought in three guest speakers, each one an expert in his area: one in speculation, one in gambling, and one in investment. “He wanted us to see why they did what they did,

what made them successful, and what were the elements of mastery that differentiated them from the average.”

During most of the 1990s, Brennan was an MFS equity research analyst and pulled the MSF Capital Opportunities Fund in Boston from a two-star to five-star Morningstar rating.

In 1999, Brennan cofounded Sirios Capital Management (Greek form of Sirius), also located in Boston. It is named after Sirius, Latin for the brightest star, or the Dog Star that stands out during the dog days of August. The hedge fund came to life after quickly raising $500 million.

Brennan has read the Berkshire and Wesco annual reports over the years, but never had any of the same investments as Buffett. Still, it turned out that both Brennan and Buffett were buying heavily into the junk bond market in 2002.

Brennan has been an eclectic investor, buying a wide variety of securities in distressed markets from U.S. government bonds to cellular issues. A huge win for the Sirios fund came as a result of shorting both Global Crossing and WorldCom at the height of the telecom craze.

Known for digging through 10-K and 10-Q company documents, Brennan shorted WorldCom stock after he saw the fundamentals faltering. “First the business was under pressure from competitors. Price erosion was going on with AT&T, Sprint, Williams, and Global Crossing in the market. Capital was flowing freely. There was massive fiber capacity,” he said. Things were masked when the Internet was exploding, but when the Internet craze slowed, so did the telecoms.

Also, he said, WorldCom’s consumer accounts were leaving for wireless and other competitors. As for the balance sheet, there was too much capital spending and too much debt. “The capital expenditures didn’t make sense for the life cycle of the company. There was $12 to $14 billion in spending and $30 billion in debt.” He saw from the 10-Ks and 10-Qs that the interest expense was only 3 percent, meaning a large amount of the debt was short-term that might later have to be financed at higher rates. Not only that, he said, “they were capitalizing instead of expensing costs.”

Brennan shorted the stock in the midteens and rode it all the way to zero for a huge payoff. Further, he shorted the bonds and hedged the position by buying Treasuries long. While Wall Street saw WorldCom bonds as pretty solid, Brennan saw them as junk bonds whose prices went from 90 to 11.

At a low point for the bonds, Brennan thought increasing risk was there by continuing the short position; so he hedged his position by buying a similar bond to close out his position and defer the capital gain on the WorldCom bonds. During this process, McDonald and Brennan addressed Global Crossing and WorldCom in a case discussion on shorting stocks in the investment class at Stanford.

TIM BLISS

Tim Bliss, by way of Carpinteria, California, Cate School, Harvard College, Stanford Graduate School of Business, and a job at Capital Group, turned his net worth of negative $30,000 (because of student loans) into a net worth of several hundred millions that he and several others share at Investment Group of Santa Barbara (IGSB).

Bliss said, “Jack McDonald consistently taught the disciplines and skill sets of fundamental analysis and investing [unlike those advocating efficient markets]. Jack would point to Warren Buffett’s record, which showed he was outperforming the market over time by a very substantial margin.

“One day in 1978, Buffett came to our class. There were about 25 students, and Jack introduced his friend Warren as the country’s greatest investor. He made a huge impact on me. Everything he said passed the test of rationality. He talked about volatility being your friend.”

Under McDonald’s supervision, Bliss and classmate Bill Oberndorf did a study of the great investors, interviewing people like Phil Fisher, but the “biggest part of it was a study of Buffett and his evolution.”

At the time, Berkshire had a stock portfolio of only $170 million, $130 million in eight companies.

Bliss was such an avid student of Professor McDonald that he even did a study for class credit to compare the various editions of The Intelligent Investor. Discovering the evolution of Ben Graham’s thinking was a great learning experience for Bliss.

An earlier Stanford student was Reece Duca, whose father died when Duca was only 11, leaving him the sole male figure in his Italian family. Duca had previously studied fundamental analysis and visited companies. After the death of his father, he started playing the hot IPO market of the time and had cleared $50,000 by the time he left Stanford.

“That was the original seed money,” Bliss said. Duca, Bliss, and several others transformed that money into several hundred million dollars over the 1970s–1990s.

Duca hired Bliss for $2,000 a month with the agreement Bliss would make 10% of what money he managed. Bliss ran headlong into failure. Markets went against him. The $500,000 he ran turned into $400,000, and his salary was slashed to $1,600 a month.

Then Duca gave Bliss a break: “I could use the writeoff,” Duca said. “Start over.” Bliss said Duca gave him a large chunk of money to run, and “it was off to the races.”

Bliss, borrowing money and picking stocks such as Toys-R-Us out of bankruptcy, racked up the following returns:

1979 9.8% 1983 96.5%

1980 85.1% 1984 6.5%

1981 23.7% 1985 31.5%

1982 95.5%

During this time, Bliss owned Best Products (a catalog and showroom merchandiser), Federal Express, Mercury General, Everest and Jennings (dominant manufacturer of wheelchairs), Commodore Computers, A. Schulman (specialty plastics fabricator), New Hampshire Ball Bearings, ISC Systems (enterprise software for the S&L industry), Hazelton Labs, Autodesk, Williams-Sonoma (top quality cookware and tableware), Greentree Financial, and CPI (portrait studios in Sears stores).

As time went on, IGSB (whose partners are now Duca, Bliss, Bill Rauth, Luise Phelps, and Michael Cooney) moved more into private companies which later went public, such as Advent Software and The Learning Company.

Although Duca and Bliss do not have clients or shareholders or limited partners, they did have debt in the early days when they got loans from Crocker Bank. So their good results were magnified early on by borrowed money. They eventually stopped borrowing and have operated debt-free for more than 15 years.

So with no debt, no clients, no limited partners, no stakeholders of any kind, Bliss and Duca are truly “principal investors.”

“I call Tim Bliss, ‘the ultimate principal investor,’” McDonald says.

Bliss says of McDonald, “Jack is someone who can crank through the numbers but also can find the elements of value outside the numbers.

“He taught us that excellent managers get excellent results and mediocre managers get mediocre results.” He said stick with excellent managers. “He loves the investing process.”

Bliss recounts a funny tale about McDonald, who at the time was busy with second-year students. Bliss, who was a first-year student, wanted to meet McDonald and went to his secretary. Bliss was told he could see McDonald on May 7 for 10 minutes as the professor walked to the parking lot. Bliss waited and met with McDonald, and they talked about Tandem Computers. The company made fault-tolerant computers—a new concept at the time—that was going public. “We were both familiar with the company and had a great discussion which ... was the start of a long friendship... Jack could tell I was passionate about investing, and we became lifelong friends,” Bliss said. “Jack is positive and upbeat and values everyone’s opinion. He can bring someone who may be off-base into a useful discussion.”

“I think one of the missing things [in business education] is biography. With Andrew Carnegie or Thomas Watson, Sr., of IBM, for example, things didn’t go straight up. When I had no paycheck, it was a stretch. It’s how you react [in tough times]. Jack taught us about how careers develop.” Bliss said what’s important about Buffett and Munger and Fisher is the value they put on by being a better person. “When I read something written by Buffett, I feel I’m becoming a better person.”

Bliss said, without question, Buffett is smart, but beyond that, it has been his patience, his discipline, his ability to distill the complex to the simple. “He’s really looking at the three or four most important variables. What are the underlying drivers [to an investment or life situation]?” Bliss said Buffett takes a dispassionate look at things and arrives at the facts about what is of value.

Lastly, as to McDonald, Bliss says, “At a very impressionable time that sets him apart in our lives, Jack taught us ‘McDonald Capitalism.’ He taught us an investor’s version of practical, entrepreneurial capitalism.”

Stanford Business School



(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)



Dr. Jack McDonald

(Photo courtesy of Dr. Jack McDonald)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Sons of Stanford

(Photo by Michael Miles)

Tom Russo



The Sons of Stanford The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Sons of Stanford



Bill Oberndorf

(Photo courtesy of SPO Partners)

The Sons of Stanford The Story of Warren Buffett

(Photo courtesy of John Brennan)



John Brennan

Of Permanent Value The Sons of Stanford

Tim Bliss



(Courtesy of

Investment Group

of Santa Barbara)

The Sons of Stanford The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Sons of Stanford



287





TIM BLISS’S NOTES


On May 5, 1978 Warren Buffett spoke to Jack McDonald’s class at Stanford University’s Graduate School of Business. Buffett gave the students handouts that included examples of the Graham-Newman Fund, the Buffett Partnership, and Berkshire Hathaway at $170 million. Buffett also cited as an example his remarkable investment made earlier in the Delta Duck Club, which succeeded because Buffett recognized that the club’s land included energy rights.

Tim Bliss, a student in Professor McDonald’s class at that time, took the notes provided on the following pages. The last note on page 7 quotes Buffett ending the class saying, “I bring good tidings: The inefficient market is alive and well.” Bliss says today, “At the time some students considered this to be heresy—and a few still do.”

McDonald says, “This teaching session exemplifies classic Buffett philosophy and discipline in investing, discussed with a very lucky group of MBA students, as Warren has done over many years here at Stanford.”

(Source: Stanford Business School Magazine, July, 1989)





Author of McDonald Capitalism

McDonald Capitalism is taught at Stanford Business School.

The Note Taker

Tim Bliss at the Berkshire annual meeting weekend in 2006



(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Of Permanent Value Tim Bliss’s Notes





Tim Bliss’s Notes The Story of Warren Buffett





Of Permanent Value Tim Bliss’s Notes





289





PHIL FISHER


Buffett has famously said two big influences on him have been Ben Graham and Phil Fisher.

Philip A. Fisher, born in 1907 in San Francisco, died in 2004 at age 96 in San Mateo, California. After graduating from Stanford University, he served in the Army Air Corps. He attended Stanford Graduate School of Business and worked as a security analyst for a short while, then he established an investment counseling firm, Fisher & Company, where he managed investments for private clients for more than 60 years.

Beginning in the 1930s, Fisher developed a framework for looking at growing companies based upon the “fundamentals” of the business in a competitive marketplace. Much of Fisher’s framework was later incorporated into what others called business strategy or competitive analysis. Located in the Bay Area, now called Silicon Valley, Fisher got to know growing companies intimately by studying the competitors of each business, potential entrants, customers, suppliers, and former employees. He called this process of systematically talking with people outside the company the “scuttlebutt” method.

Fisher’s first book, Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits, was published in 1958. It became the first investment book ever to make The New York Times bestseller list (The New York Times, April 14, 2004) and is still in print today. The book encourages a buy-and-hold approach to investing in growing companies and emphasizes looking for a sustainable competitive advantage.

Like Buffett, Fisher played an important role in the legacy of teaching fundamental investing at Stanford Graduate School of Business. Since 1946, two professors have taught the investment course for MBAs at Stanford, Professor Herbert Dougall for 22 years (1946 to 1968) and Professor Jack McDonald for 40 years (1968 to 2009), with Buffett playing an active role in teaching with McDonald since 1976. On two occasions in the early 1960s when Dougall was away, Fisher was invited as a lecturer to teach investment. McDonald was a student in Fisher’s first investment course. Fisher and his book had a major impact on McDonald and many of the other MBA students in this 1961 Stanford course on fundamental investing and analysis of companies in a competitive framework.

Fisher last lectured in McDonald’s class in Spring 2000 (Outstanding Investor Digest, Volume XV, Number 7, 2000). He spoke of the importance of finding superb management, saying:

To make the really long-range gains, there are a couple of things that are necessary. First is outstanding management.… One way to recognize proper management is to look for management’s response to change. This is the basis or the gist of my sermon today. Just as some of you are smarter than others, some of you recognize opportunities that most of the rest won’t even realize are there.



And the importance of that difference never ceases to amaze me. Sometimes the result of that difference is that a particular company drops from being 30% of its industry down to 15%. But, frequently, it’s a matter of survival.



And it’s not just true of people and companies, but also of nations. Those with the right people and the desire to improve themselves are those that grow and progress, whereas those that live with the status quo decline.



In addition to emphasizing the need for outstanding management, Fisher believed that the business franchise mattered, customer loyalty mattered, and brand name recognition mattered.

Fisher also made a point to the class of 2000 about diversification: “I believe strongly in diversification,” and by that he meant seven or eight stocks—a concentrated portfolio in today’s parlance. Importantly, Fisher himself did the lion’s share of the investment research on companies owned by the clients of Fisher & Company, so that he had a high level of knowledge and conviction on each of the seven or eight companies. “I do not believe in overdiversifying.… My basic theory is to know a few companies and know them really well—and be sure your diversification is real diversification. Having Ford and General Motors is not diversification. Diversification means owning companies that do not sell into the same markets—companies with real differences.

“But it is my opinion that once you get over eight or 10 stocks, you get into danger because people just are not that good. There aren’t that many opportunities available. The last thing I want is to own a lot of good stocks. I want a very few outstanding ones.”

McDonald recalls that lecture: “This was the best of Phil Fisher in my experience, and he was 92 and ill at the time of the class. It was a truly inspiring and memorable class with a great investor—the last class Phil was able to attend.”

Fisher always said to think of the long-term and have low turnover in your portfolio. Fisher bought Motorola in 1955, back when mobile telecom meant radio systems for police cars. In the investment course McDonald took in 1956, Fisher talked about Motorola as a “great growth company” when Motorola’s market capitalization was $300 million. As a long-term investor, Fisher still owned Motorola 43 years later when he died in 2004. After Fisher’s death, his son Kenneth Fisher wrote an article for Forbes (April 25, 2004) that suggested some thoughts his father might have had at that particular time, were he alive and in his right mind. This is one of the points he made: “In your bones, believe in capitalism and its basic ability, despite recessions and scandals, to better the human condition. From that belief you can conclude that, over the long term, the stock market works.”

Fisher was a frequent reader of the Rudyard Kipling poem “If” to remind himself to remain calm amidst turmoil. The poem’s first two lines are well known:

If you can keep your head when all about you

Are losing theirs and blaming it on you....

“I sought out Phil Fisher after reading his Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits... in the early 1960s,” Buffett wrote in a 1987 article in Forbes. “From him I learned the value of the ‘scuttlebutt’ approach: Go out and talk to competitors, suppliers and customers to find out how an industry or a company really operates.”

Fisher offered these 15 points to look for in a common stock:

1. Does the company have products or services with sufficient market potential to make possible a sizeable increase in sales for at least several years?

2. Does the management have a determination to continue to develop products or processes that will still further increase total sales potentials when the growth potentials of currently attractive product lines have largely been exploited?

3. How effective are the company’s research and development efforts in relation to its size?

4. Does the company have an above-average sales organization?

5. Does the company have a worthwhile profit margin?

6. What is the company doing to maintain or improve profit margins?

7. Does the company have outstanding labor and personnel relations?

8. Does the company have outstanding executive relations?

9. Does the company have depth to its management?

10. How good are the company’s cost analysis and accounting controls?

11. Are there other aspects of the business, somewhat peculiar to the industry involved which will give the investor important clues as to how outstanding the company will be in relation to its competition?

12. Does the company have a short-range or long-range outlook in regard to profits?

13. In the foreseeable future, will the growth of the company require sufficient equity financing so that the larger number of shares then outstanding will largely cancel the existing stockholders’ benefit from this anticipated growth?

14. Does the management talk freely to investors about its affairs when things are going well but “clam up” when troubles or disappointments occur?

15. Does the company have a management of unquestionable integrity?

Fisher’s five don’ts for investors:

1. Don’t buy into promotional companies.

2. Don’t ignore a good stock just because it is traded “over the counter.”

3. Don’t buy a stock just because you like the “tone” of its annual report.

4. Don’t assume that the high price at which a stock may be selling in relation to its earnings is necessarily an indication that further growth in those earnings has largely been already discounted in the price.

5. Don’t quibble over eighths and quarters.

Buffett wrote the following letter to Forbes, and it was published in the May 10, 2004 issue:

Regarding “Philip A. Fisher, 1907–2004” (Apr. 26, p. 142), I met Phil Fisher in the early Sixties, after reading his first book. His ideas, like those of Ben Graham, were simple but powerful, and I wanted to meet the man whose teachings had such an influence on me. I dropped in without an appointment. Phil, of course, had no idea who I was but couldn’t have been more gracious. A born teacher, he couldn’t resist an eager student. It’s been over 40 years since I integrated Phil’s thinking into my investment philosophy. As a consequence, Berkshire Hathaway shareholders are far wealthier than they otherwise would have been. Forty years ago Ben Graham and Phil Fisher were my only investment heroes. They remain so today.



The lineage of teaching is clear. Ben Graham had been Warren Buffett’s teacher at Columbia in the 1950s; Phil Fisher had been Jack McDonald’s teacher at Stanford in the early 1960s, when Buffett met Fisher. McDonald added, “Two books have been texts in my investment courses for more than three decades at Stanford. While most other MBA investment courses have assigned texts on modern portfolio theory and efficient markets, mine have been Ben Graham’s Intelligent Investor, with a foreword by Warren Buffett; and Phil Fisher’s Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits. My students have been privileged to learn from these great investors through their writings, and in the case of Warren Buffett and Phil Fisher, through their regularly memorable visits to my classes over the years, inspiring generations of investors. Had Phil Fisher not been my teacher in 1961 at Stanford, I doubt that I would have chosen to teach investment with this Fisher-Graham-Buffett-Munger philosophy for more than three decades.”



First published in 1958, Phil Fisher’s Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits is in print more than 50 years later.

(Photo by Mary Porter)



Phil Fisher in the 1950s

(Photo courtesy of Ken Fisher)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Phil Fisher

Phil Fisher The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Phil Fisher



289





THE BUFFETT COURSE AT MISSOURI


Do you want to take a course exclusively about Warren Buffett? Enroll at the Robert J. Trulaske Sr., College of Business at the University of Missouri.

Students wanting to study Buffett have several other options as well. They should consider Dr. Jack McDonald’s class at Stanford, as mentioned in the previous chapters. Also, starting in the mid-1990s, Columbia has offered another value investing class modeled after the one Ben Graham taught in the 1950s, the one Buffett attended. Further, a student could go to the University of Florida where alumnus and well-known investor Mason Hawkins endowed a series of Buffett/Graham courses on value investing in the late 1990s. But for a pure dose of Buffett’s strategies, the University of Missouri offers a course named The Investment Strategies of Warren Buffett or, more colloquially, The Warren Buffett Course.

Although Missouri’s Warren Buffett Course has been around since 1997, it really got off the ground when Andy Kern, a PhD candidate in finance at Missouri, began teaching it. The course flourished when Harvey Eisen—a Missouri alum, the course creator, noted investor, and Buffett friend—stepped in as a benefactor.

Kern recalls, “I first met Mr. Eisen just before I started teaching the class, and he mentioned he would like to take us [by bus] to Omaha to meet Mr. Buffett, as many schools now do.” Since 2005, it has been an annual event for MU students.

Eisen created the course because he wanted Buffett’s ideas taught, and he was willing to pay for the course himself. He has been quoted (Columbia Missourian, March 5, 2006) as saying he attended MU because he “lived in state, had no money and bad grades.” He graduated in 1964 and, after decades of following Buffett’s investment philosophy, was chairman of investment firm Bedford Oak Advisors in Mount Kisco, New York. Eisen established the class at MU in 1997 by giving money to MU’s business college for an instructor to teach a Buffett course.

For years, Eisen managed the investment portfolio of Travelers, Inc., and of Primerica (prior to its merger with Travelers in 1993). Eisen also has been a frequent panelist on TV investment shows, including Wall Street Week.

An Eisen disciple, Kern briefly considered giving his son a name with the initials of BRK, but decided on the name David Andrew Kern.

Kern tells how he got hooked on Buffett’s philosophy: “I read Buffettology in college, about 1998, after a professor told me that Warren Buffett was the ‘richest man in the real world.’ The professor was Korean and was the same guy who said, ‘You cannot beat market. If you find a way to beat market tell no one but me. We’ll make billions!’ That summer, I read the Lowenstein biography [Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist] and was hooked. The following year, I bought two B shares at $1,800, which turned out to be a bottom.” It was at the height of the tech bubble.

Kern’s passion for Buffett shows in all the Berkshire/Buffett memorabilia in his office. He even has a Berkshire Annual Report inscribed by Buffett: “To Andy, Who Taught Me All I Know.”

When the class visited Buffett in 2005, the Oracle of Omaha told the students to think of a stock as a business, to let the markets serve you, not instruct you, and to buy with a margin of safety. He said those three concepts are it. “I’ve built everything on that structure,” he said.

The students heard the Oracle say investors do not always act rationally and that markets are not always efficient.

They also heard his philosophy of teaching: “I wouldn’t teach option theory. What the hell good is that going to do anybody?... I would have two courses: how to think about stocks and how to value a business” (Columbia Missourian, March 5, 2008).

During the trip, the students visited the landmarks of Gorat’s, the Nebraska Furniture Mart, and Borsheims. After the trip, a journalism student in the class, Catherine Pernot, wrote a story about the trip and it landed on the front page of the Columbian Missourian (March 5, 2006). Entitled “Warren Buffett’s Billion Dollar Secrets,” the article gave the course a real publicity buzz.

After CNBC mentioned the class and other news outlets came calling, more and more students wanted to enroll in a Buffett class. “I personally received requests from individuals around the world interested in taking the course,” Kern said.

Kern says the main goal of the course is to acquaint students with the principles underlying Buffett’s investment philosophy. Buffett’s criteria for evaluating potential acquisitions are a central focus of the course. The course shuns the efficient market theory and the capital asset pricing model and concentrates instead on fundamental value investing tenets as espoused by Buffett.

The course uses three primary texts: The Warren Buffett Way by Robert Hagstrom, The Essays of Warren Buffett compiled by Lawrence Cunningham, and The Psychology of Investing by John Nofsinger.

In addition to those primary texts, the course uses newspaper articles and essays, including “The Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville;” Buffett’s speech to Columbia Business School for the 50th anniversary of the publication of Security Analysis by Benjamin Graham and David Dodd; and “The Psychology of Human Misjudgment,” a talk given by Charles Munger to Harvard Law School in 1995.

The course mixes theory and practice and includes analysis of financial statements. Taught in the context of Buffett and Berkshire, the class takes a look at discounted cash flow models.

Studies include a look at the Washington Post Company from the standpoint of 1972 when Buffett was contemplating buying Post stock. Buffett’s 1973 investment in the the Post was one of his classics.

In 2008, the class examined Buffett’s investment in Burlington Northern and heard, in a timely way, from its chairman, president, and CEO, Matthew Rose. The class has also studied Nike, Wrigley, and other companies.

A seven-question exam given during the course, requires for each question a two- to three-paragraph answer. Says Kern, “I am a firm believer that to demonstrate understanding of the material in a conceptual course such as this, the student must be able to articulate his response in writing.”

The class ends with an investment analysis of a company of the students’ choice. With so many business schools offering barely a taste of Buffett, the MU course is a rare treat of a full course meal, including dessert.

One student who took in the full serving was Chase Daniel, the Missouri quarterback who was among the finalists for the Heisman Trophy Award in 2007. Daniel has said of visiting Buffett, “He’s the most genuine, kind-hearted person I’ve ever met.”



Buffett and Andy Kern in

Omaha in 2005

(Photo by John Pelikan)



(Photo courtesy of Shahn Hogan)

Harvey Eisen

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Buffett Course at Missouri



MU Business Class During Visit with Buffett in 2005

Buffett and Kern are near the center.

(Photo by John Pelikan)



Calling Signals

Missouri quarterback Chase Daniel and Buffett clown around outside Piccolo Pete’s restaurant during an MU class visit in 2008. Daniel set a Big 12 record on September 20, 2008, with 20 straight completions, passing for a career high 439 yards in a winning game over Buffalo.

(Photo by Shahn Hogan)



A Player

Buffett was honored with a MU

jersey during the school’s 2005 visit.

(Photo courtesy of Berkshire Hathaway)



290





FIGHTING AIDS


Buffett joined a group of celebrities fighting AIDS at an appearance in Lincoln, Nebraska, on December 1, 2002.

Buffett, Irish rocker Bono, actress Ashley Judd, and world cycling champion Lance Armstrong showed up on behalf of the fight against AIDS in Africa where 6,500 people a day die from the illness.

The stop in Lincoln was the start of an 11-city tour by U2 band leader Bono, who headed DATA (Debt, AIDS, Trade in Africa), now a part of the ONE organization.

Bono said he consulted Buffett when he was planning the tour. “He told me not to appeal to the conscience of America, but to the greatness of America.”

“I welcome him and his ideas,” Buffett said.

Bono explained his respect of Buffett: “He is Yoda to me, the Jedi Master of

modern America. He’s also a deeply serious citizen with an ear for a great idea—in this case, that America should support a historic AIDS initiative in Africa. He cares about the way the USA is perceived in the outside world and knows that the initiative could help that perception.”



Tour de Force

Tour de France perpetual winner Lance Armstrong addressed the media at a news conference to kick off the Heart of America Tour, Sunday, December 1, 2002, in Lincoln, Nebraska. Also shown are Irish rocker Bono, center in cap; actress Ashley Judd, back left; and Buffett, right. The tour was aimed at raising awareness of the AIDS epidemic in Africa.

(AP Photo)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Bono

Bono once said of Buffett, “He is Yoda to me, the Jedi Master of modern America.”

(AP/Wide World Photos)



Yoda

Yoda was the fictional character in the Star Wars universe—a wise and

powerful Jedi Master.

Of Permanent Value Fighting AIDS



291





DORIS BUFFETT: THE SUNSHINE LADY


While Warren Buffett is known worldwide for his business acumen, his sister Doris is making a name for herself for a different reason: her philanthropy. She has given away more than $80 million (CBS, December 4, 2009). Like Warren, Doris has a gift for transforming good ideas into prudent investments. She describes herself as a “virtue capitalist.” Doris said, “I’m fortunate because [Warren] loves to make money, and I love to give it away.”

Doris is the Buffett sister who invested early on with her brother in Cities Service preferred stock but sold it too soon, only to see the stock become a winner later. According to an interview in Worth magazine (October 1999), Doris “reformed with his next advice to buy Government Employees Insurance Co., or GEICO, now a subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway.”

When Doris inherited Berkshire Hathaway stock upon the death of her mother in 1996, she founded the Sunshine Lady Foundation. “I had a choice,” she said. “I could be a big spender, or I could have fun giving it away. That’s my nature.” Doris likes “the idea of bringing sunshine into people’s lives,” hence the name of her foundation.

Doris’ first philanthropic step copycatted a version of a program Warren started in Omaha that recognized and honored outstanding public school teachers. Warren named his teacher award after their Aunt Alice. Doris named her version after their Aunt Edith. Doris says it was a good first step, a simple nonpolitical program that could be replicated in every county in America.

Living in Morehead City, North Carolina, at the time, she sent local high school teachers to summer school at Oxford University in England. She also brought speakers to the schools. She derived tremendous satisfaction as she watched hundreds of kids listen spellbound to a holocaust survivor’s story. The next step was sending at-risk kids to summer camp, the best one she could find.

When Doris realized that the reach of the Sunshine Lady Foundation was limited to that of herself and her small staff, she decided to broaden the reach and scope by enlisting the help of family, friends, friends of friends, and professional colleagues, technically known as “adjunct program directors.” She affectionately calls them “Sunbeams,” 164 rays of light.

Sunbeams alert the foundation to needs and opportunities in their communities. They are the eyes and ears of the foundation, and they bring diversity, imagination, and passion to the foundation. Each Sunbeam is invited to submit requests and each is eligible to give up to $10,000 in grants each year. Sunbeams verify the use of funds granted and keep the foundation informed of outcomes. Through them, the foundation has encouraged and supported the work of good people all over the country who are tackling social problems, large and small. Sunbeams have made it possible for the SLF to do the following good deeds:

• Start a primary school in Guadalajara, Mexico

• Build a women’s blitz habitat house in Charlotte, North Carolina

• Sponsor reading programs

• Provide rent, utilities, and other needs for women escaping violence

• Stave off foreclosure for the terminally ill

• Adopt blood hounds trained to track missing children

• Create a community orthodontics program through a matching grant

• Launch a community band

• Fund a start-up program for grandparents raising grandchildren

• Repair roofs, provide washing machines, and build additions

• Buy handicapped vans, implant hearing aids, and fund organ transplants

Relying on the volunteer Sunbeams to stay busy in their own communities, Doris turned her attention to domestic violence as the object of her philanthropy because it had potential for producing great results. Domestic violence victims were being given shelter, but they needed to be able to live on their own. As she became educated about domestic violence, she learned of and met with many survivors who were eager, indeed desperate, to attend college to improve their lives and to provide independent living for themselves and their children. To meet this need, she set up the Women’s Independence Scholarship Program (WISP) in 2001, for survivors of domestic violence. The women are mentored by a local sponsoring agency and given a scholarship in the field of their choice. Applications for the scholarships pour into the office from every state in the union. The women chosen (nearly 600 in March 2005) are incredibly motivated and do amazingly well, and their children are growing up in violence-free homes.

In addition to WISP, the Sunshine Lady Foundation funds and operates two

college scholarship programs in eastern North Carolina. Many of the “Sunshine Scholars” are the first in their families to attend college. The success rate of the Sunshine Scholars is also impressive, because of the personal relationship the program directors develop with each student. They coach them, cheer them, prod them on, and praise them, which makes all the difference. Sunshine Scholars are sent off to college with history books, etiquette books, self-help books, and dictionaries. However, strings are attached to the scholarship money. Students must keep up a 3.0 grade point average and refrain from any self-destructive activities, including body piercing, tattooing, drinking, smoking, or taking illegal drugs.

Doris says that money founding the Sunshine Lady Foundation was made through sound investments and that she, in turn, looks at every grant as an investment that must produce a successful return. She follows two cardinal rules: First, she never invests in anything she doesn’t understand. She is put off by buzz words, fanciful speculation, and grandiosity in general. Second, she requires collaboration in every grant the SLF makes, large or small. A grant without collaboration is a handout and the SLF never gives a handout.

The Sunshine Lady Foundation has invested more than $40 million since its inception. A Worth magazine story, “Virtue Capital,” said that Doris is “determined to run through as much of the foundation money as she can before she dies, [and she] is thinking bigger and bigger.”

Fredericksburg, Virginia, has also benefited from Doris’s goal to give big. In 2009, Doris moved back to the town she has had a love affair with ever since moving there as a teenager when her father, Howard Buffett, was elected to Congress in 1942. Buffett offered $1.5 million to the Fredericksburg Boys and Girls Club for a new club building and $1.1 million to the Bragg Family Life Center, also in Fredericksburg, for a gym and wellness center. The SLF has also played a large part in constructing a Boys and Girls Club in Morehead City and in Brevard, North Carolina.

Doris Buffett says of her philanthropy, “I can’t get all puffed up about this; I’m simply passing along my good luck.”

After Warren Buffett made his gift to the Gates Foundation, he forwarded to Doris Buffett thousands of help-seeking letters that he had received. Doris and her friends tried to answer them. She said, “a few [are] from crazies, some from greedy people, but the vast majority are decent folks who have had terrible luck.”

Doris herself has not had the best of luck with marriage, having had four marriages and four divorces. She has said any public fascination with that fact is “something from the 1940s” (Worth, June/July 2008).



Buffett Women

Buffett’s sisters, Doris, left, and Bertie, right, pose with Buffett’s daughter, Susie, at Berkshire annual meeting festivities in 1999.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Doris Buffett: The Sunshine Lady

Sunshine Lady Foundation

Doris Buffett’s Sunshine Lady Foundation helps the less fortunate. Warren Buffett has forwarded to his sister more than 4,000 letters that he received requesting charity.



(Photo courtesy of the Sunshine Lady Foundation)

Graduating from Sing Sing

The Buffett siblings are pictured here with the Sing Sing graduating class of 2010. Commencement speaker Filipe Luciano, poet and journalist, described the 32 graduates as a new kind of Peace Corps, a Peace Corps of men who know the streets and the prisons. The Sunshine Lady Foundation remains committed to funding college degree programs in over a dozen prisons, an investment made based upon the fact that it works. Although the national recidivism rate is over 60%, of the 41 graduates of the Sing Sing degree program who have been released from prison, none, not one, has returned to prison! The Sunshine Lady Foundation is a proud supporter of this success story.



(From Sunshine Lady Foundation brochure)



292





DONALD AND MILDRED OTHMER


In 1998, longtime Berkshire investor Mildred Topp Othmer left a fortune of about $450 million to charity. Of that, more than $100 million went to the University of Nebraska in Lincoln.

Othmer’s niece, Mary Siena, challenged her will on grounds that Othmer was not competent late in her life. The case was settled and the University of Nebraska received a $133-million gift per The New York Times, (February 4, 1999).

Reports said the Othmer gift will be held in an endowment fund with about 75% of the income from that fund to be used to support chemical engineering programs at the university and to help upgrade technology on the Lincoln campus. An additional 12.5% was earmarked for academic programs and the other 12.5% was to back other university projects. A $24-million facility, built with the endowment, connects to the Walter Scott Engineering Center at UNL.

“I see this as an excellent fund, which will allow the University of Nebraska in Lincoln to rise to a whole new level of excellence, especially in the areas of research and graduate studies,” said James Moeser, at that time chancellor of the University of Nebraska in Lincoln. He said the gift was probably the most important asset ever to come to the university. “The impact of their gift will be felt 50 and 100 years from now.”

The New York Times reported in a front page story (July 13, 1998) that Donald and Mildred Othmer were an seemingly ordinary couple who left a staggering $750 million to charity. According to the story, “He was a professor of chemical engineering at Polytechnic University in Brooklyn, a workaholic with scores of patents and a sideline in consulting. She was a former teacher and a buyer for her mother’s dress stores who volunteered at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden and Planned Parenthood. They had no children, unless you count the students he invited to have dinner.”

The article further stated: “When they died—he in 1995 and she in April [1998], both in their 90s—they left their money to many of their favorite charities,” The Times reported. “Polytechnic, for instance, stands to receive nearly $200 million, a sum about four times the school’s entire endowment. Long Island College Hospital, also in Brooklyn, is in line for about $160 million. The University of Nebraska and the Chemical Heritage Foundation, in Philadelphia, also expect to get more than $100 million each.”

The final amounts to be divvied out from the Othmers’ estates depended on both the legal negotiations surrounding the wills and the stock market, specifically the value of Berkshire Hathaway shares.

The sum the Othmers left for charitable purposes, close to $750 million, was atypical for an academic couple. Sure, Dr. Donald Othmer was successful as an inventor and a consultant, but the stunning amount the couple bequeathed was buffed up by a different source. “Some decades ago, they invested most of their savings with an old family friend from Omaha: Warren E. Buffett,” the story in The Times explained.

“As Mr. Buffett recalls it, Mrs. Othmer’s mother, Mattie Topp, first approached him about investing for the family around 1958, when he was 27 and managing less than $1 million. She had used Mr. Buffett’s father as her broker before he became a United States Representative.”

After the Othmers initially invested $25,000 each in a partnership with Buffett in the early 1960s, “the couple received shares of Berkshire Hathaway in 1970 at $42 a share.”

According to lawyers involved, Mrs. Othmer’s estate contained about 7,500 shares of Berkshire Hathaway stock. Her husband’s approximately 7,000 shares were sold at just under $30,000 a share after his death in 1995. The price of the stock per share at the printing of the 1998 The Times story was in the $77,250 vicinity.

Although the University of Nebraska–Lincoln was named as one recipient of the Othmers’ gifts, the Brooklyn area was the real beneficiary, with substantial sums going to Polytechnic University, which once faced bankruptcy; Long Island College Hospital; Brooklyn Historical Society; the Othmers’ Plymouth Church, where they attended every Sunday; and Brooklyn Botanic Garden. According to The New York Times (February 4, 1999), the Brooklyn area was to receive about $340 million. “By comparison, if Brooklyn’s application to become an empowerment zone is approved, the Federal benefits will total $330 million.”

Mrs. Othmer, a graduate of the University of Nebraska, received a master’s degree from Columbia University Teachers College in 1945. Mr. Othmer held a number of patents from his research in chemical engineering and was coeditor of the Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology.

The University of Nebraska also benefited from the generosity of Carl Mammel and his late wife Joyce. Both went to the University of Nebraska. Carl Mammel went on to earn two fortunes, one by running financial companies, and the second by investing in the Buffett Partnership in the 1950s.

Over the years the Mammels gave to a scholarship program and in 2010 gave millions to build Mammel Hall at the University of Nebraska at Omaha’s College of Business Administration.



Donald and Mildred Othmer in 1983

Generous Berkshire shareholders

(AP Photo)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Donald and Mildred Othmer



293





ALABAMA PLAYER TACKLES BUFFETT


Kermit Kendrick, former All-American defensive back for the University of Alabama in the late 1980s, is now a lawyer in Birmingham. Kendrick once said he liked an earlier edition of this book, so I autographed a newer edition of Of Permanent Value for him. Then he asked if there were any way to get Buffett’s autograph.

“Not likely,” was my reply.

Back at the office, I felt troubled about it and called Kermit, saying, “Do you really want that book signed by Warren Buffett?” We met immediately; he returned the book, and I sent it to Buffett. A few days later, even though I had sent a return envelope with regular postage, Buffett—in a gracious act of kindness—returned the book via Federal Express on Christmas Eve, autographed.

My note to Kermit included thanks and best wishes, “Many thanks for your unsolicited compliment about the book. I really do appreciate it. I hope your finances wind up in better shape than Warren Buffett’s. All the best and happy investing! Roll Tide!”

Buffett’s note offered best wishes to him but limited blessing to the Tide, “Kermit, Best wishes for a great career in investments. And good luck to the Tide unless the Cornhuskers are the opponent.”

Kendrick was excited, but not quite satisfied, “This is probably the most exciting day of my brokerage career.… Just one other thing. Is there any way to meet him?”

Kendrick finally met Buffett at the Berkshire annual meeting in 1996. Kendrick got in touch with Alabama’s former offensive coach, Homer Smith, who then wrote Buffett on Kendrick’s behalf. Buffett had written back to Smith and included a ticket for Kendrick to attend the annual meeting.

Buffett is a well-known Huskers football fan, and like many fans in Nebraska and Alabama may see football through one of two views. View No. 1: “Football is Life.”

View No. 2, as expressed by George Will: “Football combines the two worst things about America: it is violence punctuated by committee meetings.”



(Photo courtesy of the University of Alabama)

Go Bama!

Crimson Tide’s Kermit Kendrick tackles Buffett for an autograph.



(Photo by Lisa Nichols)

The Crimson Tide

by Winston Groom

The Story of Warren Buffett



One Fan, Two Football Players

Former Alabama Coach Gene Stallings and Kermit Kendrick stand with author Andy Kilpatrick at left. A photo of Coach Paul “Bear” Bryant, whom some believe to be the god of football, hangs at left on the wall.

One Investor, One Football Player Turned Lawyer and Broker

Buffett and Kendrick finally met at Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1996.



(Photo by Tom Conrad)

Of Permanent Value Alabama Player Tackles Buffett



294





BUFFETT PICKS UP A PENNY


This book has many times bandied about the B word: billion. Now that is not small change.

One day in the mid-1980s, Buffett got on the elevator at Kiewit Plaza, heading to his office on the 14th floor. On the floor of the elevator was a penny. None of the employees of Peter Kiewit Sons’, the resident construction conglomerate, paid any attention. After all, some say a penny saved … is not much. Buffett leaned over, reached down, and picked up the penny.

To the Kiewit executives, stunned that he would bother with a penny, the fellow who would one day be one of the richest people in the world quipped, “The beginning of the next billion.”

Remember “’Tis money that begets money” (English proverb).

The Story of Warren Buffett



Shopping for 120,000 Years

Buffett wannabe George Morgan, an Omaha stockbroker, explains what $1 billion is: “A man gave his wife $1 million to spend at the rate of $1,000 per day. In three years, she returned for more. So he gave her $1 billion and she didn’t come back for 3,000 years.”

(Photo courtesy of

Midlands Business Journal in Omaha)

Of Permanent Value Buffett Picks Up a Penny



295





HARVARD REJECTEE RETURNS IN TRIUMPH


As a teenager, Buffett was rejected by Harvard Business School. That is like having sex for the first time with someone who then goes home and disconnects the phone. Rejection stinks.

Buffett has said, “Harvard did me a big favor by turning me down. But I haven’t made any contributions to them in thanks for that.”

Maybe at the time of the rejection, Buffett would have appreciated this joke:

Texan: Where are you from?



Harvard graduate: I come from a place where we do not end our sentences with prepositions.



Texan: OK, where are you from, jackass?



Years later in early 1996, Buffett spoke to Harvard before a standing-room-only crowd.

Predictably, Harvard Business School’s student newspaper, the Harbus, wrote an intelligent article, although it left out a t in Buffett’s name.

Comparing the merits of a Harvard Business degree to just investing the tuition money with Buffett early on, the story began this way: “$45,000,000. This is the fortune a 1956 Harvard Business School graduate would have amassed today had he traded in his tuition money and degree back then and given it instead to Warren E. Buffett of Omaha, Nebraska.”

Buffett gave a short talk about honesty and integrity, mentioning the personal qualities of Tom Murphy, the former chairman of Cap Cities/ABC and a graduate of Harvard Business School class of 1949. “In the 20 years I’ve known him, he has never done anything he couldn’t put on the front page of the newspaper,” Buffett said.

Then he threw it open for questions. The Harbus article described the question-and-answer session:

Harvard (“The Michigan of the East”) questioned Buffett on topics ranging from technical issues of valuation and finance to personal philosophies of success and fulfillment. Buffett stood steadfast by his well-known policy of never discussing current or future investment targets. He also shunned discussion of business school finance topics such as the Black-Scholes model and the efficient market hypothesis in favor of strike zones and fat pitches.



He stressed common sense, discipline, and patience, not IQ, as the keys to good investing. When asked what is the key to picking good stocks, Buffett responded, “understanding and picking good businesses...”



At the conclusion of the talk, fans rushed the stage with cameras flashing, while Buffett autographed dollar bills, T-shirts, annual reports, and assorted unauthorized biographies. After the 15-minute post speech melee, Buffett excused himself and was hurried off to his private jet, which waited to whisk him home in time for work the next day.

In 2003, Harbus ran a beautifully written piece about another of Buffett’s appearances. Once again, the spelling of the Oracle’s name, in one instance, was with one t.



“I Want My Cherry Coke”

This well-known photo shows Buffett’s approximate age and reaction at the time of his rejection by Harvard.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Harvard Rejectee Returns in Triumph



296





ON THE LIGHT SIDE




(With permission)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Drawing by Weber; © 1995, The New Yorker Magazine, Inc.

Of Permanent Value On the Light Side



297





THE WIT OF WARREN BUFFETT


(Author’s note: To paraphrase, there is faith, hope, and charity—but the greatest of these is a sense of humor.)

“I … prefer the iceberg approach toward investment disclosure” (Buffett Partnership Letter, July 22, 1966).

“These conditions will not cause me to attempt investment decisions outside my sphere of understanding. (I don’t go for the ‘If you can’t lick ’em, join ’em philosophy’—my own leaning is toward ‘If you can’t join ’em, lick ’em.’)” (Buffett Partnership Letter, January 25, 1967).

“Our experience in workouts this year has been atrocious—during this period I have felt like the bird that inadvertently flew into the middle of a badminton game” (Buffett Partnership Letter, 1969).

“With value like that [Walt Disney at the time], I know I’m not going to get stuck with a Kentucky Fried Computer when it goes out of fashion” (Forbes, November 1, 1969).

“I, in fact, indirectly own some Ford convertibles (bonds, not cars)” (Article by Buffett for The Wall Street Journal, August 15, 1977).

Quoting Yogi Berra: “It will be déjà vu all over again” (1983 Annual Report).

“Because my mother isn’t here tonight, I’ll even confess to you that I’ve been an arbitrageur” (Talk given at Columbia Law School’s Center for Law and Economic Studies in 1985).

“Our gain in net worth during the year was $613.6 million or 48.2%. It is fitting that the visit of Halley’s Comet coincided with this percentage gain; neither will be seen again in my lifetime” (1985 Annual Report).

Re buying bonds in inflationary times: “In runaway inflation, what you’ve bought is wallpaper” (Fortune, April 25, 1985, and quoted in the Anagnos thesis in 1986).

Here’s Buffett’s letter to Maria Anagnos after she sent him her thesis:

Berkshire Hathaway, Inc.

1440 Kiewit Plaza

Omaha, Nebraska 68131

Telephone (408) 346-1400



Warren E. Buffett, Chairman

July 3, 1986

Ms. Maria Anagnos,

300 East 62nd Street,

New York, New York 10021



Dear Maria:



Thanks for sending the thesis, which I enjoyed immensely. (Dale Carnegie once said that, next to “Would you like a drink?”, a person’s name is the most welcome sound in the English language). I’m glad NYU gave you an “A”; so do I.



It probably is a good thing you finished your thesis when you did. A few more years of markets like this and we won’t look so good—at least on a relative basis.



We’re writing a portion of Continental Illinois’s Director’s and Officer’s Liability Insurance this year, so be sure to keep everybody on their toes. And if you are out this way, stop by and bring me up to date.



Best wishes.



Sincerely,



Warren E. Buffett



WEB/gk



“When ideas fail, words come in handy” (Buffett quoting Goethe).

“The future isn’t what it used to be” (Buffett quoting Pogo).

“All men’s misfortunes spring from the single cause that they are unable to stay quietly in one room” (Buffett quoting Pascal).

“So convenient a thing it is to be a reasonable creature, since it enables one to find or make a reason for everything one has a mind to do” (Buffett quoting Ben Franklin).

“I was Snow White, but I drifted” (Buffett quoting Mae West).

“The term ‘institutional investor’ is becoming one of those self-contradictions called an oxymoron, comparable to ‘jumbo shrimp,’ ‘lady mudwrestler,’ and ‘inexpensive lawyer’ ” (Widely quoted).

The hunt for acquisitions is like “bagging rare and fast-moving elephants” (Widely quoted).

Establishing criteria for acquisitions of companies is “a lot like selecting a wife. You can thoughtfully establish certain qualities you’d like her to have, and then all of a sudden, you meet someone and you do it” (Annual meeting in 1986).

“You may quit having children if you keep having clunkers. But you just don’t cast them out” (Annual meeting in 1986).

On the advanced age of many Berkshire managers: “We find it’s hard to teach a young dog old tricks. But we haven’t had lots of problems with people who hit the ball out of the park year after year. Even though they’re rich, they love what they do. And nothing ever happens to our managers. We offer them immortality” (Annual meeting in 1987).

“We do not have, never have had, and never will have an opinion about where the stock market, interest rates, or business activity will be a year from now” (Forbes, October 13, 1997, from 1987 quote).

“If any of you would like to withdraw your proxy at this time, just raise your hand. As soon as we can get around to you, you will be ejected from the meeting” (Annual meeting in 1988).

“If you want to be loved, it’s clearly better to sell high-priced corn flakes than low-priced auto insurance” (1988 Annual Report).

Adam Smith: “Where do you get these aphorisms that you’ve gotten so well known for?” Buffett: “Well, I don’t know. They’re about the limit of my intellectual capacities, so I have to work with one sentence” (Adam Smith’s Money World show, June 20, 1988).

Talking about excesses in the takeover field that year: “Toto, I have a feeling we’re not in Kansas any more.” (Buffett quoting Dorothy from The Wizard of Oz, 1988 Annual Report).

“After ending our corporate marriage to Hochschild Kohn [a Baltimore department store Buffett bought for a bargain price], I had memories like those of the husband in the country song, ‘My Wife Ran Away with My Best Friend and I Still Miss Him a Lot’ ” (1989 Annual Report).

On how he handles so many requests from people. “Well, I just use the Nancy Reagan policy. I just say no” (Annual meeting in 1989).

“FSLIC [Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Company] has essentially allowed crooks and dopes to print money. Otherwise, it’s an unqualified success” (Annual meeting in 1989).

“A takeover [of Coca-Cola] would be like Pearl Harbor” (Fortune, April 10, 1989).

How Berkshire handles macroeconomic forecasts: “Charlie [Munger] is our macroeconomics expert. Actually, I handle Omaha and Council Bluffs and Charlie handles the rest of the country” (Annual meeting in 1990).

Munger’s note: “Berkshire has not thrived in the past from making macroeconomic predictions. Therefore, we don’t think a lot about it. We just try to do sound things and we figure economic trends will average out over the long run. We’re agnostics on the economy” (Annual meeting in 1990).

Value investing: “The fact that it’s so simple makes people reluctant to teach it. If you’ve gone and gotten a PhD and spent years learning how to do all kinds of tough things mathematically, to have to come back to this is—it’s like studying for the priesthood and finding out that the Ten Commandments were all you needed” (L. J. Davis, New York Times Magazine, April, 1990).

About making money: “I enjoy the process far more than the proceeds, though I have learned to live with those, also” (Forbes, October 22, 1990).

In the midst of the 1990 stock market slump after Berkshire had fallen 36% from $8,675 to $5,500. Fortune magazine estimated that Buffett had a paper loss so far for the year of $1.5 billion or $215,450 an hour. He said, “I have not cut back from double hamburgers to single hamburgers” (Fortune, November 5, 1990).

When asked, “How about the corporate jet,” Buffett responded, “That’ll be the last thing to go” (Fortune, November 5, 1990).

His observation that if you could simply extrapolate the past into the future, “the richest people all would be librarians” (Widely quoted).

On once contemplating shorting a $1 stock, Buffett said he was told by a friend, “Isn’t that like jumping off a pancake?” (Annual meeting in 1990).

“Wall Street is the only place that people ride to in a Rolls-Royce to get advice from those who take the subway” (Los Angeles Times Magazine, April 7, 1991).

Re “Elephant bumpers,” Buffett’s term for bosses blinded by the limelight: “If they’re bumping into elephants at industry meetings, they think they’re elephants too” (Fortune, April 22, 1991).

“If you can eliminate the government as a 46% partner, the business will be far more valuable” (Widely quoted).

Of preparation for the celebrity tennis match (February 9, 1992) in which Buffett teamed with Martina Navratilova to play Pam Shriver and former Dallas Cowboys quarterback Danny White: “I think that the majority of my training for this event is to learn how to say ‘yours’ in Czechoslovakian” (Omaha World-Herald, January 21, 1992).

“We believe that according the name ‘investor’ to institutions that trade actively is like calling someone who repeatedly engages in one-night stands a romantic” (1991 Annual Report).

On longevity: “We take as our hero Methuselah” [Noah’s ancestor is said to have lived 969 years] (Annual meeting in 1992).

Once [September 2, 1992], Omaha stockbroker George Morgan walked up to Buffett, addressing him as “Mr. Buffett.” “I know,” said Buffett.

Referring to acquisitions as frog-kissing: “I’ve observed that many acquisition-hungry managers were apparently mesmerized by their childhood reading of the story about the frog-kissing princess. Remembering her success, they pay dearly for the right to kiss corporate toads, expecting wondrous transfigurations.… Initially, disappointing results only deepen their desire to round up new toads. (Fanaticism, said philosopher Santayana, consists of redoubling your effort when you’ve forgotten your aim.) Ultimately, even the most optimistic manager must face reality. Standing knee-deep in unresponsive toads, he announces an enormous ‘restructuring’ charge. In this corporate equivalent of a Head Start program, the CEO receives the education but the stockholders pay the tuition.

“In my early days as a manager, I, too, dated a few toads. They were cheap dates—I’ve never been much of a sport—but my results matched those of acquirers who courted higher-price toads. I kissed and they croaked” (1992 Annual Report).

Re tighter accounting: “Managers thinking about accounting issues should never forget one of Abraham Lincoln’s favorite riddles: ‘How many legs does a dog have if you call his tail a leg?’ The answer: ‘Four, because calling a tail a leg does not make it a leg’” (1992 Annual Report).

“We’ve long felt that the only value of forecasters is to make fortune-tellers look good” (1992 Annual Report).

“Our … conclusion—that an increased capital base will act as an anchor …

—seems incontestable. The only open question is whether we can drag the anchor along at some tolerable, though slowed, pace” (1992 Annual Report).

In reference to Berkshire being one of the largest “super-cat” writers of insurance for catastrophes such as hurricanes and earthquakes: “Now you know why I suffer eyestrain: from watching The Weather Channel” (1992 Annual Report).

After introducing himself and Munger, he said he’d like to introduce the rest of Berkshire’s board—“the entire three” (Annual meeting in 1993).

After adjourning the meeting in about five minutes, Buffett said, “You can see I don’t get paid by the hour” (Annual meeting in 1993).

“I’d like to introduce Berkshire’s managers, except Mrs. B. couldn’t take time off from work for foolishness like a shareholders’ meeting” (Annual meeting in 1993).

“I was looking through the shareholder list recently and saw the name of someone not even born. I knew the mother was having a difficult pregnancy. I checked into it and found that the baby was our youngest shareholder. He was a shareholder two weeks before he was born. He’s Riley Timothy Guerin [Rick Guerin’s son].” At that moment a cartoon flashed on the screen of a baby saying, “What do you mean I have only two shares of Berky?” (Annual meeting in 1993).

Buffett is known for advocating executive compensation based strictly on performance: “I’ve sat on 15 different boards and the only one in which I was invited on the compensation committee was at Salomon, and we all know how that one turned out” (Annual meeting in 1993).

After answering a question, Buffett asked Munger for his thoughts. Munger said, “I’ve got nothing to add.” Quipped Buffett, “Sometimes he subtracts.” Later during one of Munger’s long pauses, Buffett said, “I feel a rebuttal coming on here” (Annual meeting in 1993).

Munger launched into a long lesson about owning too many stocks, saying no one can follow 40 stocks in 30 different industries. “Can you?” he asked Buffett. “Not after that speech!” said Buffett. “You may only need one” (Annual meeting in 1993).

Rick Berkshire, son of Robert Berkshire, asked if any plans were in the works to change Berkshire’s name. “You don’t have to worry about us changing anything at Berkshire,” Buffett said (Annual meeting in 1993).

In response to the question, How do you read an annual report?: “Well, I start at the front and read to the back” (Annual meeting in 1993).

Late in the meeting, Buffett launched into heavy criticism of business consultants, saying they were a form of intellectual prostitution. About that time a number of people began leaving the meeting. Said Buffett, “The consultants are now leaving the room” (Annual meeting in 1993).

“In the early 1900s, a reporter was sent over from Europe to do a story on Andrew Carnegie. And he cabled back to his editors, ‘I never realized that there was so much money in libraries.’ That fellow might have had a career in writing investment reports” (Annual meeting in 1993).

Lights! Camera! Cash Flow! Capital Cities/ABC Chairman Thomas Murphy and investor Warren Buffett, whose Berkshire Hathaway owned about 20% of the network’s stock, appeared on the August 27, 1993 episode of the ABC soap All My Children, returning after their cameos of two years prior. The network shelled out $300 or so to each—about right considering their performances. When handed his check, Murphy said, “I’m going to frame this.” Said Buffett, “I’m going to frame the stub” (Fortune, September 6, 1993).

“All these little kids came up to me wanting my autograph [at a College World Series event where Buffett threw out the first pitch], so I wanted to look like Nolan Ryan” said Buffett; then he described bungling the pitch, “I looked up and saw these same kids erasing my signature” (Interview by Sue Baggarly of WOWT-TV in Omaha, October 14, 1993).

“My health is terrific. I just went for the first time in six or seven years for a general checkup. The doctor asked me about my diet and said, ‘You’re counting rather heavily on your genes, aren’t you?’” (Interview by Sue Baggarly, WOWT-TV in Omaha, October 14, 1993).

“Going short is betting on something that’ll happen. If you go short for meaningful amounts, you can go broke. If something is selling for twice what it’s worth, what’s to stop it from selling for 10 times what it’s worth? You’ll be right eventually, but you may be explaining it to somebody in the poorhouse” (Talk to Columbia business students, October 27, 1993).

Buffett to Ronald Allen, the then Delta Chairman: “The airline industry is to the free-enterprise system what hell is to heaven” (Atlanta Journal Constitution, July 23, 1994).

“I gave this advice one time at Harvard when somebody asked me, ‘Who should I work for?’ I said, ‘Well, go work for somebody you admire. You’re bound to get a good result.’ A couple of weeks later, I received a call from the dean, and he said, ‘What did you tell that group? They’ve all decided to become self-employed!’ ” (Talk to University of Nebraska students, October 10, 1994).

On Munger’s fear of flying: “He’s a guy who has a prayer session before he takes a bus” (Omaha World-Herald, October 1994).

Buffett, when he was 17, got $5 from Barron’s for writing a piece about odd lot statistics. “Five dollars was the only money I ever made from using odd lot statistics” (New York Society of Security Analysts, December 6, 1994).

Graham-Newman had only about $12 million in capital when Buffett worked there. “That’s a rounding error now at Magellan” (New York Society of Security Analysts, December 6, 1994).

“Ben [Graham] used to say he wanted to do three things every day—something foolish, something creative, and something generous. He usually got the foolish done before breakfast. That was typical of Ben” (New York Society of Security Analysts, December 6, 1994).

Higher math talent is not really necessary to be an investor. “You’ve got to figure out the worth of the company and divide by the number of shares outstanding, so it does require division” (New York Society of Security Analysts, December 6, 1994).

Commenting on the unprofitable airline industry, talking about when the Wright brothers flew at Kitty Hawk: “If there had been a capitalist down there, the guy should have shot Wilbur!” (Fortune, April 3, 1995)

Regarding the Kitty Hawk flight: “I mean, you know, one small step for mankind, and one huge step backwards for capitalism!” (The New York Times, December 9, 2003).

The first with a business innovation or to invest is not always the one to make money: “The early bird might get the worm, but the second mouse gets the cheese” (Widely quoted).

“Charlie and I, at 71 and 64, respectively, now keep George Foreman’s picture on our desks. You can make book that our scorn for a mandatory retirement age will grow stronger every year” (1994 Annual Report).

Of selling some Berkshire products like See’s Candies and Dexter shoes at the Berkshire annual meeting: “Though we like to think of the meeting as a spiritual experience, we must remember that even the least secular of religions includes the ritual of the collection plate” (1994 Annual Report). (Note: Some Berkshire shareholders call Omaha, “The spiritual capital of the world.”)

“Of course, what you really should be purchasing is a videotape of the 1995 Orange Bowl. Your Chairman views this classic nightly, switching to slow motion for the fourth quarter. Our cover color this year is a salute to Nebraska’s football coach, Tom Osborne, and his Cornhuskers, the country’s top college team. I urge you to wear Husker red to the annual meeting and promise you that at least 50% of your managerial duo will be in appropriate attire” (1994 Annual Report).

“I buy expensive suits. They just look cheap on me” (Annual meeting in 1994).

Munger: Our chief contribution to the businesses we acquire is what we don’t do.”

Buffett: He has spoken (Annual meeting in 1995).

Shareholder: You’ve repeatedly said that you see many wonderful stock ideas, but can’t invest because they’re too small. Given the fact that many in the audience today have a lower dollar investment threshold…”

Buffett: In other words, do these stocks have names? (Annual meeting in 1995).

Buffett: The government has a 35% interest—a profits interest—in the earnings of all corporations. So at a tax rate of 35%, they in effect own 35% of the stock of American business. And they own a significant share of Berkshire—we write them a check every year. We don’t write you a check, but we write them a check. And we plow your earnings back to create more value for them.

Munger: Are you trying to cheer these people up? (Annual Meeting in 1995).

“To paraphrase President Kennedy, a rising tide lifts all yachts” (1995 Annual Report).

“Soon after our purchase of the Salomon preferred in 1987, I wrote that I had ‘no special insights regarding the direction or future profitability of investment banking.’ Even the most charitable commentator would conclude that I have since proven my point” (1995 Annual Report).

“At Borsheim’s we will also have the world’s largest faceted diamond on display. Two years in the cutting, this inconspicuous bauble is 545 carats in size. Please inspect the stone and let it guide you in determining what size gem is appropriate for the one you love” (1995 Annual Report).

“The most important thing in terms of your circle of competence is not how large the area is, but how well you’ve defined the perimeter. If you know where the edges are, you’re way better off than somebody that’s got one that’s five times as large but they get very fuzzy about the edges” (Talk at University of North Carolina, Center for Public Television, 1995).

Reply to a suggestion that Buffett was getting as famous as the Pope or the President: “My first reaction is that maybe I should tell my barber that we should save the clippings and sell them” (Annual meeting in 1996).

Munger told Buffett he had never actually seen him run formulas discounting future cash flows. “Well, some things you only do in private,” Buffett replied (Annual meeting in 1996).

Buffett of Munger: “I can see. He can hear. We make a great combination” (Annual meeting in 1996).

“Your board has collectively lost 100 pounds in the past year. They must have been trying to live on their director’s fees” (Annual meeting in 1996).

“I was recently studying the 1896 report of Coke (and you think you are behind in your reading!)” (1996 Annual Report).

On being lucky enough to live in a time your talents are recognized: “If I’d been born a few thousand years ago, I’d probably have been some animal’s lunch” (From a column by Bill Gates, which ran in the Omaha World-Herald, March 16, 1997).

“Happiness does not buy money” (Forbes, April 21, 1997).

“You might want to invest where we invest, but don’t eat where we eat” (Annual meeting in 1997).

“If you gave me $100 billion—and I would encourage you to do that—I don’t know how to displace Coke” (Annual meeting in 1997).

Of 18 holes of golf with Bill Gates at the Omaha Country Club: “We had a small wager. But the outcome did not affect the Forbes rankings” (Omaha World–Herald, June 2, 1997).

“I can understand Dairy Queen. It’s pushing the envelope for me, but I can get there” (Talk to students at Mary Washington College, November 11, 1997).

“We will not ask you to adopt the philosophy of the Chicago Cubs fan who reacted to a string of lackluster seasons by saying, ‘Why get upset? Everyone has a bad century now and then’” (1997 Annual Report).

“Try to think kindly of us when we blow one. Along with President Clinton, we will be feeling your pain: The Munger family has more than 90% of its net worth in Berkshire and the Buffetts more than 99%” (1997 Annual Report).

Regarding gold: “It gets dug out of the ground in Africa or someplace. Then we melt it down, dig another hole, bury it again and pay people to stand around guarding it. It has no utility. Anyone watching from Mars would be scratching their head!” (Talk in April 1998).

Concerning growing crowds at the annual meetings: “Maybe it’s a tracking device on the price of Berkshire stock” (Annual meeting in 1998).

Shareholder: “I’m very concerned about your health, seeing your diet [of Cokes, See’s Candy, and Dilly Bars] throughout the annual meeting.”

Buffett: “And that’s just what I do in public” (Annual meeting in 1998).

“Charlie and I are both very healthy. If you were in the life insurance business, you would be happy to write us a standard rate” (Annual meeting in 1998).

“I think I am undertaxed, but I do not send along any voluntary payments” (Annual meeting in 1998).

On how to teach in business schools: “I would say for a final exam, here’s the stock of any Internet company, what’s it worth? And anybody who gave an answer flunks” (Annual meeting in 1998).

Munger: I’ve always said the best way to get what you want is to deserve what you want.

Buffett: I want some more peanut brittle (Annual meeting in 1998).

When queried about the year 2000 problem: “I don’t think it has any investment consequences for Berkshire.… Maybe the government won’t find our tax return” (Annual meeting in 1998).

Upon observation that Buffett’s net worth had increased in the previous decade: “I have noticed” (Adam Smith’s Money Game show, May 18, 1998).

“I thought I ought to start off this by announcing that Bill [Gates] and I have a small bet as to who would get the most applause. I suggested that I bet my house against his. We settled on a small sum, but evidently it isn’t such a small sum to Bill, because just before we came out, he gave me this Nebraska Cornhusker shirt to wear, and then he puts on this purple University of Washington shirt himself” (Fortune, July 20, 1998, reporting on an appearance by Buffett and Gates at the University of Washington).

Buffett after Gates talked about great advances in software: Don’t you think Dairy Queen is more important than that?

Gates: You can manage Dairy Queen Warren, I’ll go and buy Dilly Bars.

Buffett: We’ll raise the price when you come (Fortune, July 20, 1998).

In a response to a question about mergers: “Actually, the two of us [Bill Gates and Buffett himself] have a small announcement we would like to make” (Fortune, July 20, 1998).

“I always say if a traffic cop follows you for 50 miles, you’re going to get a ticket. Clinton has been in somewhat the same position [in his relations with Monica Lewinsky]. But, unfortunately, he went 100 miles an hour” (Buffalo News, September 10, 1998).

“We want a maximum amount of stupid people in the market as possible” (Berkshire special meeting, September 16, 1998).

An agnostic is a person who says, “At least I’m not an atheist, thank God” (Berkshire special meeting, September 16, 1998).

Are rich people jerks? Buffett has said that being rich makes you more of whatever you are—in some cases, a bigger jerk.

“I don’t think Warren’s a big jerk,” said Senator Bob Kerrey.

“But I could be,” Buffett said (Omaha World–Herald, December 13, 1998).

Regarding moats around business franchises: “In my moat, I’d throw in a couple of sharks—or a few gators” (Miami Herald, December 27, 1998, quoting a talk to the University of Florida).

“There are really only three kinds of people in the world: Those who can count and those who can’t” (1998 Annual Report).

“One beneficiary of our increased size has been the U.S. Treasury. The federal income taxes that Berkshire and General Re have paid, or will soon pay, in respect to 1998 earnings total $2.7 billion. That means we shouldered all of the U.S. Government’s expenses for more than a half-day. Follow that thought a little further. If only 625 other U.S. taxpayers had paid the Treasury as much as we and General Re did last year, no one else—neither corporations nor 270 million citizens—would have had to pay federal income taxes or any kind of federal tax (for example, social security or estate taxes). Our shareholders can truly say that they ‘gave at the office’” (1998 Annual Report).

“In connection with General Re merger, we wrote a $30 million check to the government to pay our SEC fee tied to the new shares created by the deal. We understood that this payment set an SEC record. Charlie and I are enormous admirers of what the Commission has accomplished for American investors. We would rather, however, have found another way to share our admiration” (1998 Annual Report).

“I brought along my briefcase indicator here for you. I knew you’d be interested in that” (CNBC interview before Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1999).

CNBC: You have about $15 billion in cash?

Buffett: Well, I don’t have it all on me right now! (CNBC interview before Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1999).

What Buffett thinks of being called the Oracle of Omaha: “Well, what it has in alliteration, it lacks in accuracy” (Annual meeting weekend in 1999).

Buffett said he would answer questions “about six hours, or until we run out of candy” (Annual meeting in 1999).

Meeting adjournment: “All those in favor say, ‘Aye.’ All those opposed say, ‘I’m

leaving!’… I ask you, was Joe Stalin ever any better?” (Annual meeting in 1999).

Regarding academic requirements to get a star football player through school:

Here are the player’s answer to the two questions he had to pass:

Q: What did old McDonald have?



A. Farm.



Q. How do you spell farm?



A. E-I-E-I-O.



(Annual meeting in 1999)

“We ask them [Berkshire subsidiaries] to mail the money to Omaha. We’ll even send them a stamp” (Annual meeting in 1999).

“I tell college students we live about the same. We eat about the same, dress about the same, have a car and TV and air conditioning, but I travel a lot better on NetJets” (Annual meeting in 1999).

Munger: “Continuity in corporate culture is more likely to continue at Berkshire than at most public corporations. I think the capital would be allocated less well, but that’s just too damn bad!”

Buffett: “That’s why we don’t have a PR department!”

(Annual meeting in 1999)

In answer to a question from a student about how to form a nonprofit organization: “I’ve always tried to avoid forming a nonprofit organization” (Omaha World-Herald, October 12, 1999).

Advice to students: “If you can’t pay for it, don’t buy it. Get yourself into a situation where you can buy anything; then we’ll be happy to see you at Borsheims or the Nebraska Furniture Mart” (Omaha World-Herald, October 12, 1999).

“When I issue stock, I tend to break out into a rash” (Omaha World–Herald, November 3, 1999).

“I’m 69, but I have the mind of a 12-year-old” (St. Petersburg Times, December 15, 1999).

“If the stock goes down a lot the day I die, it’s probably a very good buy. If it goes up a lot, I’m really going to be sore” (Omaha World-Herald, February 22, 2000, from a talk to Midland Lutheran College business students in Fremont, Nebraska).

His dismal 1999 results: “My performance reminds me of the quarterback whose report card showed four Fs and a D but who nonetheless had an understanding coach. ‘Son,’ he drawled, ‘I think you’re spending too much time on one subject’” (1999 Annual Report).

“Neither my wife nor I have ever sold a share of Berkshire and—unless our checks stop clearing—we have no intention of doing so” (1999 Annual Report).

“My annual outlays at EJA [Executive Jet] and Borsheims combined, total about ten times my salary. Think of this as a rough guideline for your expenditures with us” (1999 Annual Report).

“I’d write life insurance in an emergency room provided the premiums are high enough” (Widely quoted).

Buffett (on the what-if of being offered the job of chairman of the Federal Reserve Board): I would say no in a hurry.

Munger: I would say no quicker.

Buffett: You notice that we gave answers unequivocally. That alone would disqualify us (Annual meeting in 2000).

On being hit by a bus or truck: “Well, just so it’s not a GEICO driver” (Annual meeting in 2000).

On making investment decisions: “We have no master plan. We’re just thinking all the time, and every now and then something sort of bubbles up to the level of making a telephone call. It would be very depressing for you to see it in action” (Press conference, April 30, 2000).

Shareholder: In 1999, Berkshire Hathaway managed to produce a positive gain in net worth of 1/2 of 1%. That means since present management took over 35 years ago, Berkshire has realized a positive gain each and every year and produced an average annual gain of 24%. Including the years that you ran the Buffett Limited Partnership you’ve had a run of 48 consecutive years of positive gains in net worth without one single down year producing a compounded rate of return of almost 26% annually. On behalf of the long-term shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway, thank you from the bottom of our pocketbooks.

Buffett: Thank you. I hope your question isn’t going to be whether we can continue that (Annual meeting in 2000).

“If it’s trite, it’s right” (Janet Lowe, Damn Right!).

“If it is a nonglamorous business then there is a reasonable chance that the price will be right” (The Wall Street Journal, November 27, 2000).

About checks being mailed to Berkshire: “That’s why I always come down to the office on Saturday to personally open the mail” (Fortune, February 19, 2001).

“Forget about splitting the stock; we’re just going to split my age” (Fortune, February 19, 2001).

“I should pay to have my job” (2000 Annual Report).

“We have embraced the 21st century by entering such cutting-edge industries as brick, carpet, insulation, and paint” (2000 Annual Report).

“I can’t resist pointing out that Berkshire—whose top management has long been mired in the 19th century—is now one of the very few authentic ‘clicks-and-bricks’ businesses around. We went into 2000 with GEICO doing significant business on the Internet, and then we added Acme. You can bet this move by Berkshire is making them sweat in Silicon Valley” (2000 Annual Report).

“It irritates the hell out of me, but you can’t buy love” (Shaw Industries Convention, March 30, 2001).

“With Berkshire you’ll never have to fill out an income tax form because there will be no income [for shareholders]. That’s the sort of promise you can keep” (Shaw Industries Convention, March 30, 2001).

“I don’t smoke and I don’t drink … well, just leave it at that” (Annual meeting in 2001).

“I get these questionnaires about the composition of a board or a nominating committee. And none of that makes any difference in how the business performs. I got one form that said they wanted a list of directors broken down by sex. And I said, ‘None that I know of.’ It just isn’t germane” (Annual meeting in 2001).

“If they’re so rich, how come they’re not smart?” (Widely quoted).

“You cannot buy love. You can buy sex. You can buy testimonial dinners” (Talk to Seattle’s CityClub as reported by the Seattle Post–Intelligencer, July 21, 2001).

“I would not say it is more difficult to be a long-term investor. … If you own a stock and it doesn’t go any place it seems like a long-term” (Talk to Seattle’s CityClub as reported by the Seattle Post–Intelligencer, July 21, 2001).

“If you give a box of See’s to your girlfriend, we own you. If she slaps you, we have no responsibility” (Talk to Seattle’s CityClub, according to a person in the audience).

Agreeing with Bill Gates’ comment that 5,000 years ago Buffett would have just been some animal’s lunch: “It would not have done much good to tell the animal you really ought to see me allocate assets” (Talk to Seattle’s CityClub).

“There’s nothing more serious than Nebraska football. We have divorces in Nebraska where the husband tells the wife, ‘You keep the kids. I want the tickets’” (Furniture Today, November 12, 2001).

On the subject of terrorist attacks: “I would not be a big target. It’s such a low probability. I don’t worry about that sort of thing very much. … Over the years, I’ve had a few threats from time to time. We had a guy run an ad (in the newspaper) seeking an accomplice to kidnap me. That was not the brightest guy in the world” (Furniture Today, November 12, 2001).

“One story I’ve heard illustrates the all-too-common attitude of managers toward owners: A gorgeous woman slinks up to a CEO at a party and through moist lips purrs, ‘I’ll do anything—anything—you want. Just tell me what you would like.’ With no hesitation, he replies, ‘Reprice my options’” (2001 Annual Report).

“In golf, my score is frequently below par on a pro forma basis: I have firm plans to ‘restructure’ my putting stroke and therefore only count the swings I take before reaching the green” (2001 Annual Report).

Asked who he’d want to play his role in a movie about Katharine Graham, Buffett said, “Arnold Schwarzenegger.”

After Buffett gave an eloquent summary of auditing and accountability to shareholders, a fellow panel member said: That sounds wonderful.

Buffett: It was meant to (Securities and Exchange Commission Roundtable, March 4, 2002).

“Some guys chase girls, I chase companies” (The Wall Street Journal, March 11, 2002).

“We want to be rich so we don’t have to find out how we would behave if we were poor” (Annual meeting in 2002).

On his actuarial life left to live: “About 15 million calories (and I don’t want to leave any behind), about 400 haircuts, and about 250 gas fills” (Annual meeting weekend in 2002).

“Some times are like shooting fish in a barrel; other times you can’t find the barrel” (Annual meeting in 2002).

“In my early life, I wanted to be an insurance actuary, but I didn’t have enough charisma” (Film industry’s Jack Valenti quoting Buffett, on Larry King Live, July 27, 2002).

Buffett went into business because he had only two interests when he was growing up: “but I wasn’t very good with girls, so I had to move on to my second interest” (Talk to Georgetown MBA students, November 14, 2002).

“We cherish cost-consciousness at Berkshire. Our model is the widow who went to the local newspaper to place an obituary notice. Told there was a 25-cent-a-word charge, she requested ‘Fred Brown died.’ She was then informed there was a seven-word minimum. ‘Okay’ the bereaved woman replied, ‘make it “Fred Brown died, golf clubs for sale”’” (2002 Annual Report).

Buffett once joked about how powerful former Bank of America CEO Hugh McCall is: “One day Clinton’s secretary was distraught. She had scheduled two

people to meet with the President at the same time—McCall and the Pope. Clinton turned white and told his secretary, “You better show the Pope in first—I only have to kiss his ring” (Forum for Corporate Conscience, Charlotte Observer, March 15, 2003).

When told someone had given birth to a baby girl: “Well, it has to be one or the other” (Annual meeting weekend, 2003).

You don’t want a business that’s like “a horse that never runs, but eats” (Annual meeting in 2003).

“Microsoft has this policy of trying to make their software as user-friendly as possible, so that almost anyone can handle it. In doing that over the years, they’ve had this chimpanzee that they tested all their products on. Last week, the chimp died. Bill, in a panic, called me and said, ‘We need you, Warren’” (Seattle Post–Intelligencer, May 28, 2003).

Buffett, Gates, and Michael Dell were e-mailing about Dell’s wife Susan’s performance in a triathlon event. Buffett said he couldn’t help her much with swimming, running, and biking, but he was qualified to help with pre-race carbo loading for an Ironman (Fortune, June 23, 2003).

On Arnold Schwarzenegger: “I won the look-alike contest for Arnold” (Talk to Wharton Business School students, October 10, 2003).

Regarding derivatives: “They are not in themselves illegal, immoral, or wrong” (Harbus, October 27, 2003).

Asked by a Wharton Business School student to sign a Nebraska Furniture Mart sales receipt, Buffett said: “I’ll put my middle initial in receipts greater than $50” (Wharton Journal, October 20, 2003).

In regard to the fact that top CEOs were seeking Buffett’s advice: “I feel like a priest” (The Wall Street Journal, November 14, 2003).

“When one [investment manager] tells you that increased funds won’t hurt his investment performance, step back: His nose is about to grow” (2003 Annual Report).

“‘Victory,’ President Kennedy told us after the Bay of Pigs disaster, ‘has a thousand fathers, but defeat is an orphan.’ At NFM [Nebraska Furniture Mart], we knew we had a winner a month after the boffo opening in Kansas City, when our new store attracted an unexpected paternity claim. A speaker there, referring to the Blumkin family, asserted, ‘They had enough confidence and the policies of the Administration were working such that they were able to provide work for 1,000 of our fellow citizens.’ The proud papa at the podium? President George W. Bush” (2003 Annual Report).

“Once a customer has tried us [NetJets], going back to commercial aviation is like going back to holding hands” (2003 Annual Report).

When spotted eating a Krispy Kreme donut, Buffett supposedly said, “Man cannot live on DQ Blizzards alone” (Motley Fool, April Fool’s Day, 2004).

When asked about the possibility of Microsoft’s Bill Gates succeeding him at Berkshire: “Did Bill put you up to this?” (Annual meeting in 2004).

“When my mother used to sing me songs about compound interest, there wasn’t any need to go any further” (Annual meeting in 2004).

“You just have to learn how to calibrate his [Munger’s] answers. If you and Charlie discuss something and he says ‘no’ then we put all of our money in it. If he says, ‘That’s the stupidest thing we ever heard of,’ then we make a more moderate investment. If you calibrate his answers, then you’ll get a lot of wisdom” (Widely quoted).

After lunch at Gorat’s with Wharton students, Buffett stood for a group photo outside the restaurant. Someone called for all the undergraduates to assemble around Buffett for the photo. Buffett said, “Undergraduates and dropouts,” a reference to his premature departure from Wharton (Wharton News–Journal, November 12, 2004).

“You can’t buy love. It’s very irritating. It’s so much easier to just write out a check, ‘I’d like a million dollars worth of love.’ You can get a million worth of sex but…” (TechTopics, published by the Georgia Tech Alumni Association, Spring 2005).

“To combat employees’ natural tendency to save their own skins, we have always promised NICO’s [National Indemnity’s] workforce that no one will be fired because of declining volume, however severe the contraction. (This is not Donald Trump’s sort of place.)” (2004 Annual Report).

“Charlie, who is far more knowledgeable than I am on the subject [Fruit of the Loom sales], assures me that women are not wearing more underwear. With this expert input, I can only conclude that our [Fruit of the Loom’s] market share in the women’s category must be growing rapidly” (2004 Annual Report).

On what to do at the annual meeting: “Stop by the NetJets booth at the Qwest to learn about viewing these planes. Come to Omaha by bus; leave in your new plane” (2004 Annual Report).

On criticism that Berkshire’s board is not independent enough: Citing the biblical passage Matthew 6:21 in which Jesus says, “For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also,” Buffett added, “Measured by the biblical standard, the Berkshire board is a model” (2004 Annual Report).

“I probably got interested [in the stock market] when I was seven or thereabouts. I wasted my time before that. It’s a little like W. C. Fields when he inherited some money; somebody asked him what he did with it. And he said he spent half of it on whiskey, and the rest he wasted” (Annual meeting in 2005).

Upon hearing Munger tell of a friend who sold a modest house with an ocean view for $27 million: “For $27 million, I’ll look at my bathtub” (Annual meeting in 2005).

“I was sucking my thumb when I should’ve been writing checks” (University of Nebraska–Lincoln appearance with Bill Gates, September 30, 2005).

On wanting to be more of a speed reader: “I probably wasted 10 years of my life reading slowly” (University of Nebraska-Lincoln appearance with Bill Gates, September 30, 2005).

On urging students to drink more Coke: “I don’t care whether you drink it. Just open the can” (University of Nebraska–Lincoln appearance with Bill Gates, September 30, 2005).

Asked why Berkshire’s stock had gone up recently [December 2005]: “The stock started going up when word got out about your [University of Kansas student group] visit. The ball is in my court now” (Omaha World–Herald, December 3, 2005).

“Over the years, a number of very smart people have learned the hard way that a long string of impressive numbers multiplied by a single zero always equals zero” (2005 Annual Report).

Asked what he thought of “open-source software,” Buffett said he had three baskets on his desk: “In, out, and too hard” (Talk to University of Nevada students, January 17, 2006).

“Having the investing gene wouldn’t do much if I were in Africa running from lions screaming, ‘I allocate capital’” (Talk to a group of Wharton business students in Omaha, February 25, 2006).

“Long ago, Mark Twain said: ‘A man who tries to carry a cat home by its tail will learn a lesson that can be learned in no other way.’ If Twain were around now, he might try winding up a derivatives business. After a few days, he would opt for cats” (2005 Annual Report).

Talking about his role as an animated character in a film for kids called The Secret Millionaire’s Club: “I can’t afford to go to Hollywood. There is no money in this stuff” (Los Angeles Times Series, March 9, 2006).

On the length of his term as CEO of Salomon: “Nine months and four days, and if you don’t think I was counting, you’re crazy” (Meeting with Columbia Business School students March 24, 2006).

“I have friends who like ethanol and friends who don’t like ethanol, and I want you to know I stand up for my friends” (Annual meeting in 2006).

Buffett: I read about five newspapers every day, and I think Charlie reads about the same.

Munger: Four.

Buffett: It shows (Annual meeting in 2006).

“Blessed are the meek, that they shall inherit the earth. But the question is after they inherit the earth, will they stay meek?” (Press conference, May 7, 2006)

Buffett has said his concentration while playing bridge is so steely that if naked women walked by, he would not notice (Omaha World–Herald, August 6, 2006).

Two ways to spend all his money in the wrong way: “I could have 50,000 people to paint my portrait until I got a perfect one, or I could really outdo the Egyptians and build a tomb that would make everyone forget the Sphinx” (Newsweek, September 5, 2006).

“There are businesses I bought that I haven’t seen yet, and I sincerely hope that they are still there” (Jerusalem Post, September 19, 2006).

On losing all his chips playing poker at a charity event at Borsheims: “It was different than bridge. I was confused. I thought the low score won” (Omaha World–Herald, December 8, 2006).

“It’s probably true that hard work never killed anyone—but why take the chance?” (Quoting Ronald Reagan, 2006 Annual Report).

On searching for acquisitions that are elephants and not mice. “Our exemplar is the older man who crashed his grocery cart into that of a much younger fellow while both were shopping. The elderly man explained apologetically that he had lost track of his wife and was preoccupied searching for her. His new acquaintance said that by coincidence his wife had also wandered off and suggested that it might be more efficient if they jointly looked for the two women. Agreeing, the older man asked his new companion what his wife looked like. ‘She’s a gorgeous blonde,’ the fellow answered, ‘with a body that would cause a bishop to go through a stained glass window, and she’s wearing tight white shorts. How about yours?’ The senior citizen wasted no words: ‘Forget her, we’ll look for yours’” (2006 Annual Report).

Regarding the stock listings: “With two exceptions, those that had a market value of more than $700 million at the end of 2006 are itemized. We don’t itemize the two securities referred to, which have a market value of $1.9 billion, because we continue to buy them. I could, of course, tell you their names. But then I would have to kill you” (2006 Annual Report).

When the subject turned to the load on the U.S. of so many lawsuits: “I’m going to sue Jaime [Dimon, CEO of J. P. Morgan] because I think he’s ready to settle” (Conference about capital markets at Georgetown University, March 13, 2007).

On the suggestion he could influence China to curb atrocities in Sudan’s Darfur region: “I can be a direct descendant of William Jennings Bryan, but I will not be changing the Chinese government’s policy. I doubt I could change the policies of the Douglas County Board” (Omaha World–Herald, March 19, 2007).

“Marry up and hope you can find someone willing to marry down” (Annual meeting in 2007).

“When we went to close out Gen Re’s derivatives book, we took a $400-million loss on a portfolio that was ‘marked to market’ by the prior management and auditors.… I wish I could have sold the auditors instead” (Annual meeting in 2007).

“Our managers don’t leave, and they don’t die. I tie immortality into the contract negotiations. I use immortality whenever I need a tiebreaker. Mrs. B died at 104 after quitting at 105. I use this as an example for many managers of how bad it is to quit” (Press conference in 2007).

“Buy stock in a company that’s so good that an idiot can run it, because sooner or later one will.… Now I think that sort of applies to the country” (Senator Clinton fundraiser, June 26, 2007).

At the Allen & Co. media conference in Sun Valley, Idaho, where lodging, meals, and activities are free: “I’m here for the freeloading” (CNBC, July 11, 2007).

[For the right investment] “I can spend money faster than Imelda Marcos” (Wall Street Journal, August 21, 2007).

On becoming more popular for his cash during a credit crunch: “I’m definitely more popular than I was a few months ago. But I started from a small base” (The Wall Street Journal, August 21, 2007).

About marking securities to market rather than to some model: “In one way, I’m sympathetic to the institutional reluctance to face the music. I’d give a lot to mark my weight to ‘model’ rather than to ‘market’” (Fortune, September 3, 2007).

Leaving the office Friday afternoon before Labor Day weekend, Buffett quipped to Debbie Bosanek: “Take Monday off, but come in on Sunday” (August 31, 2007).

“I have a McDonald’s card, which lets me eat free at any McDonald’s in Omaha the rest of my life. So that’s why the Buffett family has Christmas dinner at McDonald’s” (Interview with CNBC’s Becky Quick on their trip to China in October 2007).

On not knowing when the last shoe has dropped for financial writeoffs: “You don’t know if it’s a one-legged man or a centipede” (CNBC, December 11, 2007).

When asked by Liz Claman of Fox Business Network what he is buying: “You’re irresistible, but I’ll resist” (Barron’s, December 15, 2007).

“When you have an AAA-rated company issue bonds at 14% in a 4% interest rate environment, you are now seeing the cow jump over the moon” (CNBC, February 12, 2008).

Person which whom he would most like to have lunch: “I would have to say Isaac Newton or Benjamin Franklin.… But I don’t think I would pass up the opportunity with Sophia Loren” (Talk to students of Emory’s Goizueta Business School and McCombs School of Business at the University of Texas in Omaha, February 15, 2008).

“I’ve reluctantly discarded the notion of my continuing to manage the portfolio after my death—abandoning my hope to give new meaning to the term ‘thinking outside the box’” (2007 Annual Report).

“Warren always says you should take the high road in life because it’s less crowded” (Munger in a talk at Caltech, March 11, 2008).

In response to a question about undue pressure “to keep up with the Joneses”: “Just keep up with the Buffetts” (Annual meeting in 2008).

Munger: Regarding pitfalls, I would predict that if you have an extreme political ideology, you are very likely to make a lot of dumb charitable gifts.

Buffett: If you hang around Charlie enough, you get the sunny side of life (Annual meeting in 2008).

“There are [free] Cokes in the back [of the room]. If you want a Pepsi, get your own” (Press conference, May 4, 2008, in Omaha).

Munger: I have nothing to add.

Buffett: He’s been practicing for weeks (Annual meeting in 2008).

While staying at Bill Gates’ home, Buffett got up in the night and hit his toe on some furniture. Having broken a toe, Buffett said he planned to sue Gates. Buffett said if his lawsuit is successful it would widen his gap over Gates as the richest person in the world (Told at a press conference in Lausanne, Switzerland in May 2008).

“Up until the age of about 20, I probably did think if I got rich, I would buy a baseball team. Then I got rich, and changed my mind” (CNBC’s Warren Buffett Watch, June 11, 2001, quoting a story in The New York Times from the previous year).

Showing off that he has become hightech and has a cell phone: “It’s an 1893 model, I think. Alexander Graham Bell gave this to me personally” (CNBC, July 9, 2008).

After his previous comment that only in a financial crisis do you find who has been “swimming naked” because the tide goes out, he added: “We found out that Wall Street has been kind of a nudist beach” (CNBC, August 22, 2008).

On throwing a baseball pitch to Jack Welch at Boston’s Fenway Park before a Red Sox–Tampa Bay Rays game: “Anything he calls for. I’ve got a fastball, a curve, a sinker, you know a spitball, a knuckleball, a sidearm delivery. And if he calls for any pitch, including the ball bouncing four or five times before it gets to the plate, I’m going to throw it” (CNBC, September 9, 2008). [Buffett threw a perfect strike.]

During a talk to the media conference in Sun Valley in 1999, Buffett fleshed out the story about the Don Keough family not investing in the Buffett Partnership. Don Keough’s son Clarke was on hand for the retelling: “One night, in the summer of 1962, I started heading over to the Keough house.… [to again ask for money for the partnership]… [T]he whole place was dark, silent. There wasn’t a thing to see. But I knew what was going on. I knew that Don and Mickie were hiding upstairs, so I didn’t leave.

“I rang that doorbell. I knocked. Nothing happened. But Don and Mickie were upstairs, and it was pitch-black.

“Too dark to read, and too early to go to sleep. And I remember that day as if it were yesterday. That was June 21, 1962.

“Clarke, when were you born?”

“March 21, 1963.”

“It’s little things like that history turns on. So you should be glad they didn’t give me [any money]” (Alice Schroeder, The Snowball: Warren Buffett and the Business of Life, p. 16, 2008).

“As we view GEICO’s current opportunities, Tony [Nicely] and I feel like two

hungry mosquitoes in a nudist camp. Juicy targets are everywhere” (2008 Annual Report).

“By yearend investors of all stripes were bloodied and confused much as if they were small birds that had strayed into a badminton game” (2008 Annual Report).

“As the year progressed, a series of life-threatening problems within many of the world’s great financial institutions was unveiled.… The watchword throughout the country became the creed I saw on restaurant walls when I was young: ‘In God we trust, all others pay cash’” (2008 Annual Report).

“What would you do if you were in President Obama’ shoes right now with GM?”Buffett: “Can I use a lifeline? I have a friend…” (CNBC, March 9, 2009).

Global warming: Buffett told Bill Gates that since he was already 78 and would wind up six feet under that he was likely to be subject to climate change soon—I hope not too soon” (Fortune, June 22, 2009 quoting Buffett from a Microsoft CEO Summit held on May 21, 2009).

One reason he doesn’t drink: “I can behave silly enough without it” (Omaha World–Herald, June 14, 2009).

Even with a recent cataract operation, Buffett said he could see no green shoots, “no bounce” in the economy (CNBC, June 24, 2004).

In saying that the first stimulus package wasn’t enough and that a second one is needed, Buffett made the comparison that the first stimulus package was like a half tablet of Viagra and then having a bunch of candy thrown in, it didn’t have the desired effect (ABC’s Good Morning America, July 9, 2009).

Asked which index he follows the most, he said “the freight-train index” (ABC’s Good Morning America, July 9, 2009).

Re the recession: Over Father’s Day, I don’t know which America’s families rebelled against their father that day, but sales were bad. Apparel sales were bad. We’re in the underwear business. We see how they’re moving every day and wives are not buying underwear for their husbands (laughs). It’s still very, very soft.

CNBC: The underwear indicator is bad.

Buffett: Yeah, right, under is going down (CNBC, July 9, 2009).

On how animators should portray him as a TV cartoon character for the Web series the Secret Millionaires Club to teach children about finance: “Make me look like George Clooney, but I think that’s too difficult for them” (The New York Times, July 27, 2009).

Test-driving BYD’s EG electric-car: “We’ll be back after we pick up a few girls” (Video of the test drive, 2009).

On being one of only five speakers out of 77 people to appear at Fortune magazine’s annual Most Powerful Women Summit in Carlsbad, California: “For a guy who couldn’t get a date in high school, this is heaven” (Omaha World-Herald, September 20, 2009).

On donating money: “If you do it just right, you’ll have your last check bounce” (Omaha World–Herald, October 25, 2009).

“I like issuing shares at Berkshire about as much as I enjoy prepping for a colonoscopy” (CNBC, January 20, 2010).

“For a million-seven, you can call up Warren” (Charity lunch won by Salida Capital for a $1.65 million bid at Smith & Wollensky steakhouse in New York, February 22, 2010).

“P.S. Come by rail” (End of the annual meeting section of the 2009 Annual Report).

CNBC’s Becky Quick: What’s 2,350,000 worth in 15 years if it compounds at 13%?

Buffett: About 10 million.

CNBC’s Joe Kernen [incredulous]: Were you using the Rule of 72?

Buffett: Joe, no actually I was calculating the distance to the moon and dividing by the speed of light (CNBC, March 1, 2010)

Envy is the worst of the Seven Deadly Sins because it only hurts you. But lust and gluttony can make for a heck of a weekend (Annual Meeting weekend in 2010).

“I plan to work past 100 but to do so I may have to learn to think outside the box” (Deal Journal, August 27 2010).

“If the government hadn’t acted [with a bailout], I would be eating Thanksgiving dinner at McDonald’s” (CNBC, November 17, 2010).

On convincing Morningstar CEO Joe Mansueto to join the Giving Pledge effort: Monsueto: “I sent Warren a note [of acceptance] at noon. He replied at 3 o’clock saying ‘Joe, I was out at a noon meeting and would have responded sooner. I’m going to send you a box of See’s for Christmas. You can tell your wife it’s from you. Let your conscience be your guide’” (Chicago Tribune, December 10, 2010).

Saying “the ten most immortal words in the history of economics” came from President George W. Bush in 2008 when Bush said, “If money isn’t loosened up, this sucker could go down!” (Vanity Fair, January 6, 2011)

On hiring investment manager Todd Combs: “Our goal was a two-year-old Secretariat, not a 10-year-old Seabiscuit, not the smartest metaphor for an 80-year-old CEO.” (Vanity Fair, January 6, 2011, quoting from an early peek at Berkshire’s 2010 Annual Report)

Quoting an investor about the financial crises of 2008-2009: “This is worse than divorce, I’ve lost half my net worth—and I still have my wife” (2010 Annual Report).

Updating Aesop’s fable: “A girl in a convertible is worth five in the phoen book” (2010 Annual Report).

“All the elephants don’t want to go into my zoo” (CNBC, March 2, 2011).

“It was a zebra,” referring to a midsize acquisition that didn’t happen (CNBC, March 2, 2011). This apparently was a reference to the PPL purchase of some of E.On’s European energy assets for $6 billion.

“Berkshire is a collection of odds and ends. Mostly odds” (Fortune, May 19, 2011)

“I hope when they decide to cut Social Security that they pay alphabetically” (CNBC, July 7, 2011).

“I read [securities filings] like other people read Playboy. That’s what happens when you’re 80” (CNBC, July 7, 2011).

On having a tax-increase proposal named after him: “That’s been my childhood dream” (Chicago Sun-Times, October 27, 2011).

“I often tell people Bill {Gates} and I are so rich because we share a comb” (The Time of Our Lives, Tom Brokaw, p. 158).



It’s Not Over.

New York Yankees catcher Yogi Berra said, “When you come to a fork in the road take it.” Another Yogism: “I really didn’t say everything I said.” Here’s Yogi, with his finger out of the glove, during spring training in Tampa in March 1961.

(AP/Wide World Photos)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Wit of Warren Buffett

The Wit of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Wit of Warren Buffett



Berkshire’s First NetJet

This is the only photo of man’s first flight. Orville Wright is at the controls of the Wright Flyer and has just taken off as his brother Wilbur Wright was at the side to hold the wing to balance the machine. This was the plane’s first flight at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, on December 17, 1903. Orville flew the craft for 120 feet (traveling at 6.81 mph) along the dunes of Kitty Hawk. Orville set up the photograph by placing a tripod at the location where the plane was to take off. John T. Daniels snapped the shutter during the 12-second flight. It was a big day for aviators as well as photographers. It was the first of four short flights that day. The longest was flown by Wilbur Wright over a distance of 852 feet. Now, more than 100 years later, Buffett has an airline: NetJets.

(AP/Wide World Photos)



(Photo by Mary Porter)

The Wright Brothers

in Book Form

The Wit of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett



U.S. Senator Bob Kerrey, Debra Winger, and Buffett

“The real trick to this is having Debra [Winger] as a co-host. Otherwise, this room would be empty,” Buffett said at a fund-raiser for Kerrey that Buffett and Winger cohosted.

(Omaha World Herald)



(Photo by

Nancy

Line Jacobs)

Knows Football

Former Nebraska football coach Tom Osborne.

Of Permanent Value The Wit of Warren Buffett

The Wit of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Wit of Warren Buffett



What? A Phone Call?

Buffett, at world headquarters August 28, 2000, standing under a photo of the old Berkshire textile mill complex and in front of a newly acquired pinball machine. (See “Pinball Wizards” chapter.) Things seem calm, but were actually “bubbling up to the point of making a phone call.” Days later, Berkshire announced plans to buy Shaw Industries.

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

The Wit of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Wit of Warren Buffett

The Wit of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett



Mark Twain

Of Permanent Value The Wit of Warren Buffett

The Wit of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Wit of Warren Buffett



Joe Mansueto



(Photo courtesy of

Debbie Bosanek)

Buffett Overdosing on Root Beer Floats at

Piccolo Pete’s Restaurant in Omaha

The restaurant, which opened in 1933, is a favorite of Buffett’s. He has frequented it with such celebrity guests as Jimmy Buffett, Alex Rodriguez, Ben Stein, Bill Gates, and Jeff Immelt. Buffett also has brought some of his visiting student groups to the restaurant, which is now run by Donna Sheehan and Dee Graves. Buffett usually has a chicken dish and chicken noodle soup, and always has a large root beer float. Like Gorat’s with your steak you have three choices of sides: spaghetti, mostaccioli, or green beans.



Piccolo Pete’s Owner

Donna Sheehan

(Photo courtesy of Donna Sheehan)

The Wit of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Wit of Warren Buffett



298





THE WISDOM OF WARREN BUFFETT


“I will tell you how to become rich. Close the doors. Be fearful when others are greedy. Be greedy when others are fearful” (Buffett lecturing a group of students at Columbia University when he was 21).

Visualizing success at age seven: “I don’t have much money now but someday I will and I’ll have my picture in the paper” (Attributed to Buffett’s mother, Leila Buffett, about 1937. Siimon Reynolds, Thoughts of Chairman Buffett, 1998).

“The investor of today does not profit from yesterday’s growth” (Commercial and Financial Chronicle, December 6, 1951).

The joys of compounding: “One story stands out. This, of course, is the saga of trading acumen etched into history by the Manhattan Indians when they unloaded their island to that notorious spendthrift, Peter Minuit in 1626. My understanding is that they received $24 net. For this, Minuit received 22.3 square miles which works out to about 621,688,320 square feet. While on the basis of comparable sales, it is difficult to arrive at a precise appraisal, a $20 per square foot estimate seems reasonable given a current land value for the island of $12,433,766,400 ($121/2 billion). To the novice, perhaps this sounds like a decent deal. However, the Indians have only had to achieve a 61/2% return (the tribal mutual fund representative would have promised them this) to obtain the last laugh on Minuit. At 61/2%, $24 becomes $42,105,772,800 ($42 billion) in 338 years, and if they just managed to squeeze out an extra half point to get to 7%, the present value becomes $205 billion” (Buffett Partnership Letter, January 1965).

“The course of the stock market will determine, to a great degree, when we will be right, but the accuracy of our analysis of the company will largely determine whether we will be right. In other words, we tend to concentrate on what should happen, not when it should happen. … If we start deciding, based on our guesses or emotions, whether we will or won’t participate in a business where we should have some long-run edge, we’re in trouble. We will not sell our interests in businesses (stocks) when they are attractively priced just because some astrologer thinks the quotations may go lower even though forecasts are obviously going to be right some of the time.… The availability of a quotation for your business interest (stock) should always be an asset to be utilized if desired. If it gets silly enough in either direction, you take advantage of it. Its availability should never be turned into a liability whereby its periodic aberrations in turn formulate your judgments” (Buffett Partnership Letter, July 1966).

“All of our investments usually appear undervalued to me—otherwise we wouldn’t own them” (Buffett Partnership Letter, July 1966).

“I am not in the business of predicting general stock market or business fluctuations. If you think I can do this, or think it is essential to an investment program, you should not be in the partnership” (Buffett Partnership Letter, July 1966).

“As Ben Graham said: ‘In the long run, the market is a weighing machine—in the short run, a voting machine.’ I have always found it easier to evaluate weights dictated by fundamentals than votes dictated by psychology” (Buffett Partnership Letter, 1969).

“Maybe grapes from a little 8-acre vineyard in France are really the best in the whole world, but I have always had a suspicion that about 99% of it is in the telling and about 1% of it is in the drinking” (Janet Lowe, Warren Buffett Speaks, p. 36 quoting SEC file No. HO-784, Blue Chip Stamp et al/Warren Buffett, letter to Charles N. Huggins, December 13, 1972).

“The sillier the market’s behavior, the greater the opportunity for the business-like investor. Follow [Ben] Graham and you will profit from folly rather than participate in it” (Preface to the fourth edition of The Intelligent Investor, 1973).

“I shave my face on the same side every morning and put on the same shoe first and people are creatures of habit” (Courier-Express v. Evening News testimony, November 4, 1977).

“We ordinarily make no attempt to buy equities for anticipated favorable stock price behavior in the short term. In fact, if their business experience continues to satisfy us, we welcome lower market prices of stocks we own as an opportunity to acquire even more of a good thing at a better price” (1977 Annual Report).

“When companies with outstanding businesses and comfortable financial positions find their shares selling far below intrinsic value in the marketplace, no alternative action can benefit shareholders as surely as repurchases” (Widely quoted).

“Neither a short-term borrower nor a long-term lender be” (Paraphrasing Polonius, 1979 Annual Report).

“[The] argument is made that there are just too many [investment] question marks about the near-term future; wouldn’t it be better to wait until things clear up a bit? You know the prose: ‘Maintain buying reserves until current uncertainties are resolved,’ etc. Before reaching for that crutch, face up to two unpleasant facts: the future is never clear; you pay a very high price in the stock market for a cheery consensus. Uncertainty actually is the friend of the buyer of long-term values” (Forbes, August 6, 1979).

“Your charitable preferences are as good as mine” (1981, announcing that Berkshire shareholders could designate their choice of charitable contributions; the program was discontinued in 2003.)

“We do not need more people gambling in non-essential instruments identified with the stock market in this country, nor brokers who encourage them to do so. What we need are investors and advisers who look at the long-term prospects for an enterprise and invest accordingly. We need intelligent commitment of investment capital, not leveraged market wagers. The propensity to operate in the intelligent, pro-social sector of capital markets is deterred, not enhanced, by an active and exciting casino operating in somewhat the same arena, utilizing somewhat similar language and serviced by the same work force” (From a letter Buffett wrote to John Dingell, Chairman of the House Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, in March 1982, when Congress was considering whether to allow the Chicago Mercantile Exchange to trade futures contracts).

“If something’s not worth doing at all, it’s not worth doing well” (1981 Annual Report).

“Geometric progressions eventually forge their own anchors” (1982 Annual Report).

“The market, like the Lord, helps those who help themselves. But, unlike the Lord, the market does not forgive those who know not what they do” (1982 Annual Report).

“As we look at the major acquisitions that others made during 1982, our reaction is not envy, but relief that we were non-participants. For in many of these acquisitions, managerial intellect wilted in competition with managerial adrenaline. The thrill of the chase blinded the pursuers to the consequences of the catch. Pascal’s observation seemed apt: ‘It has struck me that all men’s misfortunes spring from the single cause that they are unable to stay quietly in one room’” (1982 Annual Report).

“Although our form is corporate, our attitude is partnership. Charlie Munger and I think of our shareholders as owner-partners, and of ourselves as managing partners. (Because of the size of our shareholdings we also are, for better or worse, controlling partners.) We do not view the company itself as the ultimate owner of our business assets but, instead, view the company as a conduit through which our shareholders own the assets” (1983 Annual Report).

Quoting John Maynard Keynes: “The difficulty lies not in the new ideas but in escaping from the old ones” (1983 Annual Report).

“During the 19-year tenure of present management, book value has grown from $19.46 per share to $975.83, or 22.6% compounded annually. Considering our present size, nothing close to this rate of return can be sustained. Those who believe otherwise, should pursue a career in sales, but avoid one in mathematics” (1983 Annual Report). (Author’s note: For once, Buffett got his math wrong. In the subsequent 17 years, Berkshire’s annual compound rate of growth rose to 22.6%.)

Investors should be “focused on business results, not market prices” (1983 Annual Report).

“I heard a story recently that is applicable to our insurance accounting problems: a man was traveling abroad when he received a call from his sister informing him that their father had died unexpectedly. It was physically impossible for the brother to get back home for the funeral, but he told his sister to take care of the funeral arrangements and to send the bill to him. After returning home he received a bill for several thousand dollars, which he promptly paid. The following month another bill came along for $15, and he paid that too. Another month followed, with a similar bill. When, in the next month, a third bill for $15 was presented, he called his sister to ask what was going on. ‘Oh’, she said. ‘I forgot to tell you. We buried Dad in a rented suit’” (1984 Annual Report).

“I would like you to imagine a national coin-flipping contest. Let’s assume we get 225 million Americans up tomorrow morning and we ask them all to wager a dollar. They go out in the morning at sunrise, and they all call the flip of a coin. If they call correctly, they win a dollar from those who called wrong. Each day the losers drop out, and on the subsequent day the stakes build as all previous winnings are put on the line. After 10 flips on 10 mornings, there will be approximately 220,000 people in the United States who have correctly called ten flips in a row. They each will have won a little over $1,000.

“Now this group will probably start getting a little puffed up about this, human nature being what it is. They may try to be modest, but at cocktail parties they will occasionally admit to attractive members of the opposite sex what their technique is, and what marvelous insights they bring to the field of flipping” (Hermes magazine, Columbia Business School, 1984).

“The common intellectual theme of the investors from Graham-and-Doddsville is this: they search for discrepancies between the value of a business and the price of small pieces of that business in the market” (Hermes magazine, Columbia Business School, 1984).

“I have seen no trend toward value investing in the thirty-five years I’ve practiced it. There seems to be some perverse human characteristic that likes to make easy things difficult” (Talk to Columbia Business School in 1985).

“Complete anonymity would be the best way for me to operate, but because of size that’s not possible anymore” (Financial Review, December 9, 1985).

“All I want is one good idea every year. If you really push me, I’ll settle for one good idea every two years” (Financial Review, December 9, 1985).

“The failure of business schools to study men like [Teledyne’s Henry] Singleton is a crime. Instead, they insist on holding up as a model executives cut from a McKinsey & Company cookie cutter” (Talk to Columbia Business School in 1985).

“When I get an investment proposal, I can look at it in five minutes or less. I can filter out 99% of the ideas in less than five minutes” (Financial Review, December 9, 1985).

“When a management with a reputation for brilliance tackles a business with a reputation for poor fundamental economics, it is the reputation of the business that remains intact” (1985 Annual Report).

“The fact that people will be full of greed, fear or folly is predictable. The sequence is not predictable” (Channels magazine, talk to Patricia Bauer, 1986).

“Money, to some extent, sometimes lets you be in more interesting environments. But it can’t change how many people love you or how healthy you are” (Channels magazine, talk to Patricia Bauer, 1986). (Author’s note: Of course others say, “Money cannot buy happiness, but then happiness cannot buy groceries,” or “I’m tired of love, I’m still tired of rhyme, but money gives me pleasure all the time.”)

Business schools “reward complex behavior more than simple behavior; but simple behavior is more effective” (Channels magazine, talk to Patricia Bauer, 1986).

“The idea that you get a lifetime supply of food stamps based on coming out of the right womb strikes at my idea of fairness” (Channels magazine, talk to Patricia Bauer, 1986).

Arms control and population growth problems: “If we don’t solve them, we don’t have a world” (Channels magazine, talk to Patricia Bauer, 1986).

“The key in life is to figure out who to be the batboy for” (Broadcasting, June 9, 1986).

On patience: “You don’t trade in houses, children, and wives every year, so why trade companies around? I want to have fun with the companies, see them grow and develop. And also, I want to enjoy life. I can’t understand the Carl Icahns, Victor Posners and Ted Turners of the world. In the end all my money is going to charity. So it’s crazy to live by being in uncomfortable situations, or being unpleasant towards others. What’s the difference anyway, if the Buffett Foundation is worth X or 2X at the end?” (Anagnos thesis, 1986, quoting Buffett)

“I do what I like to do. I don’t spend five minutes a year doing what I don’t like. And fortunately I have the luxury to do so. I don’t care what anyone else does. I like people, and I like the people I associate with. I care about them and their businesses. And besides, I want to have fun!” (Anagnos thesis, 1986, quoting Buffett).

“Would anyone say the best way to pick a championship Olympic team is to select the sons and daughters of those who won 20 years ago? Giving someone a favored position just because his old man accomplished something is a crazy way for society to compete” (Fortune, September 29, 1986).

“Love is the greatest advantage a parent can give” (Fortune, September 29, 1986).

“We like to buy businesses, but we don’t like to sell them” (1987 Annual Meeting).

“Anything that can’t go on forever, will end” (1987 Annual Meeting, paraphrasing Herb Stein).

Re Berkshire’s investment in Salomon: “I like the fact it’s a big transaction. I can’t be involved in 50 or 75 things. That’s a Noah’s Ark way of investing—you end up with a zoo that way. I like to put meaningful amounts of money in a few things” (The Wall Street Journal, September 30, 1987, shortly after Berkshire’s $700-million investment in Salomon).

“The public school teacher is probably the most under-compensated and under-appreciated person in the public arena” (Omaha World-Herald, October 1, 1987).

“There’s no reason in the world you should expect some broker to be able to tell you whether you can make money on index futures or options or some stock in two months. If he knew how to do that, he wouldn’t be talking to investors. He’d have retired long ago” (Money, Fall 1987).

“It looks … impressive if it comes out of a computer. But it’s frequently nonsense. The person who’s making the decision is far more important” (Outstanding Investor Digest, October 7, 1987).

“I’m an analyst basically. I try to figure out what businesses are worth, then divide by the number of shares outstanding” (Omaha World-Herald, October 18, 1987, quoting Money magazine).

“There’s something about smart people explaining ideas to an orangutan that makes their decision-making better” (Fortune, October 26, 1987).

“We’re far from believing that there is no fate worse than debt. We are willing to borrow an amount that we believe—on a worst-case basis—will pose no threat to Berkshire’s well-being” (1987 Annual Report).

“If you aren’t certain that you understand and can value your business far better than Mr. Market, you don’t belong in the game” (1987 Annual Report).

“What I am is a realist. I always knew I’d like what I’m doing. Oh, perhaps it would have been neat to be a major league baseball player, but that’s where the realism comes in” (US West, Autumn 1987).

“I keep an internal scorecard. If I do something that others don’t like but I feel good about, I’m happy. If others praise something I’ve done, but I’m not satisfied, I feel unhappy” (US West, Autumn 1987).

“The market is there only as a reference point to see if anybody is offering to do anything foolish. When we invest in stocks, we invest in businesses. You simply have to behave according to what is rational rather than according to what is fashionable” (Fortune, January 4, 1988).

“Our goal is to attract long-term owners who, at the time of purchase, have no timetable or price target for sale but plan instead to stay with us indefinitely” (1988 Annual Report).

“We just read the newspapers, think about a few of the big propositions, and go by our own sense of probabilities” (1988 Annual Report).

“I want to be in businesses so good that even a dummy can make money” (Fortune, April 11, 1988).

“We don’t go into companies with the thought of effecting a lot of change. That doesn’t work any better in investments than it does in marriages” (Fortune, April 11, 1988).

“If we get on the main line, New York to Chicago, we don’t get off at Altoona and take side trips” (Fortune, April 11, 1988).

“It’s far better to buy a wonderful company at a fair price than a fair company at a wonderful price” (Widely quoted).

On turnarounds: “The projections will be dazzling and the advocates sincere, but, in the end, major additional investment in a terrible industry usually is about as rewarding as struggling in quicksand” (Widely quoted).

“I don’t know what it’ll [the stock market] do tomorrow or next week or next year. But I do know that over a period of 10 to 20 years you’ll have some very enthusiastic markets and some very depressed markets. The trick is to take advantage of the markets rather than letting them panic you into the wrong action” (Widely quoted).

“It’s not necessary to do extraordinary things to produce extraordinary results” (Widely quoted).

Re the importance of a franchise business: Adam Smith: “So it’s the power of the franchise?” Buffett: “It’s the power of the franchise” (Adam Smith’s Money World show, June 20, 1988).

“The most important quality for an investor is temperament, not intellect. You don’t need tons of IQ in this business. You don’t have to be able to play three-dimensional chess or duplicate bridge. You need a temperament that neither derives great pleasure from being with the crowd or against the crowd. You know you’re right, not because of the position of others, but because your facts and your reasoning are right” (Adam Smith’s Money World show, June 20, 1988).

“Our outlook for inflation is always the same. We feel there’s a big bias toward inflation—both in the U.S. and around the world … It’s a world where prices are going to go up. It’s just a question of how much. You could definitely have some explosive inflation at some point. Printing money is just too easy. I’d do it myself if I could get away with it” (1988 Annual Meeting).

“We don’t view precious metals and precious stones as great inflation hedges. But we don’t bring anything to that game, so we don’t play it” (1988 Annual Meeting).

“It’s hard enough to understand the peculiarities and complexities of the culture in which you’ve been raised, much less a variety of others. Anyway, most of our shareholders have to pay their bills in U.S. dollars” (1988 Annual Meeting).

“We wouldn’t care if the market closed for a year or two. It closes on Saturday and Sunday and we do just fine” (Annual Meeting in 1988).

“If principles are dated, they’re not principles” (1988 Annual Meeting).

On properly valuing a business: “To properly value a business, you should ideally take all the flows of money that will be distributed between now and judgment day and discount them at an appropriate discount rate. That’s what valuing businesses is all about. Part of the equation is how confident you can be about those cash flows occurring. Some businesses are easier to predict than others. For example, water companies are generally easier to predict than building contractors. We try to look at businesses that are predictable” (1988 Annual Meeting).

Something Buffett doesn’t lose sleep over: “We’re actually prohibited from buying other savings and loans. But that’s not a prohibition that keeps us up at night” (1988 Annual Meeting).

Money: “I think if you found an athlete that was doing well—and I’m not comparing myself—but a Ted Williams or an Arnold Palmer or something—after they have enough to eat, they’re not doing it for the money. My guess is that if Ted Williams was getting the highest salary in baseball and he was hitting .220, he would be unhappy. And if he was getting the lowest salary in baseball and batting .400, he’d be very happy. That’s the way I feel about this job. Money is a byproduct of doing something I like doing extremely well” (1988 Annual Meeting).

“Anything can happen in stock markets, and you ought to conduct your affairs so that if the most extraordinary events happen, that you’re still around to play the next day” (Adam Smith’s Money World, June 20, 1988).

“All our policies are designed to attract the business-oriented long-term shareholder and to filter out possible buyers whose focus is short term and market oriented” (Letter to shareholders announcing Berkshire’s listing on the New York Stock Exchange, August 5, 1988).

“Valuing a business is part art and part science” (Esquire, October, 1988).

Referencing Casey Stengel’s job description of a baseball team manager, Buffett described his role at Berkshire: “getting paid for the home runs the other fellows hit” (Widely quoted).

“Great investment opportunities come around when excellent companies are surrounded by unusual circumstances that cause the stock to be misappraised” (Fortune, December 19, 1988).

Imaginary News Advisory: Buffett steps into elevator shaft July 4, 2084, leaving twenty trillion to the Buffett Foundation. Berkshire drops 23% to $99 million a share in the first minute of trading. Munger steps up to the easel. Lou Simpson, named vice chairman, initiates massive stock buyback, consults Gates, and starts talks to buy China. Berkshire ends trading session at $123 million as investors recall Buffett’s famous words of December 19, 1988:

Take the probability of loss times the amount of possible loss from the probability of gain times the amount of possible gain. That is what we’re trying to do. It’s imperfect, but that’s what it’s all about. We compete only within the circle of what we understand, which eliminates a lot (1989 Annual Meeting).



“Time is the friend of the wonderful business, the enemy of the mediocre” (1989 Annual Report).

“It’s no sin to miss a great opportunity outside one’s area of competence” (1989 Annual Report).

“I found in running businesses that the best results come from letting high-grade people work unencumbered” (Fortune, September 11, 1989).

On why Berkshire borrowed $400 million and put the cash into Treasuries: “The best time to buy assets may be when it is hardest to raise money” (Fortune, October 23, 1989).

“I’ve often felt there might be more to be gained by studying business failures than business successes. It’s customary in business schools to study business successes. But my partner, Charlie Munger, says all he wants is to know where he’s going to die—so he won’t ever go there” (Talk to Emory Business College, November, 1989).

“I’m not like a steel executive who can think only about how to invest in steel. I’ve got a bigger canvas, simply because I have spent my life looking at companies, starting with Abbott Labs and going through to Zenith” (Fortune, January 29, 1990).

“I think it’s a saner existence here [Omaha]. I used to feel when I worked back in New York, that there were more stimuli just hitting me all the time, and if you’ve got the normal amount of adrenaline, you start responding to them. It may lead to crazy behavior after a while. It’s much easier to think here” (L. J. Davis, The New York Times Magazine, April 2, 1990).

“I love what I do. I’m involved in a kind of intellectually interesting game that isn’t too tough to win, and Berkshire Hathaway is my canvas. I don’t try to jump over seven-foot bars: I look around for one-foot bars that I can step over. I work with sensational people, and I do what I want in life. Why shouldn’t I? If I’m not in a position to do what I want, who the hell is?” (L. J. Davis, The New York Times Magazine, April 2, 1990).

“Any young person who doesn’t take up bridge is making a big mistake” (The New York Times, May 20, 1990).

“Stocks are simple. All you do is buy shares in a great business for less than the business is intrinsically worth, with management of the highest integrity and ability. Then you own those shares forever” (Forbes, August 6, 1990).

Buffett’s description of some of the ground rules for the Buffett Partnership: “I told them [limited partners], ‘What I’ll do is form a partnership where I’ll manage the portfolio and have my money in there with you. I’ll guarantee you a 5% return, and I get 20% of all profits after that. And I won’t tell you what we own because that’s distracting. All I want to do is hand in a scorecard when I come off the golf course. I don’t want you following me around and watching me shank a three-iron on this hole and leave a putt short on the next one’ ” (1990 Investors Guide/Fortune).

“A hyperactive stock market is the pickpocket of enterprise” (Widely quoted).

“You don’t need to be a rocket scientist. Investing is not a game where the guy with the 160 IQ beats the guy with a 130 IQ. Rationality is essential” (Widely quoted).

“In a sense, Berkshire Hathaway is a canvas, and I get to paint anything I want on that canvas. And it’s the process of painting that I really enjoy, not selling the painting” (Widely quoted).

“You can’t be smarter than your dumbest competitor. The trick is to have no competitors” (Widely quoted).

“In the insurance business, there is no statute of limitations on stupidity” (1990 Annual Report).

“The most common cause of low prices is pessimism—sometimes pervasive, sometimes specific to a company or industry. We want to do business in such an environment, not because we like pessimism but because we like the prices it produces. It’s optimism that is the enemy of the rational buyer.

“None of this means, however, that a business or stock is an intelligent purchase simply because it is unpopular; a contrarian approach is just as foolish as a follow-the-crowd strategy. What’s required is thinking rather than polling” (1990 Annual Report).

“The most important thing to do when you find yourself in a hole is to stop digging” (1990 Annual Report).

How a corporation (specifically Salomon) should behave: “Anything not only on the line, but near the line, will be called out” (The Wall Street Journal, August 19, 1991).

“In the end we must have people to match our principles, not the reverse” (Salomon report to shareholders, third quarter, 1991).

“Someone’s sitting in the shade today because someone planted a tree a long time ago” (NewsInc., January 1, 1991).

“Our stay-put behavior reflects our view that the stock market serves as a relocation center at which money is moved from the active to the patient” (1991 Annual Report).

“In the long run, of course, trouble awaits managements that paper over operating problems with accounting maneuvers. Eventually, managements of this kind achieve the same result as the seriously ill patient who tells his doctor: ‘I can’t afford the operation, but would you accept a small payment to touch up the x-rays?’” (1991 Shareholder Letter, 1991 Annual Report)

“The best CEOs love operating their companies and don’t prefer going to Business Roundtable meetings or playing golf at Augusta National”(Fortune, April 22, 1991).

“To swim a fast 100 meters, it’s better to swim with the tide than to work on your stroke” (1991 Annual Meeting).

“There are a lot of profitable things you can do, but you have to stick to what you can do. We can’t find a way to knock out Mike Tyson” (Annual meeting in 1991).

“We’re not pure economic creatures. … And that policy penalizes our results somewhat, but we prefer to operate that way in life. What’s the sense of becoming rich if you’re going to have a pattern of operation where you continually discard associations with people you like, admire, and find interesting in order to earn a slightly bigger figure? We like big figures, but not to the exclusion of everything else” (Annual meeting in 1991).

On the desire for big positions in the right business: “We own fewer stocks today at $7 billion than we did when our total portfolio was $20 million” (1988 Annual Meeting).

No frills: “Whatever colors were on the corporate jet when we bought it are the ones that are on it today. There’s no ‘WB’ or ‘BH.’ And that’s not likely to change” (1988 Annual Meeting).

On not second-guessing the managers of his businesses: “If they need my help to manage the enterprise, we’re probably both in trouble” (Outstanding Investor Digest, May 24, 1991).

“For me, it’s what’s available at the time. We’re not interested in categories per se. We’re interested in value” (Business Week, August 19, 1991).

“Easy access to funding tends to cause undisciplined decisions” (Salomon conference with clients, September 13, 1991).

On learning from mistakes: “I guess I had too much inclination originally to buy mediocre, or worse than mediocre, businesses at a very cheap price. That works OK, in the sense that you never lose money; but you never end up with a great business that way either. So that emphasis has shifted over the years. We don’t want to buy the worst furniture store in town at the cheapest price; we want to buy the best one at a fair price” (Widely quoted).

His biggest strength: “I’m rational. Plenty of people have higher IQs, and plenty of people work more hours, but I am rational about things. But you have to be able to control yourself; you can’t let your emotions get in the way of your mind.

“In 1986, my biggest accomplishment was not doing anything stupid. There is not much to do; there is not much available right now. The trick is, when there is nothing to do, do nothing. I love what I do. All I want to do is do what I’m doing as long as I can. Every day I feel like tap dancing all through the day. I really do” (Widely quoted).

Advice to graduating MBA students: “Go to work for whomever you admire the most. You’ll be turned on; you’ll feel like getting out of bed in the morning; and you’ll learn a lot.

“That is what I did. I wanted to work for Ben Graham, but he didn’t hire me immediately. I offered to go to work for him for nothing, too, so it’s even worse than it sounds. So I started trying to be useful to him in various ways. I did a number of studies I dreamt up. I tried to suggest ideas.

“If I were a student today, I would probably try to show the people where I worked what I could do. If I wanted to be starting quarterback on the Washington Redskins, I’d try to get them to watch me throw a few passes.

“As a corollary, I would never go to work for an operation that I had any negative feelings about” (Widely quoted).

“I used to tell the stock exchange people that before a person bought 100 shares of General Motors they should have to write on a piece of paper, ‘I’m buying 100 shares of General Motors at ‘X’ and multiply that by the number of shares, ‘and therefore General Motors is worth more than $32 billion’ or whatever it multiplies out to, ‘because [fill in the reasons].’ And if they couldn’t answer that question, their order wouldn’t be accepted” (Talk at Notre Dame, Spring 1991).

“Life tends to snap you at your weakest link. So it isn’t the strongest link you’re looking for among individuals in the room. It isn’t even the average strength of the chain. It’s the weakest link that causes the problem.… I’m looking for people that function very, very well. And that means not having any weak links. The two biggest weak links in my experience: … liquor and leverage” (Talk to Notre Dame, Spring 1991).

“Investment must be rational; if you don’t understand it, don’t do it” (Forbes, October 19, 1992).

“What counts for most people in investing is not how much they know, but rather how realistically they define what they don’t know. An investor needs to do very few things right as long as he or she avoids big mistakes” (1992 Annual Report).

Restaurants are generally not good as investments because “a similar one can open up across the street” (Robert Stoval column, Business Week, January 5, 1993).

“Growth is always a component in the calculation of value, constituting a variable whose importance can range from negligible to enormous and whose impact can be negative as well as positive” (1992 Annual Report).

“If options aren’t a form of compensation, what are they? If compensation isn’t an expense, what is it? And if expenses shouldn’t go into the calculation of earnings, where in the world should they go?” (1992 Annual Report)

“Mrs. Blumkin recently sold her Mrs. B’s Warehouse to the [Nebraska Furniture] Mart and announced plans to operate her carpet business alongside a new store operated by the Mart.

“I am delighted that Mrs. B has again linked up with us. Her business story has no parallel and I have always been a fan of hers, whether she was a partner, or a competitor. But believe me, partner is better” (1992 Annual Report).

“Overhead costs are under 1% of our reported operating earnings and less than 1/2 of 1% of our look-through earnings. We have no legal, personnel, public relations, investor relations, or strategic planning departments. In turn this means we don’t need support personnel such as guards, drivers, messengers, etc” (1992 Annual Report).

Two kinds of information: “Those things you can know and those things important to know. Those things you can know that are important constitute an extremely small percentage of the total known” (Widely quoted).

On investing: “Investing is not that complicated. You need to know accounting, the language of business. You should read The Intelligent Investor. You need the right mind-set, the right temperament. You should be interested in the process and be in your circle of competence. … Avoid overstimulation. Read Ben Graham and Phil Fisher, read annual reports and trade reports, but don’t do equations with Greek letters in them” (Annual meeting in 1993).

“I read annual reports of the company I’m looking at and I read the annual reports of the competitors. … That’s the main source material” (1993 Annual Meeting).

Munger: “We like to keep things simple … so the chairman can sit around and read annual reports” (1993 Annual Meeting).

Berkshire’s price: “At no time has Berkshire’s price been ridiculously out of line from intrinsic value. All along it’s been reasonably priced” (1993 Annual Meeting).

On selling off businesses: “We try not to sell the flowers to water the weeds” (Annual meeting in 1993, quoting Peter Lynch).

“If you advertise for an opera and a rock concert, you get a different audience. …We try to attract the long-term shareholder. We don’t want a lot of seat-changing. If you get the wrong shareholder, he’ll leave you in six months. … We’re very unlikely to split the stock” (1993 Annual Meeting).

On media reports of what he is buying: “Some are erroneous.… We don’t announce our acquisitions (unless legally required). Everyone in this room is a little richer because of that policy” (1993 Annual Meeting).

“Daily newspapers are still good businesses, just not as good as before” (1993 Annual Meeting).

On giving: “My feeling is you pick high-grade younger people to do it.… I’m not going to give a tightly drawn document about it. You hope that they are a lot smarter above the ground than you are below ground. You should concentrate your shots in death as well as life” (1993 Annual Meeting).

Prospect of inflation: “It’s basically just in remission” (1993 Annual Meeting).

Restructurings: “That’s a word for mistakes” (1993 Annual Meeting).

The investment professional as a whole doesn’t add value: “One factor people have not focused on enough is that obviously professional investment management in aggregate will deliver a poorer return than a simple indexed investment because of the frictional costs Charlie mentioned. Such a significant percentage of the $4 trillion equity market is managed by managers who are getting paid to do the job that their aggregate performance has to be a little less than average simply because of frictional costs. So therefore you have a profession where practitioners as a whole can add nothing to what you can do yourself. In fact, they subtract from it” (1993 Annual Meeting).

“There’s good money out of cigarettes, which in turn kill people” (1993 Annual Meeting).

Berkshire’s future: “I see a lot of interesting things happening, but I haven’t the faintest idea what they’ll be” (Nightly Business Review, April 26, 1993).

Buffett, who makes a $100,000 annual salary and $148,000 in director’s fees, on the wealthy paying a fair share under President Clinton’s deficit reduction proposal: “If I make it into the top 1% (of taxpayers), I don’t mind at all. It would be bad for America if we didn’t do anything. We can’t sit there and choose among 20 bills. I like the idea of more progressivity on the tax rates. I just wish it had been achieved more in spending cuts” (USA Today, August 6, 1993).

In response to Forbes reporter Robert Lenzner’s inquiry, Where will you take your next vacation? “There’s nothing to get away from” (Forbes, October 19, 1993).

How’s the 1993 stock market? “Common stocks look high and are high, but they are not as high as they look,” and Buffett quoting Ben Graham’s response before the 1955 Fulbright hearings in Washington, D.C. (Forbes, October 19, 1993).

Buffett as admirer of the British economist and investor John Maynard Keynes: “Keynes essentially said don’t try and figure out what the market is doing. Figure out businesses you understand, and concentrate. Diversification is protection against ignorance, but if you don’t feel ignorant, the need for it goes down drastically” (Forbes, October 19, 1993).

Summing up Ben Graham’s teachings: “When proper temperament joins with proper intellectual framework, then you get rational behavior” (Forbes, October 19, 1993).

International portfolio: “I get $150 million earnings pass-through from international operations of Gillette and Coca-Cola. That’s my international portfolio” (Forbes, October 19, 1993).

“I am a better investor because I am a businessman, and a better businessman because I am an investor” (Forbes, October 19, 1993).

“Children should be given enough to do what they want to do, but not enough to be idle” (WOWT-TV in Omaha, October 14, 1993).

Advice for someone coming into the investment field:

Buffett: If he were coming in with small sums of capital, I’d tell him to do exactly what I did 40-odd years ago, which is to learn about every company in the United States that has publicly traded securities, and that bank of knowledge will do him or her terrific good over time.

Adam Smith: But there’s 27,000 public companies.

Buffett: Well, start with the A’s (Adam Smith’s Money World, October 21, 1993).

“The smartest side to take in a bidding war is the losing side” (Fortune, November 29, 1993, quoting Buffett’s talk to Columbia Business School students October 27, 1993).

Picking the right business for a long-term holding: “If you’re going to have a Catholic marriage, you’d better do it right” (Omaha World-Herald, October 28, 1993, quoting from the same talk).

“I feel competent … in a very few cases. I think that Bill Gates is one of the best managers in the world, but I don’t have the faintest idea of how to evaluate what the stream of coupons will look like on a bond called Microsoft” (Omaha World-Herald, October 28, 1993, quoting from the same talk).

“It may be a sensational stream of coupons, but I just don’t know enough about it to evaluate that. But if I can’t evaluate it … then I’m not investing. I’m betting on whether a stock will go up or down tomorrow or next week or next month.… I put a heavy weight on certainty” (Omaha World-Herald, October 28, 1993, quoting from the same talk).

“Risk comes from not knowing what you’re doing” (Omaha World-Herald, October 28, 1993, quoting from the same talk).

“I would think very hard about getting into a business with fundamentally good economics. I would think of buying from people I can trust. And I’d think about the price I’d pay. But I wouldn’t think about price to the exclusion of the first two. And that essentially, is what we’re trying to do at Berkshire. And if I did that, would I think about whether I could buy it cheaper on Monday rather than on Friday or would I think about the January effect or other nonsense?” (Omaha World-Herald, October 28, 1993, quoting from the same talk)

Communications investments: “I don’t like businesses where the technology is changing fast. Basically, I don’t think I’m a great one for seeing the future when the future looks way different than the present. Generally, anything that is subject to a lot of change and technology, I tend to be critical of rather than excited by” (Omaha World-Herald, October 28, 1993, quoting from the same talk).

On common sense and believing in yourself: “In the end, I always believe my eyes rather than anything else” (Omaha World–Herald, October 28, 1993, quoting from the same talk).

Taxes: “Speaking for our own shares, Charlie and I have absolutely no complaint about these taxes. We know we work in a market-based economy that rewards our efforts far more bountifully than it does the efforts of others whose output is of equal or greater benefit to society. Taxation should, and does, partially redress this inequity. But we still remain extraordinarily well-treated” (1993 Annual Report).

Diversification: “The strategy we’ve adopted precludes our following standard diversification dogma. Many pundits would therefore say the strategy must be riskier than that employed by more conventional investors. We disagree. We believe that a policy of portfolio concentration may well decrease risk if it raises, as it should, both the intensity with which an investor thinks about a business and the comfort level he must feel with its economic characteristics before buying into it. In stating this opinion, we define risk, using dictionary terms, as ‘the possibility of loss or injury.’

“Academics, however, like to define investment ‘risk’ differently, averring that it is the relative volatility of a stock or a portfolio of stocks—that is, their volatility as compared to that of a large universe of stocks. Employing databases and statistical skills, these academics compute with precision the ‘beta’ of a stock—its relative volatility in the past—and then build arcane investment and capital allocation theories around this calculation. In their hunger for a single statistic to measure risk, however, they forget a fundamental principle: It is better to be approximately right than precisely wrong” (1993 Annual Report).

“By periodically investing in an index fund, the know-nothing investor can actually outperform most investment professionals. Paradoxically, when ‘dumb’ money acknowledges its limitations, it ceases to be dumb” (1993 Annual Report).

“The pleasant but vacuous director need never worry about job security” (1993 Annual Report).

“There’s no use running if you’re on the wrong road” (1993 Annual Report).

“We know who the best baseball players are; why not know who the best teachers are?” (Interview with Tom Brokaw of NBC News, April 12, 1994).

“You can’t get rich with a weathervane” (1994 Annual Meeting).

“We’d rather multiply by three than pi” (1994 Annual Meeting). [Or, as Ben Franklin said: “The most exquisite folly is made of wisdom spun too fine.”]

“Charlie and I never have an opinion on the market because it wouldn’t be any good and it might interfere with the opinions we have that are good” (1994 Annual Meeting).

“Virtually everything we’ve done has been by reading public reports and then maybe asking questions around and ascertaining trade positions and product strengths or something of that sort” (1994 Annual Meeting).

Coca-Cola: “Coke in 1890 or thereabouts—the whole company—sold for $2,000. Its market value today is $50-odd billion. Somebody could have said to the fellow who was buying it in 1890, ‘We’re going to have a couple of great World Wars. There’ll be a panic in 1907. All of these things are going to happen. Wouldn’t it be better to wait?’ We can’t afford that mistake” (1994 Annual Meeting).

“There’s nothing that I know about that product or its distribution system, its finances or anything that hundreds of thousands or millions of people don’t know, too. They just don’t do anything about it” (1994 Annual Meeting).

“So the important thing that we do as managers generally is find the .400 hitters and then not tell them how to swing. … And the second thing we do is allocate capital. Aside from that, we play bridge. That’s Berkshire” (1994 Annual Meeting).

“There’s a huge difference between the business that grows and requires lots of

capital to do so and the business that grows and doesn’t require capital” (1994 Annual Meeting).

“We don’t have any meetings of any kind at Berkshire, but we’d never have an asset allocation meeting” (1994 Annual Meeting).

Thinking for yourself: “You have to think for yourself. It always amazes me how high-IQ people mindlessly imitate. I never get good ideas talking to other people” (U.S. News & World Report, June 20, 1994).

A good business: “Look for the durability of the franchise. The most important thing to me is figuring out how big a moat there is around the business. What I love, of course, is a big castle and a big moat with piranhas and crocodiles” (U.S. News & World Report, June 20, 1994).

“Compound interest is a little bit like rolling a snowball down a hill. You can start with a small snowball and if it rolls down a hill long enough (and my hill is now 53 years long—that’s when I bought my first stock), and the snow is mildly sticky, you’ll have a real snowball at the end” (Talk to University of Nebraska students, October 10, 1994).

“I spend an inordinate amount of time reading. I probably read at least six hours a day, maybe more. I spend an hour or two on the telephone, and the rest of the time I think. We have no meetings at Berkshire. I hate meetings” (Omaha World-Herald, October 11, 1994).

“I’m sort of a Republican on the production side, and I’m sort of a Democrat on the distribution side” (Associated Press, October 16, 1994).

“All we want is to be in businesses that we understand, run by people whom we like, and priced attractively relative to their future prospects” (Fortune, October 31, 1994).

“We don’t know and we don’t think about when something will happen. We think about what will happen” (Fortune, October 31, 1994).

“You’re lucky in life if you pick the right heroes. Ben was mine” (Talk to New York Society of Security Analysts, December 6, 1994).

About Ben Graham being generous with his ideas: Roughly quoting Oscar Hammerstein, “A bell’s not a bell until you ring it. A song is not a song until you sing it. And love in the heart isn’t put there to stay. Love isn’t love ’til you give it away” (New York Society of Security Analysts, December 6, 1994).

“The professional in almost any field achieves a result which is significantly above what the layman in aggregate achieves. It’s not true in money management” (New York Society of Security Analysts, December 6, 1994).

“The basic ideas of investing are to look at stocks as businesses, use market fluctuations to your advantage and seek a margin of safety. That’s what Ben Graham taught us.… A hundred years from now they will still be the cornerstones of investing” (New York Society of Security Analysts, December 6, 1994).

“We just try to buy businesses with good to superb underlying economics, run by honest and able people, and buy them at sensible prices. That’s all I’m trying to do. When I see a seven-footer, I think, ‘Is the guy coordinated, can I keep him in school, and all those things. And then some guy comes up to me and says, ‘I’m 5-6, but you ought to see me handle the ball.’” Says Buffett: “I’m not interested” (New York Society of Security Analysts, December 6, 1994).

On being named pitchman for economic development in Nebraska: “Easiest job I ever had” (Omaha World-Herald, January 11, 1995).

“The best time to sell a stock is never” (USA Today, February 17, 1995).

“When you find a really good business run by first-class people, chances are a price that looks high isn’t high” (London Independent, February 19, 1995).

“I’d be a bum on the street with a tin cup if the market were efficient” (Fortune, April 3, 1995).

“Thirty years ago, no one could have foreseen the huge expansion of the Vietnam War, wage and price controls, two oil shocks, the resignation of a president, the dissolution of the Soviet Union, a one-day drop in the Dow of 508 points, or treasury bill yields fluctuating between 2.8% and 17.4%” (1994 Annual Report).

“Fear is the foe of the faddist, but the friend of the fundamentalist” (1994 Annual Report).

“It’s far better to own a significant portion of the Hope diamond than 100% of a rhinestone” (1994 Annual Report).

Quoting Wayne Greter: “Go to where the puck is going to be, not where it is” (1994 Annual Report).

“We try to price, rather than time, purchases. In our view, it’s folly to forego buying shares in an outstanding business whose long-term future is predictable, because of short-term worries about an economy or a stock market that we know to be unpredictable. Why scrap an informed decision because of an uninformed guess?” (1994 Annual Report)

“If I can’t make money in a $5-trillion market [right here in the United States], it may be a little bit of wishful thinking to think that all I have to do is get a few thousand miles away and I’ll start showing my stuff” (Widely quoted).

“You don’t have to make money back the same way you lost it” (1995 Annual Meeting).

“We believe in managers knowing money costs money” (1995 Annual Meeting).

“A stock doesn’t know who owns it. You may have all of these feelings and emotions as the stock goes up or down, but the stock doesn’t give a damn” (1995 Annual Meeting).

“We try to find businesses with wide and long moats around them protecting a castle with an honest lord of the castle … all moats are subject to attack in a capitalistic society” (1995 Annual Meeting).

“We like stocks that generate high returns on invested capital where there is a strong likelihood that it will continue to do so. For example, the last time we bought Coca-Cola, it was selling at about 23 times earnings. Using our purchase price and today’s earnings, that makes it about five times earnings. It’s really the interaction of capital employed, the return on that capital, and future capital generated versus the purchase price today” (1995 Annual Meeting).

“There are certain kinds of businesses where you have to be smart once and the kind where you have to stay smart every day to defend it. Retailing is one of them. If you find a retailing concept that catches on, you have to defend it every day” (1995 Annual Meeting).

Advice to managers: “Think like an owner and give us the bad news early” (1995 Annual Meeting).

“I have no use whatsoever for projections or forecasts. They create an illusion of apparent precision. The more meticulous they are, the more concerned you should be. We never look at projections, but we care very much about, and look very deeply at, track records. If a company has a lousy track record but a very bright future, we will miss the opportunity” (1995 Annual Meeting).

First thing Buffett thinks about when buying a business: “Can I understand it?” (1995 Annual Meeting).

“If the accounting confuses you, don’t do it” (1995 Annual Meeting).

“I look for what’s permanent, and what is not” (1995 Annual Meeting). [Author’s note: see there!]

Re Coca-Cola: “It’s not a bad measuring stick against buying other things. I don’t have any plans to buy more right now, but I wouldn’t rule it out. And when I consider buying another business, I’ll say, ‘Why would I rather have this than Coca-Cola?’ ” (1995 Annual Meeting)

“If you have to choose between a terrific management and a terrific business, choose the terrific business” (1995 Annual Meeting).

Management: “If the company cannot be expected to stand on its own two feet for years after the ink is dry, we would not be interested” (1995 Annual Meeting).

“I’ve learned mainly by reading” (Outstanding Investor Digest, August 10, 1995).

“It’s not that I want money. It’s the fun of making it and watching it grow” (Time, August 21, 1995).

Selling a familiar stock is “like dumping your wife when she gets old” (Business Week, August 21, 1995).

“Chains of habit are too light to be felt until they are too heavy to be broken” (PBS TV program produced by the University of North Carolina Center for Public Television, 1995).

On waiting until the last minute to decide whether to take stock, cash, or a combination in connection with the Disney/Cap Cities merger: “I’ve never swung at a ball while it’s still in the pitcher’s glove” (Fortune, March 4, 1996).

“In the early years, we needed only good ideas, but now we need good big ideas” (1995 Annual Report).

A man with an ailing horse: “Visiting the vet, he said: ‘Can you help me? Sometimes my horse walks just fine and sometimes he limps.’ The vet’s reply was pointed: ‘No problem—when he’s walking fine, sell him.’ In the world of mergers and acquisitions, that horse would be peddled as Secretariat” (1995 Annual Report).

“We do have a few advantages, perhaps the greatest being that we don’t have a strategic plan” (1995 Annual Report).

“We avoid the attitude of the alumnus whose message to the football coach is, ‘I’m 100% with you—win or tie’ ” (1995 Annual Report).

A question folks at Berkshire always should ask: “And then what?” (1996 Annual Meeting).

“There is no formula to figure (intrinsic value) out. You have to know the business” (1996 Annual Meeting).

“If you find three wonderful businesses in your life, you’ll get very rich” (1996 Annual Meeting).

“We like businesses which are fundamental, simple, and where the rate of change is not very fast” (1996 Annual Meeting).

“If the business and the manager are right, you should probably forget the quote” (1996 Annual Meeting).

“The definition of a great company is one that will be great for 25 or 30 years” (1996 Annual Meeting).

“We do not view Berkshire shareholders as faceless members of an ever-shifting crowd. But rather as co-venturers who have entrusted their funds to us for what may well turn out to be the remainder of their lives” (Berkshire’s Owner’s Manual, June 1996).

“Overall, Berkshire and its long-term shareholders benefit from a sinking stock market much as a regular purchaser of food benefits from declining food prices. So when the market plummets—as it will from time to time—neither panic nor mourn. It’s good for Berkshire” (Berkshire’s Owner’s Manual, June 1996).

An added principle: “To the extent possible, we would like each Berkshire shareholder to record a gain or loss in market value during his period of ownership that is proportional to the gain or loss in per-share intrinsic value recorded by the company during that holding period. For this to come about, the relationship between the intrinsic value and the market price of a Berkshire share would need to remain constant, and by our preferences at 1-to-1. As that implies, we would rather see Berkshire’s stock price at a fair level than a high level. Obviously, Charlie and I can’t control Berkshire’s price. But by our policies and communications, we can encourage informed, rational behavior by owners that, in turn, will tend to produce a stock price that is also rational. Our it’s-as-bad-to-be-overvalued-as-to-be-undervalued approach may disappoint some shareholders, particularly those poised to sell. We believe, however, that it affords Berkshire the best prospect of attracting long-term investors who seek to profit from the progress of the company rather than from the investment mistakes of others” (Berkshire’s Owner’s Manual, June 1996).

“You can gain some insight into the difference between book value and intrinsic value by looking at one form of investment, a college education. Think of the education’s cost as its ‘book value.’ If this cost is to be accurate, it should include the earnings that were foregone by the student because he chose college rather than a job.

“For this exercise, we will ignore the important non-economic benefits of an education and focus strictly on its economic value. First, we must estimate the earnings that the graduate will receive over his lifetime and subtract from that figure an estimate of what he would have earned had he lacked his education. That gives us an excess earnings figure, which must then be discounted, at an appropriate interest rate, back to graduation day. The dollar result equals the intrinsic economic value of the education.

“Some graduates will find that the book value of their education exceeds its intrinsic value, which means that whoever paid for the education didn’t get his money’s worth. In other cases, the intrinsic value of an education will far exceed its book value, a result that proves capital was wisely deployed. In all cases, what is clear is that book value is meaningless as an indicator of intrinsic value” (Berkshire’s Owner’s Manual, June 1996).

“The much-maligned ‘idle rich’ have received a bad rap: they have maintained or increased their wealth while many of the ‘energetic rich’—aggressive real estate operators, corporate acquirers, oil drillers, etc.—have seen their fortunes disappear” (Widely quoted).

“It’s the big, dumb acquisitions that are going to cost shareholders far, far more than all other things” (Talk at Yeshiva University’s Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law, October 27, 1996).

“There is no question the leeway I have to report earnings as CEO of Berkshire is enormous. I don’t know how to quantify it precisely, and some of it would catch up with you later on, in terms of insurance reserves, for example. In an insurance company, the long-tail business in particular, you can paint any picture you want, for a period that probably encompasses enough time to either buy out the public or to effect a major public offering” (Conversations from the Warren Buffett Symposium October 27, 1996 at Yeshiva University’s Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law).

“With enough inside information and a million dollars, you can go broke in a year” (Widely quoted).

Buffett to Katharine Graham about the tough days in the 1970s at the Post: “When you’re down for one day it doesn’t change anything. If you’re down for a year, you’ve lost the whole enterprise. Where in between do the lines cross?” What he was watching for was that line-crossing point. Looking back, he admitted, “You didn’t come near that point where you were in serious danger of losing the company, but it’s like looking for a cure for cancer; you either find the cure or you die in six months. And if you find one in the fourth month, you say there was nothing to it” (Katharine Graham, Personal History, p. 552).

“I would rather be certain of a good result than hopeful of a great one” (1996 Annual Report).

“I would not want you to panic and sell your Berkshire stock upon hearing that some large catastrophe had cost us a significant amount. If you would tend to react that way, you should not own Berkshire shares now, just as you should entirely avoid owning stocks if a crashing market would lead you to panic and sell” (1996 Annual Report).

Taxes: “In 1961, President Kennedy said that we should ask not what our country can do for us, but rather ask what we can do for our country. Last year we decided to give this suggestion a try—and who says it never hurts to ask? We were told to mail $860 million in income taxes to the U.S. Treasury.

“Here’s a little perspective on that figure: If an equal amount had been paid by only 2,000 other taxpayers, the government would have had a balanced budget in 1996 without needing a dime of taxes—income or Social Security or what have you—from any other American. Berkshire shareholders can truly say, ‘I gave at the office.’

Charlie and I believe that large tax payments by Berkshire are entirely fitting. The contributions we thus make to society’s well-being is at most only proportional to its contribution to ours. Berkshire prospers in America as it would nowhere else” (1996 Annual Report).

“Inactivity [in investing] strikes us as intelligent behavior” (1996 Annual Report).

“If you aren’t willing to own a stock for 10 years, don’t even think about owning it for ten minutes” (1996 Annual Report).

In comparison to 1% fees of most mutual funds: “We are here to make money with you, not off you” (1996 Annual Report).

“In the securities business, whatever can be sold will be sold” (1996 Annual Report).

“To invest successfully, you need not understand beta, efficient markets, modern portfolio theory, option pricing, or emerging markets. You may, in fact, be better off knowing nothing of these. That, of course, is not the prevailing view at most business schools, whose finance curriculum tends to be dominated by such subjects. In our view, though, investment students need only two well-taught courses—How to Value a Business, and How to Think About Market Prices” (1996 Annual Report).

“If you were a jerk before, you’ll be a bigger jerk with a billion dollars” (Forbes, April 21, 1997).

“I like guys who forget that they sold the business to me and run the show like proprietors. When I marry the daughter, she continues to live with her parents” (Janet Lowe, Warren Buffett Speaks, 1997, p. 80).

“I used to be too price-conscious. We used to have prayer meetings before we’d raise the bid an eighth and that was a mistake” (1997 Annual Meeting).

“The single biggest recurring mistake I’ve made has been my reluctance to pay up for outstanding businesses” (1997 Annual Meeting).

“I’ve got 99% of my money in Berkshire, but it was bought at a different price” (1997 Annual Meeting).

“We like the idea of having it all in Berkshire, but we don’t recommend it” (1997 Annual Meeting).

“It’s our job to focus on what we know and that makes a difference” (1997 Annual Meeting).

“Money management is one field where you can get something for nothing. Money managers in aggregate have gotten something for nothing—stockholders’ money—and the investors have paid for it” (1997 Annual Meeting).

“Do something you enjoy, not to get money so you can do something you like later. If we were in this only for the money, we would have quit years ago” (1997 Annual Meeting).

“Investment is about putting out money today to get more money back later on from the asset—and not about selling it to somebody else” (1997 Annual Meeting).

“Regarding learning from your mistakes, the best thing to do is to learn from the other guy’s mistakes. As Patton used to say, ‘It’s an honor to die for your country, but make sure the other guys get the honor.’ Our approach is really to try and learn vicariously” (1997 Annual Meeting).

“If you understood a business perfectly and the future of the business, you would need very little in the way of a margin of safety. So, the more vulnerable the business is, assuming you still want to invest in it, the larger margin of safety you’d need. If you’re driving a truck across a bridge that says it holds 10,000 pounds and you’ve got a 9,800 pound vehicle, if the bridge is 6 inches above the crevice it covers, you may feel okay, but if it’s over the Grand Canyon, you may feel you want a little larger margin of safety” (1997 Annual Meeting).

“Our job really is to focus on things that we can know that make a difference. If something can’t make a difference or if we can’t know it, then we write it off” (1997 Annual Meeting).

“Price is what you pay. Value is what you get” (Widely quoted).

On successful investing: “The first thing to realize is that it takes a long time. I started when I was 11. Accumulating money is a little like having a snowball going downhill. It’s important to have a very long hill. I’ve had a 56 year hill. It’s important to work with sticky snow and you need a little snowball to start with, which I got from delivering the Post actually. It’s better if you’re not in too much of a hurry and keep doing sound things” (Talk at Caltech on October 21, 1997).

“Financial success is not a matter of genius. It’s a matter of having the right habits” (Omaha World-Herald, November 12, 1997).

Credit cards are a bad idea unless people pay the full balance each month to avoid interest. “Nobody’s ever gotten rich paying 18 to 21% on their money” (Omaha World-Herald, November 12, 1997).

Acquisitions often are described as “buyer buys seller.” Buffett says what’s actually happening is: “buyer sells part of itself to acquire seller” (Lawrence A. Cunningham, The Essays of Warren Buffett: Lessons for Corporate America, Cardozo Law Review, 1997).

Advice to Dow Jones & Co. dissident shareholders: “Act like owners” (Fortune, March 2, 1998).

“For anyone deploying capital, nothing recedes like success” (1997 Annual Report).

“At our present size, any performance superiority we achieved will be minor” (1997 Annual Report).

“Smile when you read a headline that says ‘Investors lose as market falls.’ Edit in your mind to ‘Disinvestors lose as market falls—but investors gain.’ Though writers often forget this truism, there is a buyer for every seller and what hurts one necessarily helps the other. (As they say in golf matches: ‘Every putt makes someone happy.’)” (1997 Annual Report).

“Catastrophe bonds. … may well live up to their name” (1997 Annual Report).

Re when Berkshire acquires an options-issuing company: “Their reported costs (but not their true ones) will rise after they are bought by Berkshire if the acquiree has been granting options as part of its compensation packages. In these cases, ‘earnings’ of the acquiree have been overstated because they have followed the standard—but, in our view, dead wrong—accounting practice of ignoring the cost to a business of issuing options. When Berkshire acquires an option-issuing company, we promptly substitute a cash compensation plan having an economic value equivalent to that of the previous option plan. The acquiree’s true compensation cost is thereby brought out of the closet and charged, as it should be, against earnings” (1997 Annual Report).

“I paid my first tax at 13 years old and I’m not that bothered—I’d rather be a big taxpayer than need government help” (Annual meeting in 1998).

“It’s much more fun to have a company that’s largely owned by individuals than institutions. Neither Charlie nor I are working for the money. [Our success as managers] translates into changes in people’s lives, not some institutional manager’s performance figures” (1998 Annual Meeting).

“We will wait until we find something we like. We will love it when we can swing in a big way. That’s our style” (1998 Annual Meeting).

“An occasional dry stretch in new buying? This is no great tragedy in an investing lifetime” (1998 Annual Meeting).

Now what interferes with rationality? “It’s ego. It’s greed. It’s envy. It’s fear. It’s mindless imitation of other people. I mean, there are a variety of factors that cause that horsepower of the mind to get diminished dramatically before the output turns out. And I would say if Charlie and I have any advantage, it’s not because we’re so smart, it is because we’re rational and we very seldom let extraneous factors interfere with our thoughts. We don’t let other people’s opinion interfere with it.… [W]e try to get fearful when others are greedy. We try to get greedy when others are fearful. We try to avoid any kind of imitation of other people’s behavior. And those are the factors that cause smart people to get bad results” (Adam Smith’s Money Game, May 15, 1998).

“I tap-dance to work, and when I get there I think I’m supposed to lie on my back and paint the ceiling” (Fortune, July 20, 1998).

“If you look at the history of markets, you see everything under the sun” (1998 Annual Meeting).

“We centralize money. Everything else is decentralized” (1998 Annual Meeting).

“We try to think about things that are both important and knowable. There are important things that are not knowable. … And there are things knowable but not important—and we don’t want to clutter up our minds with those” (1998 Annual Meeting).

“I really don’t know what Berkshire is selling for today. It just doesn’t make any difference. I can’t tell you what it was selling on May 4th, 1983 or May 4th, 1986. And I don’t care what it sells for on May 4, 1998. I do care what it sells for 10 years from now. That’s what counts. And that’s where all our focus is” (1998 Annual Meeting).

“Returns on equity in most areas of Japanese business are very, very low. And it’s extremely difficult to get rich by owning a business that earns a low return on equity” (1998 Annual Meeting).

“I do think enthusiasm is a good quality to have generally. It has helped me. … I like managers in our businesses that are enthusiastic. These people are enthusiastic about their work in the same way people can get enthusiastic about golf, and that translates into results. If you are in a job that you are not enthusiastic about, find something else. You’re not doing yourself any favor, and you’re not doing your employer any favor and you’re going to make a change anyway at some point. We’re here on earth only one time, unless Shirley MacLaine is right, so you ought to be doing something that you enjoy as you go along, and can be enthusiastic about” (Buffett and Gates on Success video, May 1998).

On planning ahead: “It wasn’t raining when Noah built the ark” (After Berkshire announced it would acquire General Re in June 1998).

“In most acquisitions, it’s better to be the target than the acquirer. The acquirer pays for the fact that he gets to haul back to his cave the carcass of the conquered animal” (Fortune, July 20, 1998).

His beef with EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization, which in 2002 came to mean earnings before I trusted the dumb auditor): “Why not report earnings before wages? Why not report earnings before rent? In fact, why not report earnings before all expenses? That’s called sales” (Berkshire’s special meeting, September 16, 1998).

“We’re risk adverse, not volatility adverse” (Berkshire’s special meeting, September 16, 1998).

On taking no role in 1992 presidential politics when he was involved in salvaging Salomon: “I was in no position to offend anyone” (Omaha World-Herald, December 13, 1998).

“The job of government, it seems to me, is to promote trade that will raise the standard of living of the country and at the same time have a safety net for those who are dislocated. … You need a policy that takes care of people who lose jobs through no fault of their own” (Omaha World-Herald, December 13, 1998).

“After you graduate, take a job you like, not one you think will look good on your resume. Take one that you would take if you were independently wealthy. Money isn’t everything. Liking the people you work with is” (Miami Herald, December 27, 1998, quoting a talk at the University of Florida).

“I buy businesses, not stocks … businesses I would be willing to own forever. For a good diversified portfolio, you don’t need to own pieces of a large number of businesses. If you can identify six good ones, that should be enough. If you go into a seventh, you may be stretching too far” (Miami Herald, December 27, 1998, quoting a talk at the University of Florida).

Macroeconomics: “If I were at a dinner with Alan Greenspan on one side of me and Robert Rubin on the other, what they said would mean nothing to me” (Miami Herald, December 27, 1998, quoting a talk

at the University of Florida).

THE OVARIAN LOTTERY

Buffett’s version of the ovarian lottery suggest that 24 hours before your birth a genie comes to you. “You look like a bright prospect,” the genie would say, “I’m going to let you set the rules of the society in the world you will enter in 24 hours. That’s going to be it. You’ll determine what the social, political and economic rules will be.”

You’ll want to know, “What’s the catch?”

“The catch is that you don’t know whether you’re going to be male or female, rich or poor, able-bodied or infirmed, black or white, born in the United States or Bangladesh. You have to reach into the ovarian ball and pick one out.”

“What kind of world would you want to emerge into when you don’t know what ball you’re gonna get?” Buffett asked the students.

“What is a just world?” he asked. “I think the better answers coincide with the views of most religions. I’m not here to give the answer” (Speech at Midland Lutheran College, February 26, 2000).

For the long haul, low expectations is what you want. “I mean I’ve never told anybody to buy Berkshire stock. And if I were to give advice to somebody about how to have a marriage that would last and they could only seek one quality in their spouse, now, if the only thing you’re interested in is having the marriage last … then you want low expectations” (Interview on Nightline, March 2, 1999).

“You should understand just what an average gain of 15% over the next five years implies: It means we will need to increase net worth by $58 billion. Earning this daunting 15% will require us to come up with big ideas: Popcorn stands just won’t do. Today’s markets are not friendly to our search for ‘elephants,’ but you can be sure that we will stay focused on the hunt” (1998 Annual Report).

“A majority of our shares are held by investors who expect to die still holding them. We can therefore ask our CEOs to manage for maximum long-term value, rather than for next quarter’s earnings” (1998 Annual Report).

“Many managements purposefully work at manipulating numbers and deceiving investors. And, as Michael Kinsley has said about Washington: ‘The scandal isn’t in what’s done that’s illegal but rather in what’s legal’” (1998 Annual Report).

“I like a company I can understand, management that I like and trust, and a price that is sensible. But with the Dow near 10,000 points, I will have trouble finding No. 3” (San Antonio Express-News, March 20, 1999).

“Capitalism is brutal. We could all go count the restaurants for the next three miles, and in five years, many of them will not be there with the same names. There are no prizes if you don’t run them right. That’s why I buy good businesses to begin with” (San Antonio Express-News, March 20, 1999).

“I don’t want a boat or 10 cars. I can drive only one car at a time. I might as well buy an auto dealership and say they’re all mine. I don’t want a 300-room house either. After awhile, the possessions possess you” (San Antonio Express-News, March 20, 1999).

“When we can’t find things to invest in, the money piles up. When we can find something, we pile in” (1999 Annual Meeting).

“Stocks are not items that wiggle around in the paper and have charts attached to them” (1999 Annual Meeting).

The investment process: “Essentially, you’re being a reporter. It’s very much like journalism. If you ask enough questions.… It’s an investigative process—a journalistic process. And in the end, you want to write the story” (1999 Annual Meeting).

“There’s a lot of difference between making money and spotting a wonderful

industry” (1999 Annual Meeting).

“Why do smart people do dumb things that are against their self interest? Our success has probably been driven mostly by avoiding mistakes” (1999 Annual Meeting).

“I read the Financial Times every day, but if there is something in their headline, ‘What I Think the World Will Look Like Next Year’ by anybody prominent in the world of economics, I don’t read the article. The time spent doing that I could spend looking at businesses. I’m not interested in soothsaying” (Financial Times, May 17, 1999).

“You tell me who somebody’s heroes are, and I will tell you how they will turn out. If you get the right heroes, it gets you through a tremendous amount” (Financial Times, May 17, 1999).

“I was lucky to be wired the way I am. … I happen to fit very well into a big market economy, where allocation of capital is an important and well-paid function. … If the money was in high-jumping, I couldn’t be making any money. … If the money was in spelling, I probably wouldn’t be making any money. I was lucky. I applied myself to it but it has been a lot of fun, so why shouldn’t I? It doesn’t make me superior to anybody who is leading a Boy Scout troop in Omaha in terms of helping the community. I was just in the right place at the right time” (Financial Times, May 17, 1999).

“I’m comfortable with myself. I can afford it. I’ve never been tested. Who knows how I would behave if I had a kid who needed an operation next week and I didn’t have any money” (Financial Times, May 17, 1999).

On being a good investor: “I was born at the right time and place, where the ability to allocate capital really counts. I’m adapted to this society. I won the ovarian lottery. I got the ball that said, ‘capital allocator—United States’ ” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

“Success in investing doesn’t correlate with IQ once you’re above the level of 125. Once you have ordinary intelligence, what you need is the temperament to control the urges that get other people into trouble in investing” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

On identifying good companies: “The best thing that happens to us is when a great company gets into temporary trouble. … We want to buy them when they’re on the operating table” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

On the size of his stock portfolio: “If I was running $1 million today, or $10 million for that matter, I’d be fully invested. Anyone who says that size does not hurt investment performance is selling. The highest rates of return I’ve ever achieved were in the 1950s. I killed the Dow. You ought to see the numbers. But I was investing peanuts then. It’s a huge structural advantage not to have a lot of money. I think I could make you 50% a year on $1 million. No, I know I could. I guarantee that” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

“Up until a few years ago, we sold things to buy more because I ran out of money. I had more ideas than money. Now I have more money than ideas” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

On holding cash: “Today we have $15 billion in cash. Do I like getting 5% on it? No. But I like the $15 billion, and I don’t want to put it in something that’s not going to give it back and then some. The nature of markets is that at times they offer extraordinary values and at other times you have to have the discipline to wait” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

“If you think about it [i.e., the markets], you get these huge swings in valuations. It’s the ideal business arrangement, as long as you don’t go crazy. The 1970s were unbelievable. The world wasn’t going to end, but businesses were being given away. Human nature has not changed. People will always behave in a manic-depressive way over time. They will offer great values to you” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

On the Internet’s impact on business: “The Internet as a phenomenon is just huge. That much I understand. I just don’t know how to make money at it. … I don’t try to profit from the Internet. But I do want to understand the damage it can do to an established business. Our approach is very much profiting from lack of change rather than from change. With Wrigley chewing gum, it’s the lack of change that appeals to me. I don’t think it is going to be hurt by the Internet. That’s the kind of business I like” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

On Internet stock valuations: “There will be enormous amounts of disappointment. The numbers of people buying these stocks to hold them are very few. I think 98% of them are being bought by people because they are going up. If these stocks stop going up, they’ll get out.… Very few of these companies will be big winners in the long run. It’s the nature of capitalism not to get a lot of winners. You get a few” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

“With Coke I can come up with a very rational figure for the cash it will generate in the future. But with the top 10 Internet companies, how much cash will they produce over the next 25 years? If you say you don’t know then you don’t know what it is worth and you are speculating, not investing. All I know is that I don’t know, and if I don’t know, I don’t invest” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

On technology stocks: “How do you beat Bobby Fischer? You play him at any

game but chess. I try to stay in games where I have an edge, and I never will in technology investing” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

On macro-economic forecasting: “I don’t read economic forecasts. I don’t read the funny papers” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

On analyst Alice Schroeder’s research showing that Berkshire Hathaway is selling at a sizable discount: “I think she did a very thorough job. It seems to me she varied from the standard approach of securities analysts. But I don’t comment on the value. I don’t want anybody to come into Berkshire based on what I’m saying about the value of the stock. Our goal is to have the stock sell as close to the intrinsic value as possible, so that people come in and go out on the same basis” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

On daytraders and speculators: “We try to communicate in a way that turns people off who have a crazy approach to stocks. It matters as much who you repel as who you attract. If we were sizably owned by daytraders, we’d have crazy valuations in no time—and in both directions” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

On Coca-Cola: “I have a very strong feeling that Coca-Cola will dominate a much larger soft drink business 10 years from now than today. But in terms of the short run, I have no idea what will happen” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

On past mistakes: “My biggest lost opportunity was probably Freddie Mac. We owned a savings and loan, and that entitled us to buy 1% of Freddie Mac stock when it first came out. We should have bought 100 S&Ls and loaded up on Freddie Mac. What was I doing? I was sucking my thumb” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

“The biggest cause of that kind of mistake [here, failing to buy more Citicorp in 1991], is that I stop buying when the stock starts moving up. I got so enamored of how cheap it was when I started buying that I stopped. I have often folded my tent. I believe in loading up on these things. There wasn’t anyone who thought Citibank was going to disappear. And there wasn’t anyone who thought it wasn’t cheap at $9 a share” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

“We’ve lost very little on errors of commission. The errors of omission are the big ones” (Business Week, July 5, 1999).

“I close my eyes and think about what a company’s going to look like in ten years before I invest” (Disney’s Michael Eisner quoting Buffett, Fortune, September 6, 1999).

“When you begin to expect the growth of a component factor to forever outpace that of the aggregate, you get into certain mathematical problems” (Fortune, November 22, 1999).

“Now, to get some historical perspective, let’s look back at the 34 years before this one—and here we are going to see an almost Biblical kind of symmetry, in the sense of lean years and fat years—to observe what happened in the stock market. Take, to begin with, the first 17 years of the period, from the end of 1964 through 1981. Here’s what took place in that interval:

Dow Jones Industrial Average



Dec. 31, 1964: 874.12



Dec. 31, 1981: 875.00



“Now I’m known as a long-term investor and a patient guy, but that is not my idea of a big move” (Fortune, November 22, 1999).

“Every time the risk-free rate moves by one basis point—by 0.01%—the value of every investment in the country changes. People can see this easily in the case of bonds, whose value is normally affected only by interest rates. In the case of equities or real estate or farms or whatever, other very important variables are almost always at work, and that means the effect of interest rate changes is usually obscured. Nonetheless, the effect—like the invisible pull of gravity—is constantly there” (Fortune, November 22, 1999).

“The absolute most that the owners of a business, in aggregate, can get out of it in the end—between now and Judgment Day—is what that business earns over time” (Fortune, November 22, 1999).

“Well, I thought it would be instructive to go back and look at a couple of industries that transformed this country much earlier in this century: automobiles and aviation. Take automobiles first: I have here one page, out of 70 in total, of car and truck manufacturers that have operated in this country. At one time, there was a Berkshire car and an Omaha car. Naturally I noticed those. But there was also a telephone book of others. All told, there appear to have been at least 2,000 car makes, in an industry that had an incredible impact on people’s lives. If you had foreseen in the early days of cars how this industry would develop, you would have said, ‘Here is the road to riches.’ So what did we progress to by the 1990s? After corporate carnage that never let up, we came down to three U.S. car companies—themselves no lollapaloozas for investors. So, here is an industry that had an enormous impact on America—and also an enormous impact, though not the anticipated one, on investors” (Fortune, November 22, 1999).

“Move on to failures of airlines. Here’s a list of 129 airlines that in the past 20 years filed for bankruptcy. Continental was smart enough to make that list twice. As of 1992, in fact—though the picture would have improved since then—the money that had been made since the dawn of aviation by all of this country’s airline companies was zero. Absolutely zero.

“Sizing all this up, I like to think that if I’d been at Kitty Hawk in 1903 when Orville Wright took off, I would have been farsighted enough, and public-spirited enough—I owed this to future capitalists—to shoot him down. I mean, Karl Marx couldn’t have done as much damage to capitalists as Orville did” (Fortune, November 22, 1999).

“The key to investing is not assessing how much an industry is going to affect society, or how much it will grow, but rather determining the competitive advantage of any given company and, above all, the durability of that advantage. The products or services that have wide, sustainable moats around them are the ones that deliver rewards to investors” (Fortune, November 22, 1999).

“I focus on the absence of change. I don’t think the Internet is going to change how people chew gum” (Fortune, December 20, 1999).

“Most people get interested in stocks when everyone else is. The time to get interested is when no one else is” (Fortune, December 20, 1999).

“I never met a man who could predict the market” (Widely quoted).

On buying companies: “I look at what their long-term competitive advantage is and that’s something that’s enduring. I have to understand what they sell, why people buy it, why people might buy something else” (St. Petersburg Times, December 15, 1999).

Regarding not talking about Berkshire’s problems in 1999: “You don’t talk about Father on Mother’s Day, and today, GEICO is Mother’s Day” (At an appearance in Lakeland, Florida, to open a new GEICO call center as reported in St. Petersburg Times, December 15, 1999).

“Once again, I would like to make some comments about accounting, in this case about its application to acquisitions. This is currently a very contentious topic and, before the dust settles, Congress may even intervene (a truly terrible idea)” (1999 Annual Report).

“Market commentators and investment managers who glibly refer to ‘growth’ and ‘value’ styles as contrasting approaches to investment are displaying their ignorance, not their sophistication. Growth is simply a component—usually a plus, sometimes a minus—in the value equation” (2000 Annual Report).

On buying companies: “We like to think that we’re the Metropolitan Art Museum of business” (Annual meeting in 2000).

“We buy into success stories” (Annual meeting in 2000).

“A casino is a much more exciting place than a church, but the by-products are much worse” (Press conference, April 30, 2000).

“It would be a nightmare if there was a speculative surge in Berkshire. Then you’d get all kinds of people coming in, and if the stock went up to $200,000, I would say to Charlie, ‘It’s all yours’” (Press conference, April 30, 2000).

How to think about investing: “The first investment primer was written by Aesop in 600 B.C. He said, ‘A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.’ Incidentally, Aesop did not know that it was 600 B.C. He was smart, but not that smart. Aesop forgot to say when you get the two birds in the bush and what interest rates are; investing is simply figuring out your cash outlay (the bird in the hand) and comparing it to how many birds are in the bush when you get them” (Annual meeting in 2000).

The impact of technology on the Internet: “For society, the Internet is wonderful, but for capitalists, it will be a net negative. It will increase efficiency, but lots of things increase efficiency without increasing profits. It is way more likely to make American businesses less profitable than more profitable” (2000 Annual Meeting).

Quoting Samuel Johnson: “I can give you an argument, but I can’t give you understanding” (2000 Annual Meeting).

On soft money for political contributions: “Let only individuals contribute—with sensible limits per election. Otherwise, we are well on our way to ensuring that a government of the moneyed, by the moneyed, and for the moneyed shall not perish from the earth” (Op-ed piece in The New York Times, September 10, 2000).

“I hear friends talk about the debilitating effects of food stamps and the self-perpetuating nature of welfare and how terrible that is. These same people are leaving tons of money to their kids, whose main achievement in life had been to emerge from the right womb. And when they emerge from that womb, instead of a welfare officer, they have a trust fund officer. Instead of food stamps, they get dividends and interest” (Talk at Columbia University, September 27, 2000).

“[I’m] very undertaxed. I hear this Republican message that we’re rich as hell, and we’re not going to take it anymore. That doesn’t make a lot of sense to me. I’m paying taxes at a lower rate than my secretary … and frankly I think that’s crazy” (Talk at Columbia University, September 27, 2000).

“When I hire people, I look for intelligence, energy, and integrity. Without the third, the first two don’t do any good” (Talk at Columbia University, September 27, 2000).

“What money cannot buy: health and love; what it can buy: fame, sex, testimonials, and power” (Talk at Executive Jet dinner in Palm Beach, February 11, 2001).

About campaign finance reform: “If a market model prevails, political clout will eventually be priced appropriately, which means survival of the fattest will be ensured” (The Washington Post, March 21, 2001).

“I have personal knowledge of several $1 million requests made in last year’s campaign in which the potential donor was promised his name would never surface. If you want to know how to participate in such ‘laundering,’ just call your local party chairman and say you’re considering a large anonymous contribution. He’ll send a taxi” (The Washington Post, March 21, 2001).

“Congress is the only body that can end the financial arms race—in which wealthy entities and individuals are otherwise destined to become superpowers” (The Washington Post, March 21, 2001).

“Whatever legislation is passed, ample money will continue to flow into the political process. But a tough bill will minimize that amount that arrives via the sewer system” (The Washington Post, March 21, 2001).

Guessing that the first question from an audience would be about how the market would do: “The answer to your first question is I don’t know” (Shaw Industries Convention, March 30, 2001).

“Growth is part of the value equation” (2001 Annual Meeting).

“Anyone who says that you should put a certain amount into value and growth doesn’t understand investing. Other than that, they’re great people” (2001 Annual Meeting).

“We have no more of a master plan now than in 1965 when we bought a textile mill” (2001 Annual Meeting).

“You can always write dumb insurance policies. There is an unlimited market for dumb insurance policies. And they’re very troubling because the first day the premium comes in, that’s the last time you see any new money. From then on, it’s all going out. And that’s not our aim in life” (2001 Annual Meeting).

“It’s crazy to get in debt because it’s so hard to get out of debt” (2001 Annual Meeting).

“What the Internet offered was a chance to monetize the hopes of people …

and transform greed and dreams into instant cash through venture capital … the promoters got rich at the expense of the gullible but there was very little money actually made” (2001 Annual Meeting).

Filters for buying a business: A) Buy a business I can understand; B) Look at the long-term prospects; C) See if I like the managers; D) A price I like. If all four filters are met, I sign my name to the check” (Press conference in Omaha, April 29, 2001).

“We tie compensation to what’s under a manager’s control” (Press conference in Omaha, April 29, 2001).

“There are two questions to ask yourself as you look at the decision you’ll make. A) is it knowable? B) is it important? If it is not knowable, as you know there are all kinds of things that are important but not knowable, we forget about those. And if it is unimportant, whether it’s knowable or not, it won’t make any difference. We don’t care. But there are enough things that are knowable and important that we focus on those things. And everything else, we forget about” (Press conference in Omaha, April 29, 2001).

Invest in sure things: “I know who’s going to make the most money in bricks in Texas” (Press conference in Omaha, April 29, 2001).

On inheritance taxes: “I’m not a big believer in the divine right of the womb” (Talk to Seattle’s CityClub as reported by the Seattle Post-Intelligencer, July 21, 2001).

On joining the Internet investing community: “I don’t bring anything to that party” (Talk to Seattle’s CityClub as reported by the Seattle Post-Intelligencer, July 21, 2001).

“We’re not interested in anybody who learns from his mistakes. We are looking for people who learn from someone else’s mistakes” (Widely quoted).

How to size up people: Buffett shared a method that a friend, a Polish Jew who survived Auschwitz, uses to this day when sizing up would-be-friends. She asks herself: “Would they hide me?” (Talk at Harvard Business School, October 18, 2001)

“There seems to be some perverse human characteristic that likes to make easy things difficult” (Widely quoted).

“Anyone who says that size does not hurt investment performance is selling” (BusinessWeek.com, November 14, 2001).

“In economics, interest rates act as gravity behaves in the physical world. At all times, in all markets, in all parts of the world, the tiniest change in rates changes the value of every financial asset” (Fortune, December 10, 2001).

“For more than 40 years I’ve studied the documents that public companies file. Too often, I’ve been unable to decipher just what is being said or, worse yet, had to conclude that nothing was being said” (Preface to the Plain English Handbook of the Securities and Exchange Commission).

On declining corporate ethics: “Today is significantly different from the 1950s. Back then there was less disclosure, but the disclosure you had was accurate. In the 1960s you started to have more games being played. Conglomerates were trying to pump up their stock to use it as currency in takeovers, but old-line America didn’t do it. It was still the good guys vs. the bad guys. It’s not like today, where too often otherwise high-grade companies start with a number [for quarterly earnings] and work backward. Situational ethics has reared its ugly head” (Fortune, February 18, 2002).

“If I can’t understand the accounting, they don’t want me to” (Widely quoted).

“I would suggest that the CEO regard himself as the chief disclosure officer of a company” (Securities and Exchange Commission Roundtable, March 4, 2002).

“We own 100 percent of some companies. Believe me, we can discipline managers if we want” (Financial Times, March 5, 2002).

“We recommend scrapping the term ‘loss development’ and its equally ugly twin, ‘reserve strengthening.’ (Can you imagine an insurer, upon finding its reserves excessive, describing the reduction that follows as ‘reserve weakening’?) ‘Loss development’ suggests to investors that some natural, uncontrollable event has occurred in the current year, and ‘reserve strengthening’ implies that adequate amounts have been further buttressed. The truth, however, is that management made an error in estimation that in turn produced an error in the earnings previously reported. The losses didn’t ‘develop’—they were there all along. What developed was management’s understanding of the losses (or, in the instances of chicanery, management’s willingness to finally fess up)” (2001 Annual Report).

“Fear may recede with time, but the danger won’t. The war against terrorism can never be won. The best the nation can achieve is a long succession of stalemates” (2001 Annual Report).

“At Berkshire, we retain our risks and depend on no one” (2001 Annual Report).

“We don’t have to be smarter than the rest; we have to be more disciplined than the rest” (Annual meeting weekend in 2002).

Love the business: “If a guy auctions his business, we don’t want him. There’s nothing wrong with loving money. It’s just not for us” (Talk to Columbia University students on May 5, 2002).

“When someone builds a business, they’re building their own masterpiece. If we purchased that painting, we’re offering to hang it, not buy it and quickly sell it to someone else. I tell a prospective seller they can choose to hand it over to Berkshire where I will never tell them to add more blue paint or less red paint, but simply hang it. Consider Berkshire the Metropolitan Museum. Your alternative is to hang it in a porn shop” (Talk to Columbia University students, May 9, 2002).

“Having a lot of work is no hardship when you’re enjoying what you’re doing. You don’t run out of gas when you’re enjoying what you’re doing. The gas goes into the tank faster than it comes out” (Fortune, July 8, 2002).

“Options are a huge cost for many corporations and a huge benefit to executives. No wonder, then, that they have fought ferociously to avoid making a charge against their earnings. Without blushing, almost all C.E.O.’s have told their shareholders that options are cost-free.

“For these C.E.O.’s I have a proposition: Berkshire Hathaway will sell you insurance, carpeting or any of our other products in exchange for options identical to those you grant yourselves. It’ll all be cash free. But do you really think your corporation will not have incurred a cost when you hand over the options in exchange for the carpeting? Or do you really think that placing a value on the option is just too difficult to do, one of your other excuses for not expensing them? If these are the opinions you honestly hold, call me collect. We can do business” (The New York Times, July 24, 2002).

“If I got a call this afternoon and somebody offered me A, B, or C—securities, assets or a business—and it looked like a good idea, we could sign up a deal tonight. We move fast, and we always have cash” (The Wall Street Journal, August 2, 2002).

About investigations into companies where Berkshire was buying assets: “Assets are morally neutral. Nothing we’ve done would cause us a problem. We didn’t go in with people who caused the problem” (The Wall Street Journal, August 2, 2002).

“It’s not greed that drives the world, but envy” (Widely quoted).

“It is better to point out your own mistakes than have somebody else do it” (London Telegraph, September 23, 2002).

“It’s only in the rinse cycle that you find out how dirty the laundry’s been. We’re in the rinse cycle now” (Times Online, September 26, 2002).

“I’m looking for answers to business questions, not market questions” (Talk to Georgetown’s MBA students, November 14, 2002).

“The important thing is to keep playing, to play against weak opponents and to play for big stakes” (ibid.).

“Managers that always promise to ‘make the numbers’ will at some point be tempted to make up the numbers” (2002 Annual Report).

“We will continue to emphasize substance over form in our work and waste as little time as possible during board meetings in show-and-tell and perfunctory activities” (2002 Annual Report).

“Audit committees can’t audit. Only a company’s outside auditor can determine whether the earnings that a management purports to have made are suspect” (2002 Annual Report).

“Hedge funds have become the latest Holy Grail” (Fortune, March 31, 2003).

“If you see a company issuing a lot of shares over time, they must not have a very high opinion of their shares” (Knoxville News Sentinel, April 9, 2003).

“At 72, I should be living in Florida, pushing a shuffle board around, but I want to be running Berkshire Hathaway” (Daily Nebraskan, April 10, 2003).

“If I had to turn $10,000 into $10 million in 10 years or else get shot, I would:

(1) get an ‘override’ on someone else’s money and, (2) look at thousands of small companies and find the two or three that are a cinch. There are opportunities … that are as easy as ‘shooting fish in a barrel after the water has run out and the fish have stopped flopping around’” (Harvard Business School talk on April 2003).

“What counts is to play for big stakes against weak opponents” (2003 Annual Meeting).

“You only have to do one dumb thing in life” (2003 Annual Meeting).

“Intrinsic value is terribly important but inherently fuzzy” (2003 Annual Meeting).

“I have yet to see an electron. I could regurgitate something on a test, but I don’t understand it” (2003 Annual Meeting).

“We want a business that we think, if run well, is going to have a competitive advantage. We don’t buy Hula Hoop or Pet Rock companies, or companies with explosions in demand where we don’t know who the winners will be” (2003 Annual Meeting).

“Having $42.5 billion of free money is a good thing” (2003 Annual Meeting).

“It’s bad to go to bed at night thinking about the price of a stock. We think about the ‘value’ and company results. The stock market is there to serve you, not instruct you” (2003 Annual Meeting).

Compensation: “We could spend a billion bucks year to year on consultants to get an answer we can get in five minutes frankly. It just isn’t that complicated. However, can you imagine a consultant coming around and saying: ‘I’ve got a one-paragraph compensation management for you.’ Would they be able to send you a large bill for their consultancy? Of course not. So they’ve got to make things more complicated. And we don’t believe in that. We want things that are easy to understand” (2003 Annual Meeting).

“You only have to be right on a very, very few things in your lifetime as long as you never make any big mistakes” (2003 Annual Meeting).

“The truly big investment idea can usually be explained in a short paragraph” (Widely quoted).

On keeping it simple: “There’s nothing advantageous in looking for a silver needle in a golden haystack. Just take the haystack” (Talk to Wharton Business School students, October 10, 2003).

“The most important thing in the world is what you teach kids in those first couple of years. Make sure you deserve to be their hero, because you will be” (Talk to Wharton Business School students on October 10, 2003).

In making decisions: “You want to cast out all kinds of things” (Vintage Buffett: Warren Buffett Shares His Wealth video, October 14, 2003).

“The improbable happens, 5-Sigma events are not 5-Sigma events” (Vintage Buffett: Warren Buffett Shares His Wealth video, October 24, 2003).

On bridge and investing: “Play with weak opponents for big stakes, a lot” (Harbus, October 27, 2003).

“If class warfare is being waged in America, my class is clearly winning” (2003 Annual Report).

In praise of ownership: “After all, who ever washes a rental car?” (2003 Annual Report).

“Our board knows that the ultimate scorecard on its performance will be determined by the record of my successor” (2003 Annual Report).

“When analyzing Berkshire, be sure to remember that the company should be viewed as an unfolding movie, not as a still photograph. Those who focused in the past on only the snapshot of the day sometimes reached erroneous conclusions” (2003 Annual Report).

“I made a big mistake in not selling several of our larger holdings during The Great Bubble. If these stocks are fully priced now, you may wonder what I was thinking four years ago when their intrinsic value was lower and their prices far higher. So do I” (2003 Annual Report).

“I should note that the cemetery for seers has a huge section set aside for macro forecasters” (2003 Annual Report).

“Charlie and I detest taking even small risks unless we feel we are being adequately compensated for doing so. About as far as we will go down that path is to occasionally eat cottage cheese a day after the expiration date on the carton” (2003 Annual Report).

“[The] typical stuff [of asset allocation] is pure nonsense. Typical asset allocation is just merchandising—you don’t need this” (2004 Annual Meeting).

“What we learn from history is that people don’t learn from history” (2004 Annual Meeting).

“We do not know today what we’ll be doing tomorrow” (2004 Annual Meeting).

Why Berkshire got out of textiles and into insurance: “We decided we wanted to make some money” (2004 Annual Meeting).

“We don’t have to do anything for external reasons” (2004 Annual Meeting).

“We’re transferring ownership of America to the rest of the world. At the end of the year, the rest of the world will own maybe 1% more of the country. That doesn’t sound like much, but you do it for enough years and it adds up” (The Buffalo News, May 16, 2004).

“I personally think that society is responsible for a very significant percentage of what I’ve earned” (Seattle Times, October 4, 2004).

“You are in a position to be whatever you want to be. The time to work on the

qualities that you want to have when you are 30, 40, or 50 is right now. Furthermore, you get only one body and one mind, so take care of it. You can’t hit the rewind button on life” (Talk to George Washington University MBA students on November 13, 2004).

“Some guys chase girls. I chase companies. I’m happiest investing money. I can’t imagine having more fun” (Talk to George Washington University MBA students on November 13, 2004).

“Success is having the people love you that you want to have love you” (Talk to George Washington University MBA students on November 13, 2004).

“Success is getting what you want, and happiness is wanting what you get” (Widely quoted).

“People are voting for the artist, not the painting” (Widely quoted).

Trade deficit: “The rest of the world enjoys an ever-growing royalty on American output. Here, we are like a family that consistently overspends its income. As time passes, the family finds that it is working more and more for the ‘finance company’ and less for itself” (2004 Annual Report).

“We may well turn out to be wrong in our currency judgments. (Indeed, the fact that so many pundits now predict weakness for the dollar makes us uneasy.) If so, our mistake will be very public. The irony is that if we chose the opposite course, leaving all of Berkshire’s assets in dollars even as they declined significantly in value, no one would notice our mistake” (2004 Annual Report).

“General Motors and Ford are in the position of having commitments in strong contractual terms to pay sums for retired workers in both the annuity field and in the health field that are staggeringly high compared to some of their competitors. Meanwhile, their competitors can buy steel, aluminum, and rubber at the same price. So when you get all through with it, their competitors have huge advantages on the health care and annuity side, and so it’s not going to be a fair fight” (Annual meeting in 2005).

“There are people fighting in Iraq that are paying higher tax rates than mine” (University of Nebraska-Lincoln appearance with Bill Gates, September 30, 2005).

“A person must have a passion for the business they are in—they have to prefer going to work that day, than any other option in the world” (Talk to Northwestern’s Medill School of Journalism students on November 12, 2005).

“Never get into something if you have the intention of someday wanting to get out of it” (Talk to Northwestern’s Medill School of Journalism students on November 12, 2005).

“Your inner scorecard is more important than your outer scorecard” (Talk to Northwestern’s Medill School of Journalism students on November 12, 2005).

“Was this onslaught of more frequent and more intense storms [of 2005] merely an anomaly? Or was it caused by changes in climate, water temperature or other variables we don’t fully understand? And could these factors be developing in a manner that will soon produce disasters dwarfing Katrina?

“Joe, Ajit, and I don’t know the answer to these all-important questions. What we do know is that our ignorance means we must follow the course prescribed by Pascal in his famous wager about the existence of God. As you may recall, he concluded that since he didn’t know the answer, his personal gain/loss ratio dictated an affirmation conclusion.

“So guided, we’ve concluded that we should now write mega-cat policies only at prices far higher than prevailed last year—and then only with an aggregate exposure that would not cause us distress if shifts in some important variable produce far more costly storms in the near future” (2005 Annual Report).

“Long ago, Sir Isaac Newton gave us three laws of motion, which were the work of genius. But Sir Isaac’s talents didn’t extend to investing. He lost a bundle on the South Sea bubble, explaining later, ‘I can calculate the movement of the stars, but not the madness of men.’ If he had not been traumatized by this loss, Sir Isaac might well have gone on to discover the Fourth Law of Motion: For investors, as a whole, returns decrease as motion increases.” (2005 Annual Report)

“I want to know what’s the motor on the business” (Press conference on May 7, 2006).

In a letter Buffett wrote his son Howard when he gave him millions for his foundation: “Focus the new funds and your energy on a relatively few activities in which HGB [the Howard G. Buffett Foundation] can make an important difference. Concentrate your resources on needs that would not be met without your efforts. Conversely, avoid making small contributions to the multitude of worthwhile activities that have many possible funders and that would likely proceed without your help.… Pay attention to your home community but favor a broader view. Judge programs by how they fit with your goals and their chances of success, not by who makes the request. Expect to make some mistakes; nothing important will be accomplished if you make only ‘safe’ decisions” (Letter to his son Howard in announcing the charitable gifts, June 25, 2006).

“I am not an enthusiast for dynastic wealth, particularly when the alternative is 6 billion people having much poorer hands than we do” (June 26, 2006 when he pledged to donate much of his fortune to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation).

“Doing what you love, involving the people you love, no money in the world can beat that” (Jerusalem Post, September 19, 2006).

“Your standard of living doesn’t [have to] equal your cost of living” (CNBC, November 20, 2006).

“I don’t need to win every game, just the ones I play” (Talk to a group of students from Georgia’s Terry College of Business, January 2007).

“If it’s raining gold, you should go out with a soup ladle not a teaspoon” (Talk to University of Chicago students, April 13, 2007).

Investing in utilities is “not a way to get rich. It’s a way to stay rich” (Widely quoted).

“We like easy problems. We don’t try to solve tough problems. We don’t go around looking for tough problems” (2007 Annual Meeting).

On not being so precise: “I’ve never done a spreadsheet except in my mind” (2007 Annual Meeting).

Reading people: “People give themselves away when they come [to meet with us]—the very things they talk about.… There are a lot of clues in the things they think are important” (2007 Annual Meeting).

Financial panics: “History doesn’t repeat itself, but it rhymes,” said Buffett, sharing a Mark Twain one-liner. “We’ll have something that rhymes” (2007 Annual Meeting).

“Many institutions that publicly report precise market values for their holdings of CDOs and CMOs are in truth reporting fiction. They are marking to model rather than marking to market. The recent meltdown in much of the debt market, moreover, has transformed this process into marking to myth” (Fortune, September 3, 2007).

After looking over all the stock purchases he had ever made: “I would have made more money if I had never sold a share of stock I’d bought since I was 11 years old.” Buffett said he lost a lot of money, “fiddling around” (USA Today, September 24, 2007).

Leaving money to his children: “I want to leave them enough so they can do anything but not enough so they can do nothing” (Canadian magazine Macleans, October 15, 2007).

“Unconditional love is the most powerful force in the universe. I got unconditional love from my parents” (Talk to Harvard students in Omaha, October 19, 2007).

“It is not necessary to be able to forecast either business conditions or market fluctuations in order to do well in investing” (Maeil Business Newspaper in South Korea, October 21, 2007).

Reply to a question about financial strategy from a TaeguTec employee in Korea: “The best investment you can make is in yourself” (USA Today, October 25, 2007).

Arguing that the rich should pay higher taxes: “Mine came to 17.7%. The average for the office [of 15 other people in the office who computed their tax rate] was 32.9%. There wasn’t anybody in the office from the receptionist up that paid as low a tax rate. And I have no tax planning. I don’t have an accountant. I don’t have tax shelters. I just follow what the U.S. Congress tells me to do” (Interview with NBC’s Tom Brokaw, October 29, 2007).

“I’ll bet a million dollars against any member of the Forbes 400 who challenges me that the average [federal tax rate, including income and payroll taxes] for the Forbes 400 will be less than the average of their receptionists” (Interview with NBC’s Tom Brokaw, October 29, 2007).

“Dynastic wealth, the enemy of a meritocracy, is on the rise. Equality of opportunity has been on the decline. A progressive and meaningful estate tax is needed to curb the movement of a democracy toward plutocracy” (Testimony before the Senate Finance Committee on November 14, 2007, on behalf of continuing, rather than repealing, the estate tax).

“An artificial price is a price you don’t like” (CNBC, December 11, 2007).

“I like ’em fairly simple and somebody’s characterized what’s going on now as a flight to simplicity. And there’s good reason for that. You should only buy what you understand. And I can only understand simple things, so, ergo, I look at simple businesses” (CNBC, December 11, 2007).

“More money has been lost reaching for yield than at the point of a gun” (Fund-raiser for Senator Hillary Clinton, December 11, 2007).

Securitized mortgages: “One can make more money selling toxic waste to customers.… Wall Street started believing its own PR on this. They started holding this stuff themselves, maybe because they couldn’t sell it. It worked wonderfully until it didn’t work at all” (Fundraiser for Senator Hillary Clinton, December 11, 2007).

“My cleaning lady pays a higher tax on her earnings than I do on my dividends and investments. It’s better to earn in the boardroom than in the bathroom” (Fund-raiser for Senator Hillary Clinton, December 11, 2007).

“The Internet will not change how we chew gum. I understand Coke. I understand Wal-Mart. I understand chewing gum, but I will never understand IT well enough” (Harbus, February 19, 2008).

“If you are lucky on health and lucky on your spouse, you are a long way home” (Talk to students in Omaha of Emory’s Goizueta Business School and McCombs School of Business at the University of Texas at Austin, February 15, 2008).

“A good time to buy a really great business [Wrigley] is when you can do it” (CNBC, April 27, 2008).

“I avoided all classes that had public speaking. I got physically ill if I had to speak. I signed up for a Dale Carnegie course. Gave them a check for $100, then I went home and stopped payment on the check. I was in Omaha, took $100 cash to Wally Kean, I took that Carnegie course, and then I went to the University of Omaha to start teaching, knowing I had to get in front of people. Ability to communicate in writing and speaking—it is under-taught—and enormously important. If you can communicate well, you have an enormous advantage. Force yourself into situations where you have to develop those abilities. At Dale Carnegie they made us stand on tables. I may have gone too far. You are doing something very worthwhile if you are helping introverted people get outside of themselves” (2008 Annual Meeting).

What’s next for the stock market? “I could expand on that question, but I couldn’t give an answer” (Annual meeting in 2008).

“Stocks give you bargains, but individual owners won’t” (Annual meeting in 2008).

“Capitalism without failure is like Christianity without hell” (Annual meeting in 2008).

“The most important decision you’ll make in your lives is who you decide to marry” (Speaking to Monsoon Pabrai (12) and Momachi Pabrai (11) during a lunch on June 26, 2008).

“It’s very important to live your life by an internal yardstick. Both Charlie and I only use internal yardsticks. Would you rather be considered the best lover in the world and know privately that you’re the worst—or would you prefer to know privately that you’re the best lover in the world, but be considered the worst. If your actions always reflect the right answer, you’ve got it” (Buffett speaking to Guy Spier and Mohnish Pabrai during lunch on June 25, 2008).

Referring to Ajit Jain’s preference for keeping a low profile: “A whale only gets harpooned when it surfaces” (Speaking to Guy Spier and Mohnish Pabrai during lunch with Buffett on June 25, 2008).

“Derivatives are like sex. It’s not who we’re sleeping with, it’s who they’re sleeping with that’s the problem” (Alice Schroeder, The Snowball, p. 659).

“At the moment, it is much better to be a financial cripple with a government

guarantee than a Gibraltar without one” (2008 Annual Report).

“Strategic planning is a waste of time” (Kansas State Collegian, March 31, 2009).

On why banking can be a good business (referring to Wells Fargo): “You don’t have to be a rocket scientist when your raw material cost is less than 11/2%” (Fortune, April 27, 2009).

Reasons for a Republican winning the Ted Kennedy seat in the Massachusetts senate race in 2010: “Who knows what goes on in someone’s mind when they enter a ballot box. Someone said the word ‘motivation’ should never be used in the singular, because you get these all mixed up in your mind. But certainly, people generally in the country do not like the health bill. Whether it’s good or not. But they don’t like it, and they don’t feel good about Congress and they feel less good about the Administration than they did a year ago, clearly. And they feel the economy is dragging on for a long time …” (CNBC, January 20, 2010).

Reply to being asked where he thought he’d be ranked on the Forbes’ World Billionaires list: “I’ll let Forbes worry about that” (Forbes, February 22, 2010).

“When the financial system went into cardiac arrest in September 2008, Berkshire was a supplier of liquidity and capital to the system, not a supplicant” (2009 Annual Report).

Deliberation of acquisitions: “In more than 50 years of board memberships, however, never have I heard the investment bankers (or management!) discuss the true value of what is being given” (2009 Annual Report).

Reading annual reports: “I read hundreds. … You mentioned AIG. I read a 550-page 10k. I don’t know how many go in, but I read that on Friday night. And I read—I read lots of reports. I keep looking for a centerfold or something in these reports. I never find one” (CNBC, March 1, 2010).

“So are you a collector of anything?” I asked Buffett. “Stamps, cars, artwork?”

“I collect businesses and friends” (Investment U.com interview with Buffett at Sing Sing Penitentiary which Buffett visited at the bequest of his sister Doris who wanted him to learn about a successful college program at the prison, June 10, 2010).

“Too often, a vast collection of possession ends up possessing its owner. The asset I most value, aside from health, is interesting, diverse, and long-standing friends” (Fortune, July 5, 2010).

“If you’ve got the power to raise prices without losing business to a competitor, you’ve got a very good business. If you have to have a prayer session before raising the price by 10%, you’ve got a terrible business” (Bloomberg Businessweek, March 6, 2011).

Regarding the debt ceiling: “It’s just silly. You really don’t have any business playing Russian roulette to get your way in some other matter. We should be more grown up” (CNBC, July 7, 2011).

On not investing in Google, Apple, Amazon, and Facebook: “I did miss the boat. But I don’t mind missing the boats that I don’t know enough to captain” (Bloomberg, July 8, 2011).

“I can end the deficit in five minutes ... You just pass a law that says any time there’s a deficit of more than 3% of GDP, all sitting members of Congress are ineligible for re-election” (Bloomberg, July 8, 2011).

Federal debt ceiling debate: “All it does is slow down a process and direct people’s energy, causes people to posture. It doesn’t really make any sense” (Politico, July 19, 2011).

“In Omaha, the U.S. is still triple A. In fact, if there were a quadruple-A rating, I’d give the U.S. that,” Buffett said hours after the S&P cut the rating from AAA to AA+ (FoxNews Network, August 5, 2011)

“If anything, it (S&P’s downgrade of U.S. debt), it may change my opinion on S&P” (CNBC, August 8, 2011).

“Our currency is not AAA, and in recent months the performance of our government has not been AAA, but our debt is AAA” (CNBC, August 8, 2011)

“I can go out drinking all night, but if I’ve got a printing press, my debt is good” (CNBC, August 8, 2011).

Taxing the rich: “My friends and I have been coddled long enough by a billionaire-friendly Congress. It’s time for our government to get serious about shared sacrifice” (The New York Times, August 15, 2011).

“The lower things go, the more I buy. We are in the business of buying” (Fortune, August 11, 2011).

On his Giving Pledge: “The way I got the message out was to get a copy of Forbes, look down that 400 list and start making phone calls! Bill and Melinda {Gates} did the same thing. So keep publishing the list so I can milk it” (Forbes, October 10, 2011).

On making an educational cartoon with Jay-Z: “I saw an opportunity to have a good time and maybe get a fair number of kids in this country started with the right financial habits. Learning at the starting line is so important” (Dealbook, October 18, 2011).

“We can rise to any challenge but not if people feel we’re in a plutocracy. We have to get serious about shared sacrifice” (Time, January 23, 2012).

“We were told a rising tide would lift all boats, but the rising tide has lifted all yachts” (ABC News, January 25, 2012).

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Wisdom of Warren Buffett



Lord John Maynard Keynes in his office at the Treasury in London in 1945

(AP/Wide

World Photos)

The Wisdom of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Wisdom of Warren Buffett

The Wisdom of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett

New York Mets Manager

Casey Stengel in 1963



(AP/Wide

World Photos)

Of Permanent Value The Wisdom of Warren Buffett

The Wisdom of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Wisdom of Warren Buffett

The Wisdom of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Wisdom of Warren Buffett

The Wisdom of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett



Hockey’s Wayne Gretzky

(AP/

Wide

World

Photos)

Of Permanent Value The Wisdom of Warren Buffett

The Wisdom of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett



Former President

John F. Kennedy

(AP/

Photo)





John F. Kennedy’s

Why England Slept

My father asked Kennedy to sign the book. He wrote: “For Andy, With the hope that he will not be compelled in his senior year to write, Why America Slept. With warm regards, John Kennedy.” Kennedy didn’t know in 1961 that I wouldn’t come close to writing a book in college.

(Photos by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value The Wisdom of Warren Buffett

The Wisdom of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Wisdom of Warren Buffett



In Perpetuity Former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan Speaks

(AP/Wide

World

Photos)



Former Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin

(AP/Wide

World

Photos)

The Wisdom of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Wisdom of Warren Buffett

The Wisdom of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett



Aesop’s Fables

Aesop supposedly was a Greek slave who in the sixth century B.C. wrote fables ascribed to him. Little is known of Aesop but a collection of moralizing fables are attributed to him. Usually the tales involve animals, hence, such stories as “The Fox and the Grapes” (from which the idiom “sour grapes” spurts), “The Tortoise and the Hare” (believed to be an allegory about Buffett and Wall Street) and “The Boy Who Cried Wolf” are known throughout the cosmos. As noted, Buffett claims Aesop wrote the first investment primer by proclaiming that “a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.” But Aesop—poor like most writers—may not have followed his own worldly wisdom, because in this rendering of Aesop and his animals, the birds are in the bush—or flying all around—but, alas, none are in his hand.

Of Permanent Value The Wisdom of Warren Buffett

The Wisdom of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Wisdom of Warren Buffett

The Wisdom of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Wisdom of Warren Buffett

The Wisdom of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Wisdom of Warren Buffett

The Wisdom of Warren Buffett The Story of Warren Buffett

MUTUALLY UNDERSTOOD

The original:

Maturity and Duration Management

Maturity and duration management decisions are made in the context of an intermediate maturity orientation. The maturity structure of the portfolio is adjusted in the anticipation of cyclical interest rate changes. Such adjustments are not made in an effort to capture short-term, day to day movements in the market, but instead are implemented in anticipation of longer term, secular shifts in the levels of interest rates (i.e., shifts transcending and/or not inherent to the business cycle). Adjustments made to shorten portfolio maturity and duration are made to limit capital losses during periods when interest rates are expected to rise. Conversely, adjustments made to lengthen maturation for the portfolio’s maturity and duration strategy lies in analysis of the U.S. and global economies, focusing on levels of real interest rates, monetary and fiscal policy actions and cyclical indicators.

BUFFETT DECODES FUND PROSPECTUS

The Securities and Exchange Commission warns mutual funds to write their prospectuses in plain English (story 1B). To show mutual fund lawyers how to do it, SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt asked Warren Buffett, the legendary investor and CEO of Berkshire Hathaway, to rewrite a typical mutual fund prospectus paragraph. Here is the paragraph—alongside Buffett’s version:

Buffett’s version:

Maturity and Duration Management

We will try to profit by correctly predicting future interest rates. When we have no strong opinion, we will generally hold intermediate-term bonds. But, when we expect a major and sustained increase in rates we will concentrate on short-term issues. And, conversely, if we expect a major shift to lower rates, we will buy long bonds. We will focus on the big picture and won’t make moves based on short-term considerations.

(USAToday, October 14, 1994)

Of Permanent Value The Wisdom of Warren Buffett



299





FREE LUNCH WITH WARREN BUFFETT


After Warren Buffett: The Good Guy of Wall Street, (my first Buffett book) came out in 1992, I received a short letter from him saying, in part, “You’ve treated me better than I deserve, but as Charlie and I have repeatedly said, ‘Who the hell wants only what they deserve?’ ”

Some time later, I went to Omaha for some book signings. I was visited at my first stop, Village bookstore, by Buffett’s daughter, Susan, and autographed a copy for her daughter, Emily.

Back at the Red Lion hotel, I was surprised to find a message from Susan. I returned her call, and she said she had talked with her father and he’d be glad to see me the next day.

“He’s there all day. Just go up anytime,” she said.

In the morning on October 2, 1992, I called Gladys Kaiser, Buffett’s assistant at the time and was told that lunch would be a good time to come. My wife, Pat, and I parked in the Kiewit Plaza parking deck, talked to the guard who called Mrs. Kaiser, and we were told to take the elevator to the 14th floor to 1440.

We were buzzed through the security system and met the receptionist who was answering calls. There was at least one request for a Berkshire Annual Report, a request that is transferred to a tape recording. We were told Buffett was on the phone but would be with us soon.

Pat and I sat and looked about at the tiny headquarters. On the walls, there was a collage that had the symbol BRK on it and other items such as The Buffalo News. To our left at the entrance was a small sign: “A fool and his money are soon invited everywhere.”

Buffett’s current assistant, Debbie Bosanek, came out and introduced herself and was shortly followed by Gladys Kaiser. Marc Hamburg, Berkshire’s treasurer, happened by. And in less than five minutes—about the time it takes him to conduct the annual meeting—Buffett, dressed in a purple tie and dark conservative suit came ambling down the hallway, saying, “Hi, Andy. Hi, Pat.”

“Have you given them a tour?” he asked Mrs. Kaiser, realizing he was stuck with showing us around.

He gave us a brief tour, walking down a narrow hallway pointing to old front pages of the The Wall Street Journal: “This was the high in 1927 and the low in 1932 in the Depression. We have them because they cost just a dollar.” He showed us the document for the original Buffett Partnership.

Mrs. Kaiser pointed out the “library”—just a few books—and Buffett pointed out the “conference room”—two chairs and a small table.

He showed us an old-time Coke machine and his supply of Cokes.

The headquarters was a short pale green-walled line of offices, several groupings of filing cabinets and not much else. The offices, smaller and more cramped than advertised, reminded me of the narrow corridors of a Navy destroyer.

Buffett showed us some old leather-bound ledgers of the Berkshire and Hathaway textile firms, and tried to find the signature of early shareholder Hetty Green, known for her wealth and forboding personality. He was unsuccessful.

The tour was over quickly, and we followed him out and down the elevator two floors to the Kiewit Plaza Club dining room.

I asked, “Where are the hamburgers and potato chips?” to which he replied, “Oh, we have those, too.”

So what would everyone have? He ordered a bacon, lettuce and tomato sandwich, a salad, and iced tea. When I started by ordering a Coke, he said, “Attaboy!”

He looked fine, was energetic, talked fast, and walked with an ever-so-slight limp. Fair complected, he looked as though he had been in a library all his life, never a minute in the sun. Still, he gave the impression of tremendous energy. He had a genuine interest in everything and he dominated conversations with stories and jokes.

“I saw your father’s byline on the presidential series, Buffett told me. “In fact, I stopped the VCR to look at it.… I watched it on a VCR so I could stop and not miss anything because the phone tends to ring.”

About his early purchase of Washington Post Co. stock, he said he’d gotten to know Katharine Graham, knew of the business from his paperboy days, had watched the stock go public in 1971, and then watched it decline.

“I knew The Post was going to outdo the Star, not necessarily that the Star would fold.” He explained he bought his Post Co. stock quickly over a several-month period.

He also told a story about how Peter Kiewit once saved the Omaha World-Herald from the clutches of the Newhouse chain. “Kiewit bought it over a weekend,” Buffett said.

He asked all about the book—the editing, publishing, and financing. He thought it was very difficult to keep track of things in the publishing world. He added that one of his sons was in the music business and knew that it was difficult to keep exact tabs on sales.

Buffett was aware that a book about him by Roger Lowenstein was coming out.

He said he still planned his own book but maybe not right away, saying he thought he shouldn’t write two books, just one, and that he still had a lot left to do. “Of course, you don’t want to wait until you’re 98, or something.”

He added, “Frankly, I haven’t kept that many notes,” to which Mrs. Kaiser said, “He has it all up here,” pointing to her head.

Buffett repeated his joke about wanting Carol Loomis to do most of the work on the book. I asked if there were many more high-profile shareholders than I had listed in my book. “You had a pretty good list, but, yes, there would be a lot of names you’d recognize.” He gave only one vague hint. “There’s a movie star who has been buying lately.”

He told us this story about Paul Newman, without suggesting that Paul Newman was the movie star doing the buying. Years back, he sat at a dinner table with Paul Newman and Senator Charles Percy’s wife; she was between them. “She never looked at me the whole time. I could have been an empty seat.” I asked Buffett if he had a chance to talk to Paul Newman; he said a little, “but I practically had to knock her over to talk to him.”

Later, Buffett said he thought a book ought to be done about Don Keough, Coke’s president. “There have been a lot of books done about Coca-Cola but not about him.”

The previous weekend, he had been to Seattle to see the Washington-Nebraska football game and had been with a group that included Bill Gates. “He read a book during the game,” Buffett said.

“I met him through Meg Greenfield [editorial page editor of The Washington Post who died in 1999]. About a year and half ago, she asked me to check on the affordability of her building a house.” He told her, “When you ask if you can afford it, you can. Otherwise, you don’t ask.”

Buffett added, “I’m for people doing what they want to with their money.”

Buffett said Gates’ late mother, Mary, was a Berkshire shareholder.

Toward the end of lunch, he asked about my career change, and I told him I was studying for the Series 7 exam to be a stockbroker, and he related his Series 7 experience: “When I took over Salomon there was a requirement, as an officer of a securities firm, that I take the Series 7. But I kept delaying it until I left because I was afraid I wouldn’t pass it.”

He went on to say that, because Salomon trades commodities and has foreign businesses, there were many rules requiring his fingerprints. “They took 12 sets of my fingerprints.”

After lunch, we went back up the elevator (I did not see him check for pennies on the floor) two floors to Berkshire headquarters. The elevator did not magically open when he came up; we actually had to wait a minute.

I thought things were coming to an end without seeing his office, but then he motioned us to come on back; it took me one moment to say I’d love to see mission control. We walked in and I pointed to the two black phones behind his desk. I asked if that was the “bank” of phones where he placed orders. He answered affirmatively.

His office featured his rather small desk with another phone, and two small couches. He showed us a framed photo on the wall (his cameo appearance on ABC’s soap opera All My Children), and with pride pointed to a notice of payment of $10 for his wardrobe fee. “My daughter says that’s about what it’s worth.”

There was also a photo of his father and an old ticker tape but not much else in the way of mementos. Lining a shelf near his desk were some books, including a row of census books.

After thanking him for his hospitality, we walked to the hallway, and he waved nonchalantly, and said for me to stay in touch about the progress of the book.

The little more than one hour trip to World Headquarters was over. But the memory lives on.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Would You Buy a Book from This Guy?

The locked doorway into Berkshire headquarters in 1992. This writer had arrived for a meeting with Buffett. At lunch he asked for a Coke and Buffett said, “Attaboy!”

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

Of Permanent Value Free Lunch with Warren Buffett



“We Read.”

At his office, Buffett says, “We read. That’s about it.”

(Photo by Michael O’Brien)



300





LOUIS RUKEYSER


Louis Rukeyser, the noted economic commentator of PBS’ Wall $treet Week with Louis Rukeyser—the world’s most widely watched television program about money—later launched CNBCs Louis Rukeyser’s Wall Street. He also enjoyed a longtime friendly correspondence with Buffett. On October 28, 1997, they had lunch together in Omaha, and Rukeyser wrote about it in the December 1997 issue of his best-selling financial newsletter, Louis Rukeyser’s Wall Street. His revealing piece follows:

On the morning [October 28, 1997] after the stock market played its latest pre-Halloween trick to frighten investors, with the Dow plunging 554 points and the New York Stock Exchange adding to the terror via two extended trading halts, I happened to be in Omaha for a speaking engagement and was scheduled to have lunch with Warren Buffett. Hollywood could not have arranged more suspenseful timing.



At 67, Warren is already an American myth: the world’s most successful investor; the second-richest man in the U.S. (after his younger pal, Bill Gates); the genius of Berkshire Hathaway, the holding company whose original shares are the most expensive on any stock exchange in history, currently going for more than $45,000 a unit. I didn’t expect Warren to be falling to pieces, like most of the pseudo-experts I had been watching and reading about the past few hours, but I was certainly anxious to hear whatever he had to say.



In the event, we were perhaps the two calmest people in Omaha, if not the entire world of finance. I called on Warren in his modest office suite and found him slightly less of a technophobe than rumor would have it. A cable-TV ticker show was on—with the sound turned off, of course; he hasn’t gone loony—and he confessed that he does fool around a bit on the Internet, though chiefly to play long-distance bridge games. With unfailing graciousness, he showed me some memorabilia of the humble beginnings of his investment career, and we talked of his old mentor, Benjamin Graham, who had been scheduled to be my guest on Wall $treet Week with Louis Rukeyser when he contracted his final illness. Then, because Warren had to fly that afternoon to what would be the last directors’ meeting of Salomon Brothers (prior to its merger with Smith Barney), we moved on to lunch at a club within the building.



Here I had another surprise. The one thing I had been told to view as an absolute certainty was that Buffett, a famously large stockholder of Coca-Cola, never drank anything but Cherry Coke. But when I ordered an iced tea, he immediately said: “That sounds good. Let me have an iced tea, too.” A subtle investment tip? Nope; just evidence that he is a nice—and not wholly predictable—guy, two qualities that have surely helped him mightily along the way.



Similarly, when I mentioned that there was now at least one Web site providing a “Warren Buffett screen,” supposedly listing stocks he might buy, and that the proprietor had chortled publicly after Berkshire Hathaway announced Oct. 21 that it would purchase one of the companies on the list, International Dairy Queen, for $585 million, Buffett’s response was instructive: “Oh, we never would have bought that as a stock, Lou. But buying the whole business made some sense to us; it would only have to be two-thirds as attractive on that basis [primarily for tax reasons].”



His reaction to the overall market panic was in the same almost-disdainful vein. “If you can’t buy a stock and not even worry about whether the market is going to shut for the next three years,” he told me, “you shouldn’t buy the stock at all.” The intense volatility that had so many lesser investors gulping down heart medicine was merely further evidence of what Ben Graham had dubbed “Mr. Market”: a hysterical fellow from whose day-to-day behavior you should separate yourself whenever possible. The sensible way to buy a stock, Warren reiterated, was to think of it not as a piece of paper but a piece of a business. If you buy on that basis, you’ll make sounder choices (eschewing what’s hot that fortnight) and find it easier to show patience and perseverance when “Mr. Market” periodically goes crazy.



There was nothing new about Buffett’s reaction, which is perhaps

why he continues to make so much money not just for Berkshire Hathaway shareholders but for all who follow his down-home, common-sense advice. In the most recent annual report of his $43 billion multi-stock holding company, he wrote words that have front-page timeliness today: “You should entirely avoid owning stocks if a crashing market would lead you to panic and sell.... Selling fine businesses on ‘scary’ news is usually a bad decision.”



Warren Buffett is often described as a simple man. He lives in the house where his children were born, he drives himself to work, he would never be mistaken for an international gourmet (he likes ice cream with malted-milk powder for breakfast, and a major feast would be hamburgers, popcorn and—of course—Cherry Coke). But it is the simplicity of a man who knows what he knows and what he doesn’t, and is content to stick to the former—which means, by the standards of our celebrity society, where every new millionaire or movie star claims to have the answer to every problem on the planet, that his is a very profound simplicity indeed.



One of the things he knows is how silly it would be to panic about investing in the fall of 1997. Warren Buffett won’t do it, and neither should you.



In the July, 1998 issue of his newsletter, Rukeyser wrote:

HOW $10,000 BALLOONED INTO $272 MILLION

The winner’s game is buying and holding good businesses with strong enduring qualities. That’s Warren Buffett’s approach and it’s done pretty well by him. He’s #2 on the Forbes list, and he got there by buying stocks in solid companies and holding them—not by wasting time trading in and out to make a point here and there.



Anyone with the good judgment to invest $10,000 in Buffett’s partnership at its inception in 1956 (and to transfer into Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway at the partnership’s termination) would today be sitting on an astonishing $272 million—after all fees and expenses. What’s more, the lucky investor would have incurred only about $54,000 in income taxes during the entire 42-year period! No PR man alive could dream up a better testimonial for buying and holding shares of quality American businesses than that.





Louis Rukeyser

Had he simply told his viewers each week to buy Berkshire, he’d be a national hero. Later in his career, Rukeyser launched CNBC’s Louis Rukeyser’s Wall Street.

(AP/Wide World Photos)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Louis Rukeyser



301





CLINTON AND OBAMA LUNCHES


Bill Clinton had lunch with Buffett on September 13, 2003.

Harold Andersen, former publisher of the Omaha World-Herald, sniffed out the story (September 18, 2003):

This probably won’t win me a Pulitzer Prize nomination. It’s more like an example of what radio personality Paul Harvey shares with his listeners, ending his report with: “Now you know the rest of the story.”



The rest of this particular story is that while in Omaha last Saturday, former President Bill Clinton not only visited the Papillon information-processing center of InfoUSA, a corporation headed and founded by his close friend and political supporter Vin Gupta. Clinton also had lunch with another widely known figure, Omaha investment guru Warren Buffett. A luncheon with Buffett had been arranged by Gupta.



Buffett told me that he had an interesting and enjoyable time lunching with Clinton at the home of Buffett’s daughter, Susie. I said that from the way Buffett described the meeting, I presume that we “should not expect any national policy decisions” to result.



Buffett and Clinton lunched alone, and the conversation ranged over a variety of topics. “He’s a very brilliant guy on just one subject after another,” Buffett said. “You may agree or disagree with him on policy, but his range of knowledge is very impressive.”



I asked if their conversation touched on the California gubernatorial election, in which Clinton is campaigning hard for retaining Democratic Gov. Gray Davis, while Buffett is advising Republican candidate Arnold Schwarzenegger on economic policy. They touched only briefly on the California situation, Buffett indicated.



(Incidentally, Buffett said that to postpone the resolution of the gubernatorial issue in California until, say, a March [2008] election would be very unfortunate. California’s economic crisis must be addressed promptly, he said, because the health of the California economy has such importance to the entire nation. “That’s why I got involved,” Buffett said.)



____________________

Rising Democratic star Barack Obama had lunch with Buffett and his daughter, Susan, in Omaha on November 29, 2004. Obama, elected to the U.S. Senate from Illinois earlier that year gave a rousing talk at the Democratic National Convention. This fueled speculation that he may one day be a vice presidential or presidential candidate.

In the fall of 2005, Obama made another visit to Buffett at his daughter’s home, checking in with a group of 16 people that included Donald Graham, chairman of The Washington Post.

Afterward Buffett said (Chicago Tribune, November 30, 2005), “I’ve got a conviction about him (Obama) that I don’t get very often. He has as much potential as anyone I’ve seen to have an important impact over his lifetime on the course that America takes. If he can do an ounce better with me, fine.”

In his book Audacity of Hope Obama writes of a visit with Buffett:

Buffett had invited me to Omaha to discuss tax policy. More specifically, he wanted to know why Washington continued to cut taxes for people in his income bracket when the country was broke.



“I did a calculation the other day,” he said as we sat down in his office. “Though I’ve never used tax shelters or had a tax planner, after including the payroll taxes we each pay, I’ll pay a lower effective tax rate this year than my receptionist. In fact, I’m pretty sure I pay a lower rate than the average American. And if the President has his way, I’ll be paying even less.”



Buffett’s low rates were a consequence of the fact that, like most wealthy Americans, almost all his income came from dividends and capital gains, investment income that since 2003 has been taxed at only 15 percent. The receptionist’s salary, on the other hand, was taxed at almost twice that rate once FICA was included. From Buffett’s perspective, the discrepancy was unconscionable.



“The free market’s the best mechanism ever devised to put resources to their most efficient and productive use,” he told me. “The government isn’t particularly good at that. But the market isn’t so good at making sure that the wealth that’s produced is being distributed fairly or wisely. Some of that wealth has to be plowed back into education, so that the next generation has a fair chance, and to maintain our infrastructure, and provide some sort of safety net for those who lose out in a market economy. And it just makes sense that those of us who’ve benefited most from the market should pay a bigger share” (Barack Obama, Audacity of Hope, pp. 189–190).





Warren, Someone’s at the Door.

Former President Bill Clinton and Buffett have an off-the-record lunch at the Omaha home of Buffett’s daughter, Susie, on September 13, 2003. Also in the photo is Buffett’s grandson, Michael Greenberg. Note the $100 bill in Buffett’s shirt pocket.

(Photo courtesy of Debbie Bosanek)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Barack Obama

The audacity of hope is that one day he’ll have 1,000 A shares.

(AP/Wide World Photo)

Of Permanent Value Clinton and Obama Lunches



302





THE PLAYING FIELD


Berkshire hit $10,000 on November 16, 1992, closing at $10,200 on volume of 210 shares. That last trade came from the Omaha brokerage firm of Kirkpatrick, Pettis where someone said: “Nobody’s ever paid $10,200 for it.” Replied a trader: “You just did!”

Suddenly, Berkshire was a $10,000 stock! It was the highest price at which any equity had ever traded on the New York Stock Exchange. One person asked a Berkshire shareholder: “How can a stock go above $10,000?”

The five-digit price fouled up stock quotes everywhere. Some quote machines didn’t record that Berkshire was over $10,000. The Bloomberg service, for example, said the stock closed at $9,950. Other services carried the bid and asked at $9,900 by $9,950. Still, others carried quotes from $200 to $950. Buffett later joked that The New York Times printed “all the news fit to print in four digits.”

One broker called a Berkshire shareholder saying: “Did Berkshire split or what?”

Some of the lower quotes were recorded in the accounts of some Berkshire shareholders, really gumming up the works.

A broker explained that a purchase of Berkshire shares that day went unrecorded for a time because, “It had to have special handling to accommodate the five digits.” The Big Board had to give Berkshire stock quotes by means of an old-fashioned electronic messaging system to financial news services as technicians worked to accommodate the five-digit number.

LaVerne Ramsey, a longtime stockbroker with Prudential Securities in Birmingham, Alabama, sent the following memo to Berkshire shareholders: “There is good news and bad news. The good news is that Berkshire went over $10,000.… The bad news is that the ‘broker book’ system, along with many other financial services, has been unable to handle a five-digit stock price. Therefore, the unrealized gain figure is way off because the system drops a digit. Our operations people are working on the problem.

“In the meantime, here is the incorrect copy for the month of November 1992. It can be a souvenir of the historic milestone for Berkshire Hathaway.” Upon reaching Buffett, The Wall Street Journal, got this comment: “What tickles my fancy is when the intrinsic value improves. I focus on what’s happening on the playing field, not what’s on the scoreboard.”

The Omaha World-Herald got an even better quote when it asked about a stock price of $10,000 based on long-term holdings: Buffett, apparently enjoying things more than he was letting on, said: “I’ve made more money with my rear end than my head.

“It proves what Woody Allen said is true: ‘90% of life is just showing up.’ ”

It also sounds like the wit who declared: “What’s the use of lying down, if you’re not going to spend some time at it.”

Omaha broker George Morgan thinks Berkshire shareholders should live for at least another decade or so because if Buffett can manage an annual 20% net worth growth, the currently priced $75,000 stock may be trading at $200,000 a share. Berkshire now needs roughly a three-fold increase to get there.

When Berkshire hit $10,000, Charles Schwab & Co. wrote to its Berkshire shareholders: You are probably already aware of the difficulty financial institutions such as Schwab have had in reporting transactions involving Berkshire Hathaway Inc. since the price of its stock rose above $10,000 per share. In particular, your Schwab statements, confirmations, and other forms of account information are unable to reflect a price-per-share above $9,999.00.



In order for our systems to correctly calculate your account, summary balances, your statements, trade confirmations, and other account and trade information will report one (1) share of BRK as 10 “fractional shares,” each with a price of one-tenth (1/10) of the actual value of one share of BRK.



For example, if you own or trade two shares of BRK when the price-per-share is $15,000, the quantity, or the number of shares, will be shown as 20 (2 x 10 fractional shares) and the latest price will appear as $1,500 (1/10 of $15,000). Total amount on confirmations and market value on statements will be shown as $30,000, the correct total for 2 shares.



Berkshire shareholders were calling it the New Math.

On October 19, 1994, seven years to the day when Berkshire and everything else were crashing in 1987, Berkshire traded for a brief time at $20,000 a share. In early 1996, Berkshire’s stock price hit a high of $38,000 before falling back, taking about a year to return to that level. In May 1997, the stock smashed through $40,000 and ended the year at $46,000. Soon it hit $50,000. On March 11, 1998, it closed at $60,000; and on April 9, 1998, the stock closed at $70,000 and went above $80,000 in June 1998 when Berkshire said it would buy General Re.

Shareholders began musing about a $100,000 celebration party. It reminded one of a bumper sticker that says: “In case of rapture, this car will be unmanned.”

But in late 1998, and all of 1999, the rain poured on everyone’s parade with the stock closing the millennium at $56,100, then falling just above $40,000 in Y2K. It finally climbed back to $72,750 at the end of 2002, and then moving up to $88,620 at the end of 2005.

On October 23, 2006, Berkshire closed at $100,000; it has traded as high as $114,500. In 2011, the stock traded at more than $120,000.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Playing Field



303





STOCK SPLITS


We’re giving shareholders a do-it-yourself split, if they care to,” Buffett said in a rare conference call with reporters in 1996. Buffett came up with an unusual split not because he wanted to split the stock, but because he was miffed with some investment trusts which were trying to piggyback Berkshire’s success. He felt the trusts wanted to charge high fees and commissions for Berkshire-related entities. In offering a Class B share worth 1/30 of the original, now called Class A shares, Buffett undercut the unit trusts and also gave more flexibility to those trying to make gifts or put the stock into IRAs.

Buffett could simply have split the stock (a stock split occurs when your ex-wife and her lawyer split all your assets equally between themselves) but said that might have led to a “slightly more speculative bunch,” and he did not want a new shareholder base that might be “uninformed or have unrealistic expectations.”

Class B shareholders would not be allowed to participate in Berkshire’s charitable giving program, which was shut down in 2003. (See Termination of Shareholder-Designated Contributions chapter.) In 1995, Berkshire shareholders could designate $13 a share to charity, but that would amount to 43 cents a share for a Class B shareholder. “It would be crazy to make 43-cent designations,” Buffett said.

However, “unlike the indirect investments offered by the trusts, shares of Class B Common Stock entitle holders to the attributes of Berkshire shares, such as the power to vote on matters put to Berkshire shareholders, the right to receive Berkshire’s annual report and other communications to shareholders, and the right to attend meetings of Berkshire’s shareholders” (Prospectus for the Class B offering).

“We’ve never felt any need to have a public offering,” he said. “We’re not trying to attract the most people, only the people attracted to us.” Buffett ended the conference call saying, “I look forward to reading your stories tomorrow.”

Under the symbol BRK.B, the Class B shares started trading May 9, 1996 at $1,110.

Buffett told Barron’s (May 13, 1996): “I am more than pleased [with the

offering]. We had some unconventional objectives in the offering, and when those were explained to Salomon, they figured out ways they thought would best achieve those objectives. I think maybe they got just exactly the kind of investor we want.”

“Through the use of Salomon as underwriter, the total underwriting cost was only $7.8 million, about 1.5% of the capital raised (an unusually small figure since 7% is the average underwriting cost of such an issue.)” (The Essays of Warren Buffett: Lessons for Corporate America, Cardozo Law Review, September–November, 1997, p. 502).

Berkshire’s Class B shares are the second-highest-priced stock trading on the New York Stock Exchange after the Class A shares. The shares of The Washington Post Co. are the third highest.

Buffett wrote in the Owner’s Manual in June 1996:

When we sold the Class B shares, we stated that Berkshire stock was not undervalued—and some people found that shocking. That reaction was not well-founded. Shock should have registered instead had we issued shares when our stock was undervalued. Managements that say or imply during a public offering that their stock is undervalued are usually being economical with the truth or uneconomical with their existing shareholders’ money. Owners unfairly lose if their managers deliberately sell assets for 80¢ that in fact are worth $1. We didn’t commit that kind of crime in our recent offering and we never will.



In 1996, there were 5,120 Class A shares converted to Class B shares; and in 1997, there were 10,048 Class A shares converted to Class B shares. By December 31, 2006, there were 1,113,240 A shares and 12,888,424 B shares outstanding.



Sometimes, the B share trades at less than 1/30 of the A share. Buffett later said:

The Class B can never sell for anything more than a tiny fraction above 1/30 the price of A. When it rises above 1/30, arbitrage takes place in which someone—perhaps the NYSE specialist—buys the A and converts it into B. This pushes the price back into a 1:30 ratio.



On the other hand, the B can sell for less than 1/30 the price of the A since conversion doesn’t go in the reverse direction. All of this was spelled out in the prospectus that accompanied the issuance of the Class B.



When there is more demand for the B (relative to supply) than for the A, the B will sell at roughly 1/30 of the price of A. When there’s a lesser demand, it will fall to a discount.



In my opinion, most of the time, the demand for B will be such that it will trade at about 1/30 of the price of the A. However, from time to time, a different supply-demand situation will prevail and the B will sell at some discount. In my opinion, again, when the B is at a discount of more than say, 2%, it offers a better buy than the A. When the two are at parity, however, anyone wishing to buy 30 or more B should consider buying A instead.



With the purchase of Burlington Northern railroad, the Bs were split 50 to 1 so Burlington shareholders might choose tax-free stock in the transaction. At the time, about 15 million B shares existed which were approved for split in January 2010.

BlackRock, the big money management firm led by Laurence Fink, owns more than 68 million of the B shares, or 6.6% of the B shares, worth about

$6 billion.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Stock Splits



304





DELVING INTO DERIVATIVES


In Berkshire’s 2008 Annual Report, Buffett wrote:

Derivatives are dangerous. They have dramatically increased the leverage and risks in our financial system. They have made it almost impossible for investors to understand and analyze our largest commercial banks and investment banks. They allowed Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to engage in massive misstatements of earnings for years. So indecipherable were Freddie and Fannie that their federal regulator, OFHEO, whose more than 100 employees had no job except the oversight of these two institutions, totally missed their cooking of the books…



Considering the ruin I’ve pictured, you may wonder why Berkshire is a party to 251 derivatives contracts (other than those used for operational purposes at MidAmerican and the few left over at Gen Re). The answer is simple: I believe each contract we own was mispriced at inception, sometimes dramatically so. I both initiated these positions and monitor them, a set of responsibilities consistent with my belief that the CEO of any large financial organization must be the Chief Risk Officer as well. If we lose money on our derivatives, it will be my fault.



Our derivatives dealings require our counterparties to make payments to us when contracts are initiated. Berkshire therefore always holds the money, which leaves us assuming no meaningful counterparty risk. As of yearend, the payments made to us less losses we have paid—our derivatives “float,” so to speak—totaled $8.1 billion. This float is similar to insurance float: If we break even on an underlying transaction, we will have enjoyed the use of free money for a long time. Our expectation, though it is far from a sure thing, is that we will do better than break even and that the substantial investment income we earn on the funds will be frosting on the cake.



Only a small percentage of our contracts calls for any posting of collateral when the market moves against us. Even under the chaotic conditions existing in last year’s fourth quarter, we had to post less than 1% of our securities portfolio. (When we post collateral, we deposit it with third parties, meanwhile retaining the investment earnings on the deposited securities.) In our 2002 annual report, we warned of the lethal threat that posting requirements create, real-life illustrations of which we witnessed

last year at a variety of financial institutions (and, for that matter, at Constellation Energy, which was within hours of bankruptcy when MidAmerican arrived to effect a rescue).



Our contracts fall into four major categories. With apologies to those who are not fascinated by financial instruments, I will explain them in excruciating detail.



• We have added modestly to the “equity put” portfolio I described in last year’s report. Some of our contracts come due in 15 years, others in 20. We must make a payment to our counterparty at maturity if the reference index to which the put is tied is then below what it was at the inception of the contract. Neither party can elect to settle early; it’s only the price on the final day that counts.



To illustrate, we might sell a $1 billion 15-year put contract on the S&P 500 when that index is at, say, 1300. If the index is at 1170—down 10%—on the day of maturity, we would pay $100 million. If it is above 1300, we owe nothing. For us to lose $1 billion, the index would have to go to zero. In the meantime the sale of the put would have delivered us a premium—perhaps $100 million to $150 million—that we would be free to invest as we wish.



Our put contracts total $37.1 billion (at current exchange rates) and are spread among four major indices: the S&P 500 in the U.S., the FTSE 100 in the U.K., the Euro Stoxx 50 in Europe, and the Nikkei 225 in Japan. Our first contract comes due on September 9, 2019 and our last on January 24, 2028. We have received premiums of $4.9 billion, money we have invested. We, meanwhile, have paid nothing, since all expiration dates are far in the future. Nonetheless, we have used Black-Scholes valuation methods to record a yearend liability of $10 billion, an amount that will change on every reporting date. The two financial items—this estimated loss of $10 billion minus the $4.9 billion in premiums we have received—means that we have so far reported a mark-to-market loss of $5.1 billion from these contracts.



We endorse mark-to-market accounting. I will explain later, however, why I believe the Black-Scholes formula, even though it is the standard for establishing the dollar liability for options, produces strange results when the long-term variety are being valued.



One point about our contracts that is sometimes not understood: For us to lose the full $37.1 billion we have at risk, all stocks in all four indices would have to go to zero on their various termination dates. If, however—as an example—all indices fell 25% from their value at the inception of each contract, and foreign-exchange rates remained as they are today, we would owe about $9 billion, payable between 2019 and 2028. Between the inception of the contract and those dates, we would have held the $4.9 billion premium and earned investment income on it.



• The second category we described in last year’s report concerns derivatives requiring us to pay when credit losses occur at companies that are included in various high-yield indices. Our standard contract covers a five-year period and involves 100 companies. We modestly expanded our position last year in this category. But, of course, the contracts on the books at the end of 2007 moved one year closer to their maturity. Overall, our contracts now have an average life of 21/3 years, with the first expiration due to occur on September 20, 2009 and the last on December 20, 2013.



By yearend we had received premiums of $3.4 billion on these contracts and paid losses of $542 million. Using mark-to-market principles, we also set up a liability for future losses that at yearend totaled $3.0 billion. Thus we had to that point recorded a loss of about $100 million, derived from our $3.5 billion total in paid and estimated future losses minus the $3.4 billion of premiums we received. In our quarterly reports, however, the amount of gain or loss has swung wildly from a profit of $327 million in the second quarter of 2008 to a loss of $693 million in the fourth quarter of 2008.



Surprisingly, we made payments on these contracts of only $97 million last year, far below the estimate I used when I decided to enter into them. This year, however, losses have accelerated sharply with the mushrooming of large bankruptcies. In last year’s letter, I told you I expected these contracts to show a profit at expiration. Now, with the recession deepening at a rapid rate, the possibility of an eventual loss has increased. Whatever the result, I will keep you posted.



• In 2008 we began to write “credit default swaps” on individual companies. This is simply credit insurance, similar to what we write in BHAC, except that here we bear the credit risk of corporations rather than of tax-exempt issuers.



If, say, the XYZ company goes bankrupt, and we have written a $100 million contract, we are obligated to pay an amount that reflects the shrinkage in value of a comparable amount of XYZ’s debt. (If, for example, the company’s bonds are selling for 30 after default, we would owe $70 million.) For the typical contract, we receive quarterly payments for five years, after which our insurance expires.



At yearend we had written $4 billion of contracts covering 42 corporations, for which we receive annual premiums of $92 million. This is the only derivatives business we write that has any counterparty risk; the party that buys the contract from us must be good for the quarterly premiums it will owe us over the five years. We are unlikely to expand this business to any extent because most buyers of this protection now insist that the seller post collateral, and we will not enter into such an arrangement.



• At the request of our customers, we write a few tax-exempt bond insurance contracts that are similar to those written at BHAC, but that are structured as derivatives. The only meaningful difference between the two contracts is that mark-to-market accounting is required for derivatives whereas standard accrual accounting is required at BHAC.



But this difference can produce some strange results. The bonds covered – in effect, insured – by these derivatives are largely general obligations of states, and we feel good about them. At yearend, however, mark-to-market accounting required us to record a loss of $631 million on these derivatives contracts. Had we instead insured the same bonds at the same price in BHAC, and used the accrual accounting required at insurance companies, we would have recorded a small profit for the year. The two methods by which we insure the bonds will eventually produce the same accounting result. In the short term, however, the variance in reported profits can be substantial.



So derivatives cause big fluctuations of unrealized gains or losses as the positions are marked to market and the results flow through the income statements.



BERKSHIRE OPTIONS BEGIN TRADING

Options trading in Berkshire’s stock began on June 18, 2009, on the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE).

“I wasn’t asked,” Buffett later said about the move.

Buffett said he’d prefer there be no options trading in Berkshire, but didn’t think it would make much difference nor that there would be that much trading in the options (CNBC, June 24, 2009).

The CBOE, the largest options market, offers the contracts on Berkshire’s B shares. In options trading, calls give the right to buy a security for a certain price, the strike price, by a given date. Puts give the right to sell. Buffett has said, “Using options, four out of five times you will be right, the last one you’ll miss. I’ve virtually never used options as a way to enter or exit a position.”

Although Buffett generally shuns options trading, he has used options to bet on stock indices.

UPDATE ABOUT DERIVATIVES

The 2010 Annual Report said the 251 derivative positions in 2008 had become 203 in 2010. “The future of these contracts is, of course, uncertain. But here is one perspective on them. If the prices of the relevant indices are the same at the contract expiration dates as these prices were on December 31, 2010—and foreign exchange rates are unchanged—we would owe $3.8 billion on expirations occurring from 2018 to 2026. You can call this “settlement value.”

On our yearend balance sheet, however, we carry the liability for these remaining equity puts at $6.7 billion. In other words, if the prices of the relevant indices remain unchanged from that date, we will record a $2.9 billion gain in the years to come, that being the difference between the liability figure of $6.7 billion and the settlement value of $3.8 billion. I believe that equity prices will very likely increase and that our liability will fall significantly between now and settlement date ...”

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Delving into Derivatives

Delving into Derivatives The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Delving into Derivatives



305





SINCERELY, WARREN


What are the most coveted words in corporate America today? That’s simple: “Sincerely, Warren.”

With companies competing to clean up their acts, a letter of praise from the super-investor has become the ultimate Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval. General Electric got one for announcing it would expense stock options. “For a long time, GE has brought good things to life,” Buffett wrote. “now GE has brought good things to accounting.”

Standard & Poor’s also got one for its new core earnings. S&P liked the Buffett letter so much that they posted it on its Web site. Other recipients have included Bank One and Amazon.

Here’s an example of a letter from Buffett:

May 15, 2002

Mr. David M. Blitzer

Managing Director

Standard and Poor’s

55 Water Street

New York, NY 10041

Dear David:

I want you to know how much I admire Standard and Poor’s position in restating published earnings in order to make them more closely reflect economic reality and additionally contribute to comparability among companies. Your move is both courageous and correct. In the future, investors will look back at your action as a milestone event.

Sincerely,

Warren E. Buffett

“He’s the only person or entity out there that still has a good reputation,”

says S&P analyst Robert Friedman. Well, there are a few voices that still command credibility. One such voice is John Bogle, the founder of Vanguard Group. But how did Bogle know that speech about corporate accountability went over well? “Buffett gave me a very nice note after reading that speech,” he said (Fortune, September 16, 2002).

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Sincerely, Warren



306





GETTING RICH


In the spring of 1993, Buffett became one of the richest people in America as Berkshire’s rising stock price carried his worth above that of his closest rival, Microsoft’s Bill Gates.

By that summer, Buffett’s net worth exceeded $8 billion. For a man who inherited nothing, the achievement spoke volumes.

In its June 28, 1993 issue, Fortune (with photos of billionaires Sultan of Brunei, Queen Elizabeth II, Ross Perot, Buffett, and Bill Gates on the cover) ranked Buffett as the 13th richest person in the world and the third-richest American, with $6.4 billion, behind Metromedia’s John Kluge with $8.8 billion, and Gates with $6.7 billion.

Then Forbes, July 5, 1993, listed Gates as worth $7.4 billion, Buffett $6.6 billion, and Kluge, $5.5 billion.

On September 4, 1993, The Washington Post reported that Buffett appeared to be the richest person in the U.S.

The Forbes issue of October 18, 1993, said Buffett was indeed the richest person in the country with a net worth of $8.3 billion, topping Bill Gates at $6.3 billion, John Kluge at $6.2 billion, and Sumner Redstone at $5.6 billion.

Forbes five-page story about America’s richest person carried photos of Buffett at an Omaha Royals game at Omaha’s Rosenblatt Stadium. Buffett, wearing a bright red, short-sleeve shirt saying “Nebraska,” was eating from a Cracker Jack box and drinking a Coke. There he was—the richest person in the country.

The news led to a flurry of headlines such as, “The Sage of Omaha Deposes Dollar Bill” and “Gates Gets Buffetted.”

Forbes said that when Buffett dies, he probably will have “set the stage for the biggest charitable foundation ever, one that easily, as suggested earlier, will dwarf the legacies of Rockefeller, Ford, and Carnegie. Over the years, Buffett’s investments have compounded his wealth at an average annual rate of 22%. He probably can’t keep that up. But give him 15%. If he lives another 20 years and does 15%, the Buffett Foundation will have well over $100 billion. If, as is quite possible, he lives a good deal longer … well, you get the picture.”

Omaha World-Herald columnist Robert McMorris wrote at the time that he enjoyed claiming Buffett, who lived a mile away, as a neighbor.

Some day somebody will say to me, “You’re from Omaha? Isn’t that where Warren Buffett lives?”



And I’ll say, “Oh, sure, I know Warren. He’s practically a neighbor of mine.”



I may even allow that I’ve discussed investment strategy with him.



That’s more or less true. I once asked him what advice he gives investors who ask for tips on the stock market.



He said he tells them: “Buy low, sell high.”



Later in the story McMorris wrote: He doesn’t have a computer in his office or home. No calculator, for that matter.

Such toys are unnecessary, he told me, because his line of work is “not that complicated.”



For years, though, he had a dart board in his outer office that he claimed was his stock selector.



He said he has since lost faith in it. “It doesn’t work any more, so I’m going to give it to Bill Gates.”



“I’ll let him have the dart board so we can keep him in second place,” Buffett said.



With its grip on the Information Age, Microsoft has soared in recent years, vaulting Gates to the post of the richest person in the world, the first person to briefly claim a 12-figure fortune. With setbacks for Microsoft in the past several years, and a slight rebound in Berkshire’s stock price, Buffett momentarily closed much of the gap on Gates in 2002. Now the horserace remains neck and neck. Overall, because of Gates’s large gifts to charity and his youth, he certainly has a claim on No. 1.

Gates and his wife, Melinda, gave away $22.9 billion from 1999-2003 while Buffett and his wife gave away $230 million (Business Week, January 15, 2004).

In the fall of 2003, Forbes said Gates was still the richest with $46 billion; Buffett was second with $36 billion. Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen was third with $22 billion. Five members of the family of Wal-Mart founder Sam Walton took the next five spots. Oracle Chairman Larry Ellison was ninth and Dell CEO Michael Dell was 10th.

The Bible (1 Tim. 6:10) says: “The love of money is the root of all evil.” The two billionaires apparently agree instead with George Bernard Shaw’s adage: “The lack of money is the root of all evil.”

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Getting Rich



307





RICHER THAN ROCKEFELLER


Buffett, Gates, and Mexico’s Carlos Slim Helú, and possibly India’s Mukesh Ambani, are today’s richest people on earth.

John Jacob Astor built his wealth in fur trading and real estate (“Buy the acre; sell the lot”); Andrew “There’s-no-idol-more-debasing-than-the-worship-of-money” Carnegie’s fortune came from steel. Carnegie Steel Co’s blast furnaces made cheap, high-quality steel and were responsible for a quarter of the steel production in the U.S.

In its 1992 Richest 400 edition, Forbes said that Standard Oil founder John D. Rockefeller, the richest man of his day, would have a fortune of slightly more than $10 billion in today’s dollars.

Astor, Carnegie, and Rockefeller were worth several hundred million dollars.

By one measure Rockefeller was the richest, according to The Wealthy 100 by Michael Klepper and Robert Gunther. It ranked the richest Americans by comparing the person’s net worth to the country’s GNP in their day. Rockefeller, with $1.4 billion in his day took the number one ranking compared to 31st for Gates and 39th for Buffett in 1996.

Biographer Ron Chernow wrote in Titan (p. 556), a biography of John D. Rockefeller: “Rockefeller’s net worth reached a lifetime peak of $900 million in 1913—more than $13 billion in 1996 dollars.” That figure, about $15 billion today, amounted to 2.5% of the gross national product of the time.

Also, for all the controversy of how Rockefeller made his millions, he did become one of the greatest philanthropists in American history, backing many medical and educational efforts. His philanthropy totaled $500 million, about $8 billion in today’s dollars.

Carnegie once said, “He who dies rich, dies disgraced.” He came to the U.S. as an impoverished Scottish immigrant who later endowed Carnegie Corp. of New York which supported a variety of projects. In the end, Carnegie made gifts of more than 7,000 church organs and is widely known for more than 2,800 free public libraries.

In dollar amounts, and after inflation, Gates and Buffett, in real terms, certainly have the most chips. And now, Buffett stands all alone at the top of the world.



Andrew

Carnegie

John Jacob Astor





John D. Rockefeller

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Richer Than Rockefeller



308





BOOK SIGNINGS


In late October 1994, I sent a copy of my second book to Buffett via Federal Express’s 10:30 a.m. delivery. In about an hour, I got a call from Buffett’s assistant, Debbie Bosanek.

“He’s read your book. He likes your book.… Would it be okay with you if he shows up at your book signings?” I had three signings scheduled in Omaha.

I flew to Omaha, but because my plane was delayed an hour in Atlanta, arrived just in the nick of time for the first signing at Bookworm. “Oh, US Air?” Buffett quipped.

Just outside the store, I ran into Gladys Kaiser and stopped to talk, not realizing anyone was in the store. When I walked in, the place was full of people. “We’re sold out,” the owner said, explaining people had either bought the book there or had phoned in orders.

Before going to Omaha, I had two book signings in Birmingham and had sold 96 books. At the Bookworm, more than 100 were sold before Buffett showed up. After signing books, Buffett and I signed book plates to go in more books that would be shipped to the store.

Buffett set the tone for the afternoon by handing me a photo of himself dressed in a Nebraska football uniform with a big Number 1 on the jersey. He tossed a penny on the floor and asked if I wanted a photo of him picking it up.

Later a woman said she hoped her son would grow up to be like him. “Well, tell him not to eat quite so much,” Buffett replied.

Then he was asked to hold a baby girl for a photo and the baby cried. Then someone asked Buffett to give her his wallet and when he started to, the girl howled. “Well, she behaves better than most women who’ve asked for my wallet.”

In the afternoon we did a signing at Village Books where again the book immediately sold out. Again, Buffett had a quip for many, and after a “Thank you” he would say, “My pleasure.”

When people started asking him to sign dollar bills, he said, “Can I keep half?”

For four hours that day he signed books. He seemed to enjoy it but confessed

at the end, “Well, it’s gotten a little out of hand.” He stayed until 6:30 p.m. so everyone who came got his autograph. He said he had signed so many books, his autograph was becoming “devalued.”

Even at the bookstore, you could get a glimpse of a mind still trying to learn. He asked the owners how much theft they had, what they did about it, and later asked, “How well is The Bell Curve selling?”

Toward the end of the day, I really got to talk to him and asked him what the markets had done that day. He told me the stock market had been off about 40 points and that the long bond had sold off sharply.

I asked him how Berkshire fared. “I don’t know. I didn’t ask.”

Because he didn’t have a computer, I asked how he kept abreast of the market. He said, “I pick up the phone and call Salomon, and they tell me about the market or some stock I’m interested in.”

He talked about his reading and said he had 50 books at home he needed to start. “I’m getting behind,” he said.

The next day he showed up at Waldenbooks to cheers as he cited the statistics of the first quarter of the Nebraska–Kansas football game.

One lady asked for a picture and Buffett said, “Well, the backside’s better.”

Not knowing that Buffett was going to show, I had sent only 700 books to Omaha by our self-publishing unit. They were delivered to the stores by a friend, Don Pippen of Southern Publishers Group, just in time.

Defying any of Ben Graham’s formulas, Buffett managed to sell 1,000 of the 700 books, including nameplates for future books.

The man can sell books.

After I told this to Michael Assael, he wrote: “You’d make even Ben Graham’s eyes pop out with your new book statistics: Selling 1,000 of 700 books! Ben might call that, ‘selling your books short against their box.’ ”

About a month later, I tried to get a book signing in New York but was turned down by every bookstore there. We don’t do signings for self-published books; we don’t buy books from you; we’re too busy, were some of the objections.

Thanks to Pippen, who made calls from a phone booth in Florence, Alabama, I wound up with a signing in the lobby of the Millennium Hilton. When I told Debbie Bosanek I had a signing there, she said, “The Millennium Hilton? That’s where he’s staying.”

The morning of one of the signings, I walked through the lobby and saw a man reading the The New York Times. He looked like Buffett. He was Buffett. I sat and talked with him for several minutes. He later went to speak to a Ben Graham commemorative luncheon sponsored by the New York Society of Security Analysts.

Afterwards, he dropped by the book signing, but there wasn’t much business and he stayed only a short time. He signed a few books, changed a $100 bill at the counter and was gone.

After the 1996 version of this book came out, I sent it along to him. It arrived on his birthday.

Buffett replied: “What a great present on my 66th. I plan to show Tom Osborne the back cover so he can rethink his starting lineup.” Later he wrote, “Thought this book was a little abbreviated, please try to flesh out a bit the next edition (due in December).”

When the 1998 edition came out, he wrote that he enjoyed the book, but thought it was “a little skimpy.”

His note after the Monster Millennium Edition crashed on his desk said:

Deb and I want to thank you for sending along the books. You may have heard that they had to arrive in separate trucks as no vehicle in Omaha could handle two copies.



I had talked to a fellow the other day who’s taking a speed-reading course, and I asked him how it was working. He said “It’s terrific; I finished Andy’s book in 18 minutes … it’s about Buffett.”



If you find that sales are catching on, let me know so I can buy into transportation stocks.



Although sales of the Monster were sluggish, Buffett kept his end of the deal by buying all of transportation equipment company XTRA on the belief that in the long run book sales would then perk up. All of XTRA’s truck trailers and cargo containers would be in demand with publication of the 2020 edition.

In 2002, he said: “Based on the size of the book we expect there will be only one book per box.” He told one shareholder: “I want you to finish it by bedtime tonight.” And he wrote to another person: “His book is a little short of pictures, but then what can you expect in such a tiny volume.”

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Book Signings



World’s Most Efficient Autograph Machine

Buffett at a signing at Village Books in Omaha on November 4, 1994.

The man can sell books.

(Photo by

Nancy Line Jacobs)



309





THE RECORD—STOCK AND AWE


Reviewing Berkshire’s record for annual per-share increase in book value over the years, and comparing it with the S&P 500 Index, which includes dividends, can be awe inspiring.

Berkshire shareholder Ed Prendeville says, “The record is spectacular, and if you adjust some way for the low risks Buffett has taken, his record probably stands alone.”

Relative results, in percentage terms, are shown in the third row. Has Guinness thought about this one? (Losses are in parentheses.)

Berkshire S&P Relative Results

1965 23.8 10.0 13.8

1966 20.3 (11.7) 32.0

1967 11.0 30.9 (19.9)

1968 19.0 11.0 8.0

1969 16.2 (8.4) 24.6

1970 12.0 3.9 8.1

1971 16.4 14.6 1.8

1972 21.7 18.9 2.8

1973 4.7 (14.8) 19.5

1974 5.5 (26.4) 31.9

1975 21.9 37.2 (15.3)

1976 59.3 23.6 35.7

1977 31.9 (7.4) 39.3

1978 24.0 6.4 17.6

1979 35.7 18.2 17.5

1980 19.3 32.3 (13.0)

1981 31.4 (5.0) 36.4

1982 40.0 21.4 18.6

1983 32.3 22.4 9.9

1984 13.6 6.1 7.5

1985 48.2 31.6 16.6

1986 26.1 18.6 7.5

1987 19.5 5.1 14.4

1988 20.1 16.6 3.5

1989 44.4 31.7 12.7

1990 7.4 (3.1) 10.5

Berkshire S&P Relative results

1991 39.6 30.5 9.1

1992 20.3 7.6 12.7

1993 14.3 10.1 4.2

1994 13.9 1.3 12.6

1995 43.1 37.6 5.5

1996 31.8 23.0 8.8

1997 34.1 33.4 .7

1998 48.3 28.6 19.7

1999 .5 21.0 (20.05)

2000 6.5 (9.1) 15.6

2001 (6.2) (11.9) 5.7

2002 10.0 (22.1) 32.1

2003 21.0 28.7 (7.7)

2004 10.5 10.9 (.4)

2005 6.4 4.9 1.5

2006 18.4 15.8 2.6

2007 11.0 5.5 5.5

2008 (9.6) (37.0) 27.4

2009 19.8 26.5 (6.7)

2010 13.0 15.1 (2.1)

Average

Annual

Gain (1965-2010) 20.2% 9.4% 10.8

Overall Gain

1964-2010 490,409% 6,262%

The weekend prior to Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1994, before an Omaha Royals’ baseball game, Toronto Star reporter Jade Hemeon talked briefly with Buffett about Berkshire. “It’s a painting in progress; the best is yet to come,” he told her.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The Record - Stock and Awe



310





BERKSHIRE’S STOCK TABLES


1965 High Low

First Quarter 16 12

Second Quarter 21 16

Third Quarter 19 17

Fourth Quarter 22 18

1966

First Quarter 27 20

Second Quarter 27 21

Third Quarter 23 18

Fourth Quarter 18 17

1967

First Quarter 20 17

Second Quarter 19 17

Third Quarter 21 18

Fourth Quarter 21 19

1968

First Quarter 24 20

Second Quarter 31 23

Third Quarter 33 26

Fourth Quarter 39 32

1969

First Quarter 40 34

Second Quarter 45 35

Third Quarter 39 31 1

Fourth Quarter 44 34

1970 High Low

First Quarter 47 40

Second Quarter 47 32

Third Quarter 43 35

Fourth Quarter 43 39

1971

First Quarter 51 40

Second Quarter 55 48

Third Quarter 53 51 2

Fourth Quarter 74 70 2

1972

First Quarter 76 73 2

Second Quarter 78 78 2

Third Quarter 84 80 2

Fourth Quarter 80 80 2

1973

First Quarter 93 80

Second Quarter 87 85

Third Quarter 88 83

Fourth Quarter 87 71

1974

First Quarter 76 72

Second Quarter 76 64

Third Quarter 64 49

Fourth Quarter 49 40

1975 High Low

First Quarter 51 38

Second Quarter 51 45

Third Quarter 60 41

Fourth Quarter 43 38

1976

First Quarter 56 38

Second Quarter 60 55

Third Quarter 73 61

Fourth Quarter 95 66

1977

First Quarter 97 85

Second Quarter 100 95

Third Quarter 107 100

Fourth Quarter 139 107

1978

First Quarter 142 134

Second Quarter 180 142

Third Quarter 180 165

Fourth Quarter 189 152

1979

First Quarter 185 154

Second Quarter 215 185

Third Quarter 350 215

Fourth Quarter 335 240

1980

First Quarter 360 260

Second Quarter 340 250

Third Quarter 415 305

Fourth Quarter 490 385

1981

First Quarter 505 425

Second Quarter 525 485

Third Quarter 520 460

Fourth Quarter 590 460

1982 High Low

First Quarter 560 465

Second Quarter 520 470

Third Quarter 550 430

Fourth Quarter 775 540

1983

First Quarter 965 775

Second Quarter 985 890

Third Quarter 1,245 905

Fourth Quarter 1,385 1,240

1984

First Quarter 1,360 1,240

Second Quarter 1,345 1,220

Third Quarter 1,305 1,230

Fourth Quarter 1,305 1,265

1985

First Quarter 1,930 1,275

Second Quarter 2,160 1,725

Third Quarter 2,235 2,005

Fourth Quarter 2,730 2,075

1986

First Quarter 3,250 2,220

Second Quarter 3,160 2,640

Third Quarter 3,100 2,525

Fourth Quarter 2,925 2,620

1987

First Quarter 3,630 2,800

Second Quarter 3,530 3,330

Third Quarter 4,220 3,420

Fourth Quarter 4,270 2,550

1988

First Quarter 3,500 3,000

Second Quarter 4,150 3,400

Third Quarter 5,000 4,040 *

Fourth Quarter 5,050 4,600

1989 High Low

First Quarter 5,025 4,625

Second Quarter 7,000 4,950

Third Quarter 8,750 6,600

Fourth Quarter 8,900 7,950

1990

First Quarter 8,725 6,675

Second Quarter 7,675 6,600

Third Quarter 7,325 5,500

Fourth Quarter 6,900 5,500

1991

First Quarter 8,275 6,550

Second Quarter 8,750 7,760

Third Quarter 9,000 8,325

Fourth Quarter 9,125 8,150

1992

First Quarter 9,000 8,575

Second Quarter 9,300 8,850

Third Quarter 9,950 9,050

Fourth Quarter 11,750 9,150

1993

First Quarter 13,200 11,350

Second Quarter 16,200 11,800

Third Quarter 17,800 15,100

Fourth Quarter 17,800 16,200

1994

First Quarter 16,900 15,150

Second Quarter 16,700 15,400

Third Quarter 19,750 16,425

Fourth Quarter 20,800 19,200

1995

First Quarter 25,200 20,250

Second Quarter 24,450 21,500

Third Quarter 30,600 23,400

Fourth Quarter 33,400 28,850

1996 High Low

First Quarter 38,000 29,800

Second Quarter 36,000 30,000

Third Quarter 33,500 30,500

Fourth Quarter 36,500 31,000

1997

First Quarter 37,900 33,000

Second Quarter 48,600 35,900

Third Quarter 48,300 41,300

Fourth Quarter 47,200 42,500

1998

First Quarter 69,500 45,700

Second Quarter 84,000 65,800

Third Quarter 78,500 57,000

Fourth Quarter 71,000 57,700

1999

First Quarter 81,100 61,900

Second Quarter 78,600 68,300

Third Quarter 73,000 54,000

Fourth Quarter 66,900 52,000

2000

First Quarter 58,000 40,800

Second Quarter 60,800 51,800

Third Quarter 64,400 51,600

Fourth Quarter 71,300 53,500

2001

First Quarter 74,600 63,000

Second Quarter 69,800 62,800

Third Quarter 70,900 59,000

Fourth Quarter 75,600 66,600

2002

First Quarter 74,900 69,000

Second Quarter 78,500 66,500

Third Quarter 75,900 59,600

Fourth Quarter 75,000 67,800

2003 High Low

First Quarter 73,005 60,600

Second Quarter 75,500 64,305

Third Quarter 76,400 70,900

Fourth Quarter 84,700 75,150

2004

First Quarter 95,700 84,000

Second Quarter 95,650 85,100

Third Quarter 90,750 83,400

Fourth Quarter 89,500 81,150

2005

First Quarter 92,000 84,500

Second Quarter 88,900 82,000

Third Quarter 88,450 78,800

Fourth Quarter 91,200 82,100

2006

First Quarter 90,650 86,200

Second Quarter 93,100 85,400

Third Quarter 97,100 89,400

Fourth Quarter 114,500 95,200

2007

First Quarter 110,700 103,800

Second Quarter 110,490 107,200

Third Quarter 120,800 108,600

Fourth Quarter 151,560 118,400

2008 High Low

First Quarter 145,900 126,100

Second Quarter 135,500 119,450

Third Quarter 147,000 111,000

Fourth Quarter 115,750 74,100

2009

First Quarter 102,600 70,050

Second Quarter 95,500 83,957

Third Quarter 108,450 84,600

Fourth Quarter 105,980 97,870

2010

First Quarter 125,252 97,205

Second Quarter 122,908 102,751

Third Quarter 128,730 113,622

Fourth Quarter 126,568 118,201

2011

First Quarter 127,840 118,789

Second Quarter 131,463 115,860

Third Quarter 118,775 100,265

Fourth Quarter 120,755 98,952

Note 1: July 21, 1969, man lands on the moon

Note 2: August 15-18, 1969, Woodstock rocks earth

* These figures were provided by the National Quotation Bureau, but they show only the price on the last day of the quarter at a time when Berkshire was not listed in the National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation (NASDAQ) system. Instead, Berkshire was listed in the “pink sheets” and it was not a marginable security. The National Quotation Bureau has only end-of-the-month listings from that time.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Berkshire’s Stock Tables



Bullish on Berkshire?

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)



311





FOLLOW THE MONEY


The following are Berkshire’s year-end stock prices since 1965, when Buffett took control of the company:

A Shares

1965 19

1966 17

1967 20

1968 37

1969 42

1970 39

1971 70

1972 80

1973 71

1974 40

1975 38

1976 94

1977 138

1978 157

1979 320

1980 425

1981 560

1982 775

1983 1,310

1984 1,275

1985 2,470

1986 2,820

1987 2,950

1988 4,700

1989 8,675

1990 6,675

1991 9,050

1992 11,750

1993 16,325

1994 20,400

1995 32,100

1996 34,100

1997 46,000

1998 70,000

1999 56,100

2000 71,000

2001 75,600

2002 72,750

2003 84,250

2004 87,900

2005 88,620

2006 109,990

2007 141,600

2008 96,600

2009 99,200

2010 120,450

2011 114,755

B Shares (issued in 1996)

1996 1,112

1997 1,534

1998 2,350

1999 1,830

2000 2,354

2001 2,525

2002 2,423

2003 2,815

2004 2,936

2005 2,935

2006 3,666

2007 4,736

2008 3,214

2009 3,286

2010 80.11

2011 76.30

The Story of Warren Buffett



(Compiled by Mark Finch)

Of Permanent Value Follow the Money



312





FROM THE DIRECTOR OF TECHNOLOGY


Don Danly, Buffett’s teenage partner in the Wilson Coin-Operated Machine Co., offered this post on the AOL Berkshire message board July 24, 1998:



I’ve noted various figures quoted for the past performance of BRK stock price. The number obviously depends on how many years you go back in time. Listed below are the geometric average returns for the past one through 28-years using the closing price in 1997 as the final number (46,000).



BRK No. Average

Year- Of Price

End Years Increase

Year Price Data Through 12/97

1969 42

1970 40 28 28.4%

1971 48 27 29.8%

1972 78 26 30.2%

1973 80 25 29.1%

1974 50 24 30.3%

1975 40 23 34.5%

1976 94 22 37.8%

1977 134 21 34.3%

1978 158 20 33.9%

1979 320 19 34.8%

1980 420 18 31.8%

1981 560 17 31.8%

1982 775 16 31.7%

1983 1,310 15 31.3%

1984 1,275 14 28.9%

1985 2,480 13 31.8%

1986 2,820 12 27.6%

1987 2,950 11 28.9%

1988 4,700 10 31.6%

1989 8,675 9 28.8%

1990 6,670 8 23.2%

1991 9,050 7 31.8%

1992 11,700 6 31.1%

1993 16,320 5 31.5%

1994 20,400 4 29.6%

1995 32,100 3 31.1%

1996 34,100 2 19.7%

1997 46,000 1 34.9%

For example, the average increase over the past five years was 31.5%; over the past 10 years the figure is 31.6%. The 28-year average is 28.4%. These averages don’t include the large rise experienced in 1998. It seems safe to say the historical increase in stock price has been a shade over 30%—mighty good!

Don, Director of Technology



Wilson Coin-Operated Machines



The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Director of Technology



313





YELLOW BRKERS ARE PARTY ANIMALS


Each year, on the day before the Berkshire meeting, a group of fans, “Yellow BRKers,” numbering more than 100, show up at Frankie Pane’s bar in downtown Omaha. The Oracle of Omaha appears on and provides the entertainment.

Buffett gave this talk to the party April 28, 2000:

I saw Don Danly as I came in. Would he come up? There he is. I see him. Come on up, because we have to straighten things out about the golf ball business.



Don, as many of you know, was my partner in the Wilson Coin-Operated Machine Company, which was an incredible success. And we started with one $25 pinball machine, which we put over at Frank Arago’s Barber Shop, and we built the route to seven, as I remember, including a huge winner down by Griffith Stadium.



We were bothered at one point by Frank actually, who wanted us to put in a peanut machine. And we didn’t like that, because the nice thing about the pinball machine business was it was a nickel thing, but it was all profit, there was no cost of goods sold whatsoever, whereas peanuts you had to actually give people something. That went against the grain.



But then Frank told us that we were going to have to remove our pinball machine unless we put in a peanut machine. So we bought a Northwestern peanut machine for about 11 bucks or something like that, 10 or 11 bucks. And we bought five pounds of Spanish peanuts as I remember. And we took it out to the barber shop and placed it in the barber shop and then drove back to my house.



And my mother was at the door looking panicked. She said there was some fellow screaming on the phone. So I took the phone, and I couldn’t completely understand it, but I figured out it was Frank, and I thought we better get back to the barber shop fast.



So we went back to the barber shop. We had now been in the peanut business probably 20 minutes. There was a fellow there bleeding from the mouth. And it turned out that the peanut machine we bought had some little glass shavings down at the bottom. At that point, our pinball subsidiary—I mean our peanut machine subsidiary—had gross revenues of one penny and a big lawsuit. So we gave the machine to Frank and told him it was all his, peanuts and everything.



But then they mentioned the used golf ball business. And we did go into the golf ball business because there was a fellow named Bob Kerlin who had heard rumors from us of our incredible success in the pinball business, so he wanted to go into our next deal. He was sort of like an IPO free rider or something like that. He kept insisting.



And finally we decided to go into the used golf ball business, and we decided to make Kerlin a partner, and you will see why in a second. Because our idea of going into the used golf ball business was to go over to, as I remember, a course over in Virginia. We would go out early in the morning before anybody was there. And there was this lake, and we were going to retrieve these balls from the lake. And I used to count the money, and Don would fix the machines, but neither one of us wanted to go into that damn lake. So we decided to take Kerlin in as a full-fledged, one-third partner.



And to do that we felt we wanted to buy the best of equipment. So Don went down to an Army surplus store, around 9th and D, and bought a gas mask. And we hooked that up to a garden hose, and we tested it in about three inches of water in our bathtub to see whether it would work, that you could breathe. We decided that was enough for Kerlin. Then we had to make sure he stayed down, so we got my Washington Post newspaper bag and we stuck in a bunch of barbell plates.



We went out to this course, and Kerlin stripped down and he put on this Washington Post thing and a gas mask and weighted down by plates, and we told him, you know, “Now is the time to earn your third of the deal.” We sent him into this lake.



I mean Don is the guy that took up physics and chemistry and all that stuff; I just knew how to count money. But he forgot to think about what would happen once Kerlin got underneath and couldn’t see a damn thing and he was having trouble breathing.



And then just about this time, the guy with the truck came along who was going to fill up the sand traps. And we got this guy on this hose, he is down there in the lake. We started pulling back on the hose trying to get him back. And then the man stopped us and asked us what we were doing. I’m not sure which one of us came up with the answer that we were doing an experiment for our physics class. That was our used golf ball business. I just thought you were entitled to the full story.



I will save the rest of my stories for tomorrow at the meeting. I don’t want to blow all my lines for tomorrow.



At the end of Buffett’s talk, Mr. Danly took the microphone and said, “I can’t top that. I have never even told that story, and you can understand why. It was a tremendous embarrassment after being considered as the technical man by these people. Thank you.”

Mr. Lyle McIntosh closed by saying, “OK, thanks a lot, Warren. We appreciate it. We know you’ve got a busy day and we really appreciate it.”

____________________

At the Yellow BRKer party in 2001, Buffett talked about caddying for Tiger Woods saying Tiger suggested playing for serious money on their 18th hole. He reported that the conversation went something like this:

Buffett: Well, all money is serious to me.

Woods: Is $5 too much?

Buffett: Yes, but what have you got in mind?

Woods: (Jokingly) Let’s just play on 18.

Buffett: Well, Tiger, you haven’t seen me play but I have seen you play and this is not the most equitable proposition that’s ever been offered.

Woods: I’ll play on my knees.

“I thought it might give me a chance so I accepted … I’m sure he hit the ball at least 260 with a little tail and hook so I gave him $5,” Buffett admitted.

“I have since written him. I wrote him a while back and said, ‘Next time, Tiger, it’s on your knees and blindfolded.’ I got a letter from him just a couple of days ago and he accepted.”

Buffett went on to tell a well-known story about blind Alabama golfer Charley Boswell and Arnold Palmer. Boswell said he’d bet Palmer $25,000 on the outcome of the golf game. Palmer insisted on giving Boswell some advantage, but Boswell said he didn’t need one. When he asked Boswell when they’d play: “Midnight,” Boswell said.

Boswell’s son Chuck of Birmingham, Alabama, says the story is true except that the golf companion was not Palmer, as the story has often been told, but was actually Bob Hope.

Boswell was a starting tailback at the University of Alabama and a superb baseball player. In 1944 during World War II, a German shell hit a burning tank that Boswell was fleeing, and he was left blind. The 27-year-old captain was leaving the tank for a second time after he had scrambled back inside for a wounded gunner.

At Boswell’s death in 1995, The Birmingham News reported he had played in 25 national blind golf championships, winning 17 of them, and in 14 international blind golf tournaments, winning 11 of them (October 23, 1995).

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Yellow BRKers are Party Animals



Teenage Tycoons

Buffett and Don Danly banter at Yellow BRKers Club party April 28, 2000. The party was held at the Frankie Pane Building in downtown Omaha.

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)



Sweet Taste of Success

This birthday cake was served at the Yellow BRKer party at Frankie Pane’s in Omaha before

the annual meeting in 2001. The cake celebrated the 5th anniversary of the issuance of the

“B” shares.

(Photo by Jim Maves)

Yellow BRKers are Party Animals The Story of Warren Buffett



That Was Funny, Bob.

Blind golfer Charley Boswell was a multi-sport star athlete before being injured and blinded in World War II. Here he was playing at the Charley Boswell Golf Tournament in Birmingham in 1982 at the Riverchase Country Club with his friend, the late Bob Hope.

(Photo courtesy

of Chuck Boswell)



Banquet at Berkshire

This table was prepared by Yellow BRKers at World Headquarters in celebration of Buffett’s 72nd birthday. The cups are full of “XTRA” gravy.

(Photo by Sherrie Gregory)

YELLOW BRK’ERS ROCK IN OMAHA!

by Sherrie Gregory

Now listen up—you Berkshire Bunch,

The beat is— comin’ on...

It’s time to pack your bags and head

on down to Omaha town...

WEB is groovin, to his tune,

And Charlie is gettin down...

So hit the bricks and get some kicks

With the gang that’s never down (saaaaay wat?)

The date will be...so plain to see,

The second— day of May

The time is four, so don’t be late

Or extra you will pay!

We’ll hang around, and make good sound,

The food and drink will be....

Supreme, sublime, and satisfying

It’ll suit you, to a “T”!

So hip-hop—hip hop the boogie.

And give the man his due...

The Champions Club’s the place to be

For those that are true blue.

The Yellow’s have it, that’s a fact

and nothing, keeps em down

So hop a jet, and never fret

The Yellow Hat’s in town!!!!!

Now what you hear is not a test—

I’m rappin— to the beat

and me, the groove, and my friends, are gonna

try to move your feet!

Of Permanent Value Yellow BRKers are Party Animals



A Current Crop of Yellow BRKers

They partied at the Double Tree Hotel in Omaha the night before the 2010 Berkshire Annual Meeting.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)



(Photo by Sherrie Gregory)

Flamingo Balloon

and Coca-Cola

Yellow BRKer Lyle McIntosh helps celebrate what’s-his-name’s 72nd birthday. A tacky pink flamingo balloon floats in the background.



314





THE ROCK OPERA TOMMY


For Buffett’s 70th birthday, a small band of wild and crazy shareholders decided to surprise him with a vintage 1937 pinball machine, harking back to the days he and Don Danly set up for business in Washington D.C. barber shops.

“This is very much like the one we put into the barber shops,” Danly said. “Actually, we were in business in 1947 and couldn’t afford new machines, so this one is probably somewhat newer than what we used. However, from the looks of it, there is virtually no difference from the ones we purchased for $35 to $75. A new machine back then would have been over $200.”

With the assistance of Debbie Bosanek, the machine was smuggled into headquarters on August 28, 2000, and placed in a room near Berkshire’s filing cabinets complex. After Buffett was lured into the back room, everyone yelled, “Surprise!” His first words were, “Is this a shareholders’ revolt?”

He and Danly entertained the celebrants by playing the machine. Everyone then had birthday cake and Buffett said he would be glad to go to lunch, particularly if it was at Gorat’s. Everyone went to Gorat’s where Buffett ordered a hot roast beef sandwich, as did most other folks, in the vein of, “I’ll have what he’s having.”

With his day largely interrupted, he returned to Berkshire headquarters for a meeting with then-actor, later governor, Arnold Schwarzenegger.

Really, it’s hard to see how any work gets done at Berkshire.

This writer received the following post-party letter:



Dear Andy:



When you and the gang gave me the pinball machine, I should have given you the attached financial statements for the first two months of operation of the Wilson Coin-Operated Machine Company. Perhaps you already have them from Don Danly.





Anyway, I was the bookkeeper, and, as you can see, we had a phenomenal growth rate, far better than most dot-com IPOs. I don’t have the later statements, and, of course, we sold the company to Nick Sloan when we went off to college in September.





The merchandise cost of $1.50 was the five pounds of Spanish peanuts for which we paid 30¢ a pound. I think I’ve told you the story that after 1¢ of receipts we had a customer with a bloody mouth and a potential liability suit. It was our 1947 version of the asbestos problem, and we would have undoubtedly had to spin off the Spanish Peanut division before IPOing the pinball business.





REPORT OF CONDITION

OF THE

WILSON COIN OPERATED MACHINES

BALANCE SHEET AS OF MAY 31, 1947

ASSETS

CASH $ 206.25

EQUIPMENT $96.50

LESS DEPRECIATION 1.36 95.14

TOTAL ASSETS $ 301.39

LIABILITIES

PROFIT & LOSS ACCOUNT $ 21.39

WARREN BUFFETT, CAPITAL 140.00

DONALD DANLY, CAPITAL 140.00

TOTAL LIABILITIES $ 301.39

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

PROFIT & LOSS STATEMENT MAY, 1947

SALES $ 27.75 $ 27.75

Less cost of merchandise 1.50 26.25

EXPENSES

Depreciation $1.36

Advertising 3.50

$4.86 4.86

NET PROFIT FOR MAY $ 21.39

REPORT OF CONDITION

OF THE

WILSON COIN OPERATED MACHINES

BALANCE SHEET AS OF JUNE 30, 1947

ASSETS

CASH $ 142.53

EQUIPMENT $440.00

LESS DEPRECIATION 13.10 426.90

PREPAID COMMISSIONS 53.85

TOTAL ASSETS $ 623.28

LIABILITIES

PROFIT & LOSS ACCOUNT $ 113.28

WARREN BUFFETT, CAPITAL 370.00

DONALD DANLY, CAPITAL 140.00

TOTAL LIABILITIES $ 623.28

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

PROFIT & LOSS STATEMENT JUNE, 1947

SALES $ 120.53

EXPENSES

Supplies $ 5.4000

Depreciation 11.7400

Merchandise 1.5000

Advertising 10.0000 0 28.64

NET PROFIT FOR JUNE $ 91.89

The Story of Warren Buffett



The Culprits

The culprits who planned the birthday surprise included, from left, Wanda and Ken Olsen, Bob Miles, Don Danly, Lyle McIntosh, John Zemanovich, Andy Kilpatrick, Sam Park, Mick Rhodes, and Larry Oberman. Lee Bakunin and Vega Rosenberg were involved with the planning, but missing in action.

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)



A Splendid Run

Buffett’s pinball machine partner Don Danly was photographed at the Berkshire annual meeting weekend in 2001. After a long battle with throat cancer, Danly died on August 17, 2002, at age 73.

(Photo by

LaVerne Ramsey)

(Photo by Marlin Stockwell)



Fun While It Lasted

The original Pinball Wizards appear at a Yellow BRKer party in May 2001. Danly reminisces, “The pinball business was fun while it lasted.”

Of Permanent Value The Rock Opera Tommy



315





COMBINED IQ OF BUFFETT AND MUNGER


B

erkshire shareholder Bill Scargle says he has wondered all along how smart Buffett and Munger really are.

“I’ve often asked myself, ‘What’s the combined IQ of Warren Buffett and Charles Munger?’ I’ve finally decided what the answer is: It’s the stock price of Berkshire.”

So if he had asked, for example, what the combined IQ of the two men was in 2007, the answer would have been more than 100,000.

Actually, the subject of Buffett’s IQ has been the topic of frequent uninformed discussion. After much debate, still no new light has been shed on the subject. Some say the average IQ of students in Harvard Law School is 150. Buffett’s IQ is believed to be substantially higher.

Leonardo da Vinci is believed to have had an IQ of 200, but were there IQ tests or even true or false tests in Leonardo’s day? Maybe IQ was then judged by how well one could paint or draw. In any event, Buffett has done okay with his canvas.

Press accounts have pegged Bill Gates’s IQ at about 170 and author Norman Mailer’s at 165. A former Harvard Business School student conjectures that Buffett’s is far above 150, saying his math ability and memory clearly are at genius levels.

Buffett has said he does not know his IQ. To get to the bottom of things, this reporter once asked Buffett pointedly about his IQ, hoping to elicit a lengthy thesis. His reply was one word: “Shrinking.”

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Combined IQ of Buffett and Munger



316





A $210,000 WALLET


Buffett auctioned his 20-year-old wallet on December 3, 1999, and received a high bid of $210,000 which went directly to the charity, Girls Inc. of Omaha.

The story about the battered old black billfold broke in The Wall Street Journal (December 2, 1999). “I’ve never gone for the top of the line,” Buffett was quoted as saying. Not only was the wallet used and less than top of the line, but it also had experienced a dunking in a Minnesota lake when the capsizing of a fishing boat left Buffett, Munger, and Rick Guerin dog-paddling. (See PS Group chapter.) But something more valuable then just the well-used survivor wallet was involved in this auction. “I plan to leave the name of a stock tip in it for whoever buys it,” Buffett told the Journal.

Television interviewer Rob McCartney of KETV in Omaha asked Buffett before the auction if he thought the wallet would bring in seven figures. “No, no, I don’t think so,” was Buffett’s response. “If it got that high, I’d be sorry I didn’t sell it myself.”

Buffett did not include his credit cards, driver’s license, or a pass for a free McDonald’s hamburger in the wallet auctioned. He did include an expired half-price pass from Hooters restaurant and the promised stock tip.

The Hooters pass was given to him for allowing the chain to note his birthday on its calendar. Not having used the pass, Buffett said, “It expired, and they didn’t offer me a renewal.”

As for the stock tip, Buffett had said there might be “a little mention” of a company Berkshire had bought—information that was not public knowledge at that time. It turned out to be First Industrial Realty Trust, a Chicago-based real estate investment trust (REIT) that owns warehouses and distribution facilities. (Buffett is reported to have sold his stake by 2001.)

John Morgan of Wayzata, Minnesota, who was born and raised in Omaha in an area served by Girls Inc., won the bid for the wallet with a $210,000 final bid. After Morgan won the bid, Buffett took him to dinner.

Morgan is a successful businessman. He co-founded Winthrop Resources, an equipment-leasing company that he took public. In 1997, he sold it to Minneapolis-based TCF Financial Corp. Morgan and his two partners sold the business for $325 million. Each of the three partners received about $60 million. In January 1999, the three partners formed Rush River Group to invest in over-the-counter stocks. Rush River has a stake in Winmark, which owns a large number of retail stores. Morgan is now the chief executive officer (CEO) of Winmark.

Morgan, the first in his family to graduate from high school, was told by his guidance counselor that he should be a bricklayer. Ignoring this sound advice, he instead worked his way through college.

Realizing his own blessings and in efforts to help even the playing field for others, Morgan has served on the board of African-American Family Services and serves on the advisory board of Page Education Foundation, both of which give aid to minorities. “If people ask me the reason for my success, I say ‘I’m white and I’m male,’” Morgan said (Detroit Free Press, December 15, 1999).

Reports said Morgan would share the wallet’s stock tip with people giving $1,000 or more to Girls Inc., increasing the benefit that organization would receive from the wallet’s auction.

One person who took Morgan up on that offer was Fred Henry, a 40-year-old well-digger in Oakland, Iowa. After receiving the name of the stock tip from Morgan, Henry confirmed it for the The Wall Street Journal (December 17, 1999): First Industrial Reality Trust. How often do well diggers source the Journal about a stock tip in an old billfold?

The author of this book met Morgan at Berkshire’s annual meeting festivities in 2000 and offered to sell Morgan his wallet. Morgan did not express the slightest interest in the author’s wallet, even were a stock tip enclosed.

Who came up with the wallet auction idea? Buffett’s daughter, Susie, was, at that time, head of the board and president of Girls Inc., and she is the one who came up with the idea. What would be Susie’s next auction item proposal? “I can’t talk to her anymore,” Buffett told the Omaha World-Herald (December 2, 1999). “I’ve got to watch it. It may be my underwear next time”—which, of course, now would be Fruit of the Loom.

The Buffett family has long supported Girls Inc. On September 15, 2000, they did so in an unusual way when scheduled speaker author Maya Angelou became ill and was forced to cancel.

Fifteen-year-old Shadea Gallion, whose dream it had been to meet Dr. Angelou, introduced the last minute replacement. “Dr. Angelou is truly a phenomenal woman. It was my greatest honor to introduce her. It is still an honor to be here. Please join me in welcoming … Mr. Warren Buffett” (Omaha World-Herald, September 15, 2000). Susie Buffett, president of Girls Inc. at the time, thanked her father and welcomed him on stage.

Buffett told the audience of 1,100 people, including donor John Morgan, that while money can matter in determining who gets what opportunities, as the years go by, “you measure your personal bank account by who loves you and how they love you” (ibid.).

Buffett told his audience you get only one shot at life and, to make his point, told about longing for his first car: “I was 16 once. There wasn’t anything I wanted more. But suppose someone told me that would be the only car I’d get in life?” Buffett said were that the case, he would have read the owner’s manual many times to make the car last.

“You only get one mind, one body, and one opportunity in life. I suggest you think about the mind and body you’ve been given as a real asset” (Girls Inc. Newsletter, Summer 2000).

Norma Deeb, executive director of Girls Inc., at that time, recalled how she thanked Buffett for stepping in for Dr. Angelou: “I asked Susie (Buffett’s daughter) to tell me three things that her father liked … as I knew he wouldn’t take money for a fee. She said he liked malted milk balls (the Whoppers brand), pastel licorice lozenges (the ones you find in big barrels in the grocery store), and honey ham. I put this little package together, drove to his house, and knocked on his door. Warren came to the door and exclaimed, ‘Oh great, Whoppers!’ He later told Susie that he would be happy to be a substitute speaker for me again … as he got a gift that he really liked.”

The Warren Buffett and John Morgan connection did not end with the 1999 postauction dinner.

Morgan arranged for Barack Obama to meet Buffett in Omaha in 2005. “I met [Obama] before he won the Senate seat,” said Morgan. “I had heard his speech at the Democratic Convention and was quite impressed. I first met him at a fund-raiser for Senate when he talked about Buffett’s position on the inheritance tax. I asked him if he would like to meet Buffett, and I arranged for them to meet.”

In 2008, Morgan paid $100,000 for a portrait of Buffett made by Michael Israel at the Berkshire annual meeting. The money again went to Girls, Inc.

In 2010, Morgan gave $1 million to an Omaha program called The Transformation Project which helps prisoners re-enter society.

Morgan’s gift comes in part because of his own rocky start in life in Omaha, but after various missteps got an education, became an IBM salesman and accumulated much wealth as a businessman in Minneapolis.



(Photo courtesy of Girls Inc.)

World’s Smartest Wallet

Buffett’s wallet was auctioned for $210,000, which he donated to Girls Inc. of Omaha.

The Story of Warren Buffett



Owner of an Old Wallet

John Morgan was the top bidder for Buffett’s billfold.

(Photo

courtesy of John Morgan)

Of Permanent Value A $210,000 Wallett



(Photo courtesy of Sardar Biglari)

A Wallet That Talks

This photo shows Buffett’s wallet when it was thick and in active use. The picture was shot when Buffett was in San Antonio visiting Star Furniture chairman Melvyn Wolff. Wolff invited Sardar Biglari to meet Buffett. Biglari has sold two Internet companies and has served as chairman and CEO of Biglari Capital Corp., the manager of the Lion Fund in San Antonio. He is now CEO, chairman of the board, and president of Western Sizzler Corporation and president and CEO of Steak ‘n Shake Company. When Buffett pulled out his wallet, Biglari says, “I was afraid to know how much he carries with him so I said, ‘I’ll take stock instead.’” Maybe Biglari should have taken the wallet and auctioned it off for $210,000.



Lunch for the Girls

Morgan was a sponsor of a lunch featuring Buffett and Becky Quick.



Candidate Barack Obama and Morgan

This photo was taken in Minneapolis on April 8, 2006 before Obama was elected President.

(Photo courtesy

of John Morgan)



317





AUCTION OF BUFFETT’S TOWN CAR


In the latter half of 2006, Buffett put his 2001 Lincoln Town Car up for auction on eBay to benefit Girls Inc., a nonprofit youth organization. He even included his “THRIFTY” license plate in the auction package.

With Buffett’s June 2006 announcement that he was giving the bulk of his wealth to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, it seemed he was in a giving mood, but he added, “I’m not quite giving everything away.”

He had, however, already donated his long-used wallet to benefit Girls Inc., and he hoped its success at auction would be repeated proportionately in the auctioning of his Town Car. “We auctioned off a wallet some years back and got $215,000 for it, so we’re hoping since this [Town Car] weighs about 4,000 times what the wallet did, you can figure out what we’re hoping to get,” Buffett was quoted as saying in an Associated Press story (August 21, 2006).

“It’s just like getting one from a little ol’ schoolteacher who never took it out of the garage,” Buffett said. The one-owner car had been driven mostly along the 20-block route Buffett drives to and from work. “I don’t want to sound like a used-car salesman, but this car is a real cream puff,” Buffett said (The New York Times, September 3, 2006).

The Town Car had only 14,000 miles on it, but Buffett stopped driving it after buying a 2006 GM Cadillac DTS—his way of showing support for Rick Wagoner, chief executive of General Motors.

Buffett offered to drive the winning bidder from the airport when coming to pick up the car. “I’ve got a chauffeur’s cap, too,” he said.

Bidding started at $25,000, and after a few days and 18 bids, the highest offer was $32,850. Two days before the bidding was to end and after 47 bids, the price was $39,325. Buffett’s car finally went for $73,200 after 63 bids. The winning bidder was Bill Zanker of New York, founder and president of the Learning Annex.

Zanker founded Learning Annex in his New York City studio apartment with $5,000. It is now the largest adult education company in North America, offering more than 8,000 classes a year. The Learning Annex has been named to the Inc. 500 list of fastest-growing private companies, with sales of $100 million in 2006.

The morning before meeting with Buffett, Zanker sent out a press release announcing plans for a press conference and offered to donate $2 million to charity if Buffett would speak at a Learning Annex functon. Buffett respectfully declined on the media event and the speaking invitation. “I timed it wrong,” Zanker said. “I should have called his office first.”

The Buffett family has long backed Girls Inc. and helped get former President Bill Clinton and U.S. Senator (now President) Barack Obama to speak at its events.

Mr. Thrifty Gives

Away His Car

Buffett watches some girls from Girls Inc. climb on his Lincoln Town Car on August 21, 2006; he had just donated the car to the nonprofit group to sell at auction.



(AP/Photo)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Smile Kids—You Are on Candid Camera

Emily Mwaja, director of programs for Girls Inc. of Omaha, takes a picture of Buffett and some Girls Inc. members, posing on and near his donated Town Car. The car was shipped to Bill Zanker on February 14, 2007, after Zanker met with Buffett in Omaha the day before.

(AP/Photo)



Two Men and an Ad for Crest Toothpaste

Bill Zanker and Samantha Canto with the Learning Annex firm met with Buffett to claim Buffett’s car. Proceeds from the auction went to Girls Inc.

(Photo by Deb Ray)

Of Permanent Value Auction of Buffett’s Town Car



Billionaire Music

Buffett became a music teacher at Girls Inc. in Omaha for an hour on March 31, 2009, giving instructions on the ukulele. Sharing the benefits of the ukulele as a musical instrument, he came across as the ad man: “It’s easy to carry around—not like a piano or a bass drum or something. And you can sing along with it, so it’s a nice instrument to use” (Omaha World-Herald, April 2, 2009).

(World Herald Photo)



318





PHILANTHROPIC OUTING


Peter Kiewit Sons’ former CEO Walter Scott and his wife, Suzanne, were honored at the Omaha Press Club on March 1, 2004, for their philanthropic efforts. They became the 95th “faces on the barroom floor” at the press club.

To be honored by the Omaha Press Club this way, a person must be a newsmaker. The honoree is first roasted, then a caricature drawing of the honoree is unveiled. The “face” drawing is encased in a frame on the club’s barroom floor until the next roast and unveiling. The drawing is then moved to a more respectable place on the restaurant’s walls.

Several dignitaries, including Buffett, joined in roasting the Scotts. In Buffett’s roasting comments, he described a visit to the Scotts’ palatial home. He said he filled up with gas only once while driving from the gate to the house (Omaha World-Herald, March 2, 2004).

While at the podium, Buffett, looking at the caricature of himself from when he was honored, had this to say in reference to his wild hair in the drawing: “You can see I haven’t changed barbers since then.… I’ll have to rethink that quarter tip.”

Tom Osborne, U.S. Representative at the time of the roast, said Suzanne told him she had to slap Walter three times on their first date. “It’s not what you think,” he quoted Suzanne. “I thought he was dead.”

The Scotts received praise from MidAmerican Energy CEO David Sokol for their philanthropy, estimated to be between $90 million and $100 million for such projects as the Henry Doorly Zoo and various scholarships.

Suzanne Scott’s fund-raising letters are extremely polite, according to Sokol, but are similar to a request by a 900-pound gorilla for a banana you are holding. “The result is the same” (Omaha World-Herald, March 2, 2004).

The Bucks Start Here

Buffett with Suzanne and Walter Scott at the Omaha Press Club on March 1, 2004. On Walter Scott’s 76th birthday in 2007, Buffett, dressed as George Washington, and wife, Astrid, dressed as the Statue of Liberty, were part of a parade that marched to “Seventy-Six Trombones.”



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Same Hairstyle,

Same Buffett

Buffett stands at the podium and beside a cartoon drawing of himself. Under the drape is the cartoon honoring Suzanne and Walter Scott.





How to Know You Are a Public Figure

You know you are a public figure when they draw cartoons about you. Suzanne and Walter Scott are honored with their own cartoon.

(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Philanthropic Outing



Superintendent’s Office: Someone Make a Bad Grade?

Seated, from left, are is Tom Osborne, of Congress and University of Nebraska fame; Buffett; Ken Stinson, the Kiewit chairman and emcee of the roast; and Suzanne Scott.



Go Huskers.

Tom Osborne, Congressman at the time and a former Nebraska football coach, helped roast the Scotts. He returned to Unversity of Nebraska in 2007 to serve as athletic director.

Lighting Up the World

MidAmerican Energy chairman, David Sokol, roasted Walter and Suzanne Scott.



(Photos by Nancy Line Jacobs)



Ken Stinson



More Coke Stock?

Enjoying the evening were Tom Osborne, Warren Buffett, Walter Scott, and David Sokol.



Buffett roasts the Scotts.



319





BUFFETT DOING THE WALLET THING


Touch This and Become a Billionaire



While at the NBAA Convention in Las Vegas in 1998 Buffett apparently came close to losing his wallet when sharing his Midas touch with Theodore Forstmann, CEO of Forstmann, Little, which formerly owned Gulfstream.



Buffett attended the National Business Aviation Association convention in Atlanta in 1999 and there shared his Midas touch with Roberto Quarta, the nonexecutive chairman of the NBAA group in London.

The Story of Warren Buffett





Art Wegner, former CEO of Raytheon Aircraft Co. , also received the touch at the NBAA convention in Las Vegas in 1998.

(Photos by Roger Ritchie)

Serge Dassault, honorary chairman of Dassault Aviation, also grabbed Buffett’s wallet in the Paris Las Vegas at the NBAA convention in 1998.

9Of Permanent Value Buffett Doing the Wallet Thing



320





WHO WANTS TO BE A JILLIONAIRE


In a spoof on the popular TV quiz show Who Wants to Be a Millionaire, Buffett, Ameritrade’s Joe Ricketts, and Kiewit’s Walter Scott participated in a show at the Omaha Press Club in early March 2000 for the benefit of journalism students.

On tape, host Regis Philbin said the three Omaha billionaires “qualified for tonight’s show by having the fastest fingers in the financial sector” (Omaha World-Herald, March 4, 2000).

When Regis mentioned “millionaire,” the three stormed off the stage, unwilling to play for such a penny-ante stake. When Regis asked, “Who wants to be a jillionaire?” they came back to play.

The game came down to Buffett’s last multiple-choice question: “Which of the following of these is a sure-fire investment in the new millennium?”

A. Cherry Coke futures

B. Anything with “dot com” in the name

C. Blackjack at Harvey’s Casino

D. Value investing with the Wizard of Omaha

“It’s a tough one,” Buffett agonized. “I don’t like futures trading, and the Internet is a passing fad. Blackjack is just gambling, unless you can count the cards, and value investing hasn’t been working for me lately.”

Buffett decided on a “lifeline” and phoned his friend Bill Gates for help.

When Gates was told Buffett was calling for help, Gates said, “Not again!”

In the end, Buffett won. Asked what he would do with the money, Buffett said, “At times like this, you think of your family. I think I’ll give each of my kids $300. Then maybe I’ll buy a second suit … and a comb.”

That was Buffett’s final answer.



I Hear You Now, Warren.

A videotaped Bill Gates, on monitor at right, replies to Buffett’s “phone-a-friend” call for help during a rehearsal for the Omaha Press Club’s annual show in 2000. The segment was called “Who Wants to Be a Jillionaire?” The other contestants were fellow Omaha billionaires Joe Ricketts and Walter Scott.

(Photo courtesy of the Omaha World-Herald)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Who Wants to Be a Jillionaire



321





HIS HEALTH


Good health has been one of Buffett’s many blessings. Physical, as well as mental, energy has been his trademark.

He had his appendix taken out when he was nine. He once developed a reaction to penicillin given to him for a sore throat. During the Salomon crisis, he had some sleepless nights and at the annual meeting in 1998, he was severely hoarse. But by and large, he has had few medical problems other than being a bit hard of hearing.

He has always been an advocate for regular medical checkups. A routine physical on June 19, 2000, revealed that he had several benign polyps in his colon. Two days later, Berkshire issued the following press release:

Warren E. Buffett, Chairman of Berkshire Hathaway, Inc. (NYSE: BRK.A; BRK.B) expects to enter an Omaha hospital in the next month to undergo surgery to remove several benign polyps in his colon. The polyps were discovered on Monday when Mr. Buffett underwent a routine physical examination, which otherwise found him to be in excellent health. The surgery is expected to keep Mr. Buffett in the hospital for several days after which he expects to return quickly to work.



Berkshire Hathaway is releasing these facts to forestall the kind of false rumors about Mr. Buffett’s health that disrupted the market for its stock earlier this year.



The stock behaved as though Buffett were having brain surgery. The July 19 surgery to remove the polyps was a success. Buffett joked that he went from a colon to a semi-colon. His only real problem during his recovery was trouble sleeping in the hospital.

Two days after the surgery, his daughter, Susie, said, “My father is doing very well. Everything was benign (as expected) and he’s feeling great. I think he’s surprised at how tired he is—he hasn’t had surgery since he was nine years old, so he didn’t really know what to expect. I think he’s now realizing that he might have to keep the tap shoes in the closet for a couple of weeks. But, he’s been on the phone and reading the paper and watching CNN, so things are good.”

No doubt, Buffett felt like anyone else who has come through a crisis. He said, “I am vertical and am taking sustenance,” he quipped. The first eye-witness account that Buffett had left the hospital on July 25, 2000, came from Allan Maxwell, who lives two blocks from Buffett. He spotted Buffett’s car with Astrid Menks driving and Buffett in the passenger seat. A short time later that day, Berkshire issued this press release:

Warren E. Buffett, Chairman of Berkshire Hathaway Inc. (NYSE: BRK.A; BRK.B), returned home from the hospital today after surgery to remove a section of the colon containing polyps which were confirmed to be benign. No further treatment is required for Mr. Buffett and he will conduct business from his home for a short period, pending return to the office after his strength has been restored.



After his surgery, Buffett wrote a thank-you note to a Berkshire well-wisher:

I’m at home now, doing unimaginably well. After having 15 inches or so of colon taken out, I can honestly report I’ve had virtually no pain during the entire process. Of course, the first few days I was getting plenty of pain killers, but for about four days I’ve taken nothing at all. The human body is an amazing machine.



I think at least some of the credit for this fast recovery is due to the good wishes of the participants on The Motley Fool board. I’ve read all of their comments and been cheered by having so many well-wishers. Thanks for organizing this—it’s been a real boost to my morale.



P.S. I find that I can work as effectively at home as at the office. It’s nice to be in a business where the “office” is in your head.



Buffett has often joked about his mortality, saying he plans to run Berkshire for 5 to 10 years after he dies. He also has said, “I may not be strong and I may not be fast, but I seem to have a good immune system.”

In early 2001, a letter circulated from someone who said he knew of a prominent person who had “knowledge” that Buffett was in bad health. Apparently, not much knowledge had he or she. Over the course of the next several weeks, Buffett issued a lucid annual report, played a round of golf with Tiger Woods in Florida, gave an interview to Cokie Roberts that aired on national television, gave an interview to CNN, wrote an article about campaign finance reform for The Washington Post, and spoke in England and Germany at NetJets’ promotional conferences.

Still, rumors and nonsense persisted. A post on the AOL board reported that Buffett was dying and the stock was going to $50 a share. The post was removed by AOL.

During the annual meeting weekends in 2001 and 2002, Buffett went from dawn to midnight making every possible function from parties to press conferences. When asked about his cholesterol level at the 2001 meeting, he answered it was “a little high.” Noone asked questions about his health at the meeting in 2002.

He has trouble with his left rotator cuff (which has little effect on his brain even though it flies around a lot). Buffett says the injury is not that painful, and he is not that crazy about golf anymore. “I have the highest handicap of any member of Augusta,” he said (Fortune, November 11, 2002).

Barron’s (August 9, 2003) reported, “Buffett, who wouldn’t speak directly with Barron’s, said through his secretary that his doctors say that, in terms of health, he’s in ‘the top 1%’ for his age.”

At the end of an interview with Omaha World-Herald (August 30, 2003), Buffett said regarding his 73rd birthday, “I just hope you’re calling me on my 93rd.” He wears hearing aids and has had one kidney stone attack. Buffett is now “too old to die young.

When nutritional dentist Gregg Schneider, a Berkshire shareholder from Linden, New Jersey, learned that Buffett’s diet includes peanut brittle, soda, hamburgers, steak, and ice cream, he wrote a letter suggesting Buffett stick to a healthier diet.

Buffett replied:

My diet, though far from standard, is somewhat better than usually portrayed. I have a wonderful doctor who nudges me in your direction every time I see him. All in all, I’ve enjoyed remarkably good health—largely because of genes, of course—but also, I think, because I enjoy life so much every day (Omaha World-Herald, August 23, 2009).



The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value His Health



322





SCENES FROM A 75TH BIRTHDAY


Buffett celebrated his 75th birthday (August 30, 2005) with a bash of bowling, bridge, poker, table tennis, and even oil painting with family and friends. Bridge champion Sharon Osberg and David Smith were two of the friends who celebrated with Buffett.

About 30 years before Buffett’s 2005 birthday celebration, Osberg married Smith but they divorced a year later. They didn’t see one another again for 28 years. Then by chance, they ran into each other and have been together since. Buffett and Astrid spent the New Year’s weekend of 2005 with the couple.



Bridge Teams from Hell

From left to right are Peter Franks, Bertie Bialek (Buffett’s sister), David Smith, Bill Gates, Warren Buffett, two-time bridge world champion Sharon Osberg, bridge world champion Kyle Larsen, and former world champion Rose Meltzer.

(Photos by Sharon Osberg)



Birthday, Buffett Style

The Story of Warren Buffett



Buffett Knows Bowling



Table Tennis Challenge

Zinging Hsing

Gates and Buffett know who knows table tennis—and that person is Ariel Hsing of San Jose, California





Gates Knows Jogging

(Photos by Sharon Osberg)

Of Permanent Value Scenes from a 75th Birthday

Course Probably Not Offered at Harvard or Columbia

Gates and Buffett may do OK in acrylics, but they are probably not first and second in the world at it.





Future

Michelangeloes

(Photos by Sharon Osberg)

Both works hang at World Headquarters at the Museum of Berkshire Hathaway.



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Canvas by Buffett



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Canvas by Astrid Menks (now Astrid Buffett)



Party Animals Attending Buffett’s 75th

Picture Perfect

Sharon Osberg, not only a bridge player but also a

photographer, captures the moment.



(Photos courtesy of Sharon Osberg)



323





ATTEMPTED ROBBERY


A little after 10 p.m. on September 5, 2007, a man wearing dark clothes and camouflage paint on his face tried to force his way into the Buffett’s ungated home in Omaha.

Brandishing what appeared to be a gun, he rang the doorbell. Buffett’s wife, Astrid, summoned a nearby security guard, who encountered the man on the front porch. A struggle ensued, and the guard was struck in the head with an object. However, the guard was able to disarm the man, who then fled. The gun left at the scene was found to be fake.

The robbery suspect was described as between 24 and 26 years of age, about 5’10,” 150 pounds, and wearing a dark baseball hat.

Buffett was at home at the time of the incident, but neither he nor his wife was harmed.

The incident occurred at the home Buffett has lived in since he bought it for $31,500 in 1958.

In 1987, a 57-year-old man reportedly brought a gun into Kiewit Plaza, where Buffett works, in an alleged attempt to extort money from him.

As time went on, jokes rolled in about the incident. “Probably someone looking for his Elvis outfit,” was one crack.

In 2010, reports showed that Berkshire spent $350,000 on personal security.

DAN CLARK

Buffett’s security has long been headed by former Omaha policeman Dan Clark who heads his own security firm and who is often seen or pictured standing a pace ahead or a pace behind Buffett at annual meeting functions.

Buffett hired Clark in 1995, and over the years Clark has beefed up Buffett’s security with guards and off-duty law enforcement agents. Clark was instrumental in setting up more advanced protection of Buffett’s house after the robbery attempt in 2007 and it was one of Clark’s men who thwarted the attempt.

“We try to make our approach breathable to the client,” Clark has been quoted as saying (Omaha World-Herald, April 24, 2010), shortly before the 2010 Berkshire Annual Meeting.

The Buffett connection has helped Clark open doors with other celebrities who have needed protection, including Sarah Palin, George Clooney, and then Senator Barack Obama.

Clark says that Buffett, even at 80, is quick to dart into a crowd to shake hands and “can change directions on a dime.”



Buffett’s Home

(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)



Possible Robbery Suspect

The Story of Warren Buffett

All Secure

Leading the way, Dan Clark heads security protection for Buffett. Here he is pictured in action at the annual meeting in 2009.



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Attempted Robbery



324





MICHELLE STREIF


At 7 a.m. sharp each Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, Buffett’s fitness

trainer arrives at his house, enters the large family room downstairs, and coaches him through a series of exercises for 45 minutes.

“He’s always on time,” says trainer Michelle Streif. “He has his weight gloves on, ready to go.”

Several years ago, Buffett’s doctor told him that although he was in good health, he needed to either change his diet or get more exercise. Buffett has joked that he’ll never give up hamburgers and Cokes so he opted instead for an exercise regime.

As for a fitness trainer, the doctor recommended the six-foot Michelle Streif, a married 41-year-old who has an extensive background in sports and dance in addition to degrees in physical fitness. With an undergraduate degree from Iowa State University and a master’s degree in health education/gerontology from the University of Nebraska–Omaha, Streif has been in the fitness industry for 22 years. She runs Well Bound Health & Fitness in Omaha.

When they started the workouts, Buffett told her to order whatever equipment he would need, but she ended up spending only about $200 “on the basics,” Streif says. A body wedge, a stability ball, foam rollers, various resistance bands, a medicine ball, and a training table were purchased.

Buffett walks on a treadmill—even on weekdays between training sessions—and lifts weights. Streif works with him on strength, balance, flexibility, and stamina. “Sometimes I can even sneak in some Pilates or yoga moves. He always seems motivated by a challenge,” she says.

Although Buffett exercises with great energy, he doesn’t have a natural love for it. “He doesn’t really enjoy it, but he’s very focused and competitive and never complains when we do more,” says Streif. “He gives it 100%.”

Have these workouts improved his strength, stamina, and shape? “With dumbbells, he’s gone from 7 and 10 pounds up to 25 pounds in each hand,” says Streif. “He does many push-ups and some sit-ups and has increased amazingly in those [sit-ups].” He can do 50 or more sit-ups. (Maybe Arnold did get to Buffett when he threatened that he’d have to do 500 sit-ups if he mentioned taxes in California again.) “He’s amazing,” Streif says. “He’s in better shape than most 30-year-olds.” Buffett has even had some suits taken in.

What else goes on during the exercise sessions? TV watching and a little conversation are the diversion activities. While working out, Buffett usually watches CNBC’s Squawk Box or a Charlie Rose Show. On the other hand, Streif admits to being a talker, but she says, “I try to hold my talking to the commercials.” She talks with him about sports including Husker football. But otherwise, she said, he is very focused with what is on TV.

“When something has his attention on TV, I’ve told him I could be topless and he wouldn’t notice. He’s incredibly focused.”

Isn’t it obvious? Buffett is a very focused person in all he does. “He’s thinking, ‘I have things to do, and I’m not giving in,’” says Streif.

Streif thinks Buffett has many healthy years ahead of him. “Most people his age are on six or seven medications.” Buffett is on no medications and abhors the thought of any, according to Streif.

Everyone knows what Buffett eats for lunch and dinner, and his doctor does not speak highly of that intake. So what does Buffett eat in the morning? Streif says, “After the workout, he’ll have a Coke or a Cherry Coke and, occasionally, a banana.”

Go figure!



Keeping Buffett Buff

Buffett’s personal fitness trainer, Michelle Streif, work to help keep Buffett fit.

(Photo courtesy of Michelle Streif)

The Story of Warren Buffett



You Go, Girl!

Michelle Streif works out on an exercise cycle.

(Photo courtesy of Michelle Streif)

Of Permanent Value Michelle Streif



325





TO THE ALL-STARS


After the tragedy of September 11, 2001, Buffett wrote the following letter to his managers, addressing them as “The All-Stars”:

The last few weeks have been tough times for all of us in our personal lives and for many of us in our business activities.



At Berkshire we have estimated our September 11 insurance loss was $2.2 billion. We’ve labeled this a “guess” because that’s all it is. It will be many years before we can tell the world within a narrow range what the true figure was.



A very high percentage of the loss occurred in our U.S. insurance companies, with the balance in German and U.K. entities. Because we have regularly paid very large amounts of U.S. income taxes, we will bear 65% of the cost applicable to the U.S. operations; the government will bear 35%. Many insurers will not have their loss mitigated in this manner and some may not survive. Though much of our loss will be paid very soon, significant payments in the liability area will take a considerable time to settle.



Even with tax recoveries, our loss is huge. Nevertheless, it’s one Berkshire can easily bear. We have long been in the super-cat business and we have been prepared, both financially and psychologically, to handle them when they occur. This won’t be our last hit, though we fervently hope disasters in the future arise from natural causes, rather than be man-made. (We also would hope they would be of lesser magnitude.)



What should you be doing in running your business? Just what you always do: Widen the moat, build enduring competitive advantage, delight your customers, and relentlessly fight costs. With the exception of insurance pricing and coverages, almost all operating decisions that made sense a month ago make sense today.



For my part, I’ll keep looking for sensible acquisitions and continue to manage our resources so that Berkshire remains a financial Rock of Gibraltar. I’m sure we are in a recession, probably a relatively deep and extended one, but they are part of business life and we are prepared.



In short, you do the managing and I’ll do the worrying. That’s a division of labor that’s worked for us in the past, and it will continue to work well in the future.



Thanks, as always, for the great job all of you do that, in turn, makes my job so easy.



Warren



P.S. If you wish, share this message with any of your associates.



In 2006, at a time when the scandal of the moment was the number of CEOs backdating their stock options, Buffett again wrote the All-Stars:

Memorandum



To: Berkshire Hathaway Managers (“The All-Stars”)



From: Warren E. Buffett



Date: September 27, 2006



The five most dangerous words in business may be “Everybody else is doing it.” A lot of banks and insurance companies have suffered earnings disasters after relying on that rationale.



Even worse have been the consequences from using that phrase to justify the morality of proposed actions. More than 100 companies so far have been drawn into the stock option backdating scandal and the number is sure to go higher. My guess is that a great many of the people involved would not have behaved in the manner they did except for the fact that they felt others were doing so as well. The same goes for all of the accounting gimmicks to manipulate earnings—and deceive investors—that has taken place in recent years.



You would have been happy to have as an executor of your will or your son-in-law most of the people who engaged in these ill-conceived activities. But somewhere along the line they picked up the notion—perhaps suggested to them by their auditor or consultant—that a number of well-respected managers were engaging in such practices and, therefore, it must be OK to do so. It’s a seductive argument.



But it couldn’t be more wrong. In fact, every time you hear the phrase “Everybody else is doing it” it should raise a huge red flag. Why would somebody offer such a rationale for an act if there were a good reason available? Clearly the advocate harbors at least a small doubt about the act if he utilizes this verbal crutch.



So, at Berkshire, let’s start with what is legal, but always go on to what we would feel comfortable about being printed on the front page of our local paper, and never proceed forward simply on the basis of the fact that other people are doing it.



A final note: Somebody is doing something today at Berkshire that you and I would be unhappy about if we knew of it. That’s inevitable. We now employ well over 200,000 people and the chances of that number getting through the day without any bad behavior occurring is nil. But we can have a huge effect in minimizing such activities by jumping on anything immediately when there is the slightest odor of impropriety. Your attitude on such matters, expressed by behavior as well as words, will be the most important factor in how the culture of your business develops. And culture, more than rule books, determines how an organization behaves.



Thanks for your help on this. Berkshire’s reputation is in your hands.



The Story of Warren Buffett



Of Permanent Value To The All-Stars



(Photo courtesy of The New York Times)

All-Stars Lou and Babe

Baseball manager Buffett likes to keep Lou Gehrig and Babe Ruth in the lineup. Here the two all-stars are picking bats at Yankee stadium in 1930.



326





TEN POUNDS OF CHOCOLATE


In December 2006, Buffett sent Pat “The Book Widow” Kilpatrick and this author a box of See’s candy and a holiday greeting card on which was a picture of Berkshire board members with some Hooters girls..

Pat wrote a thank-you note saying that I had grabbed the photo of the Hooters girls with the board members for the book and that we then proceeded to fight over the chocolate caramels.

A few days later, we received a huge package from See’s. The package arrived by priority mail; it included 10 pounds of chocolate caramels and a note from our newly self-appointed marriage counselor, Buffett saying: “To keep the marriage from breaking up.”

Pat wrote another thank-you note, starting with, “Dear Warren, Now I wish I had told you Andy and I fought over a NetJet!” Then she said that she at first thought he was sending back my book. She went on to say, “Should we manage to eat all the candy (and we are working on it), we will have to travel to Omaha in May in a Clayton Homes double-wide mobile home.”

In 2009, Pat sent Buffett some peanut brittle with a note saying, “To a peanut brittle lover, from a caramel lover.”

He responded with appreciation: “Many thanks for the generous Care package of See’s peanut brittle. You’re great to share treats like this with us; Charlie never does. This will help fortify me (and the staff) as we prepare for the annual meeting.”

She also sent Buffett a framed old photo of him and Carol Loomis. Buffett wrote back, indicating it was a photo of significance to him: “I really appreciate the photo of me and Carol. It now resides on the credenza right behind where I work (???) all day.”



Ten Pounds of Chocolate

“Who ever loved, that loved not at first bite?”—With apologies to Christopher Marlowe.

(Photo by

Pat Kilpatrick)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Prime Location

The primo position for the framed photo of Buffett and Loomis that the Book Widow sent him is right close to the black phone, a direct-dial hotline to

Citigroup broker John Freund.

(Photo by Debbie Bosanak)

Of Permanent Value Ten Pounds of Chocolate



327





“I.O.U.S.A.”


Warren Buffett and other top business leaders treated moviegoers to a live discussion about America’s growing financial challenges in an exclusive one-night event presented in select movie theaters nationwide August 21, 2008. The even provided an advance showing of the critically acclaimed documentary I.O.U.S.A. One Nation. Under Stress. In Debt. followed by the live discussion.

Among the business leaders participating in the live discussion, which took place in the Holland Performing Arts Center in Omaha, were William Niskanen, chairman of the Cato Institute; Peter G. Peterson, senior chairman of The Blackstone Group; David Walker, CEO of the Peter G. Peterson Foundation and former US Comptroller General; and Bill Novelli, CEO of AARP. Peterson, who was commerce secretary under President Nixon and is himself a billionaire from his investment in Blackstone, has committed $1 billion to promote campaigns to reverse the public debt.

Questions were taken from the audience and through the movie’s Web site. The discussions were about the movie I.O.U.S.A. which was broadcast along with the discussion via satellite to 400 theaters that night.

The documentary movie, having premiered at the Sundance Film Festival earlier in 2008, opened in 10 cities the day following the August 21 event. The movie was also screened at both presidential conventions.

Reuters stated that the movie “may be to the U.S. economy what An Inconvenient Truth was to the environment.” The nonpartisan film explained America’s four key deficits—budget, savings, balance of payments, and leadership. The film showed that the nation is faced with an ever-expanding government and military, increased foreign competition, and huge financial obligations as 78 million baby boomers begin to retire and collect benefits from entitlement programs.

The silver-screen debut presented an alarming picture of America’s economic scene amidst rising gas, food, and health care costs.

Distributed by Roadside Attractions, the film was sponsored by the Peterson Foundation, with the key aim of examining the country’s $9.5 trillion debt. The film argued that only real fiscal reform can resolve the debt. The current federal deficit is small compared with the trillions of dollars facing the country for future health care costs.

Pre-movie visuals featured running numbers of millions of dollars being added to the nation’s debt as time ticked by.

The documentary film’s premise was that future generations face a dismal economic future if debts are not reduced and if people do not spend less and save more.

Actually, Buffett took a different slant on the dire outlook ... “It’s a marvelous economy.”



Attention on the Nation’s Debt

Buffett, foreground, with from left, movie director Patrick Creadon; David Walker and Pete Peterson of the Peterson Foundation. In the far left are William Niskanen (largely obscured) of the Cato Institute, and Bill Novelli of AARP.

(Photo courtesy of the Omaha World-Herald)

The Story of Warren Buffett



I.O.U.S.A. Badge

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value “I.O.U.S.A.”



328





LASTING IMPRESSIONS


Jim Maguire, who is a month younger than Buffett, came to work on Wall Street on September 12, 1949. He knows all the old Wall Street stories, none better than the one he tells on himself.

Eleven months after the crash of 1987—in August 1988—George Gillespie, a lawyer representing Buffett, called Maguire about the possibility of getting Berkshire listed on the New York Stock Exchange.

Maguire, who had never heard of Berkshire, asked what its price was. [It was trading on NASDAQ at the time.]

“$4,500,” said Gillespie.

“$4,500,” Maguire replied, incredulbously. “I had no idea there was that much money in music.”

Maguire would later learn the difference between Warren and Jimmy Buffett. Ever since, Maguire worked at the Berkshire post run by LaBranche & Co. (now Barclays) “Berkshire has one of the most important companies in the world,” Maguire adds.



Buffett’s Heart is Revealed!

Buffett revealed! Berkshire’s quarterback likes both the University of Nebraska football team and Berkshire’s finances to be No. 1.

(Photo courtesy

of Warren Buffett)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Enough Margin of Safety?

Buffett rides high on NetJets newest aircraft, or rather a Segway—not quite the same, but close. So much for his oft-stated line, “We don’t understand technology.”

(Photo by Roger Ritchie/FlightSafety)

Of Permanent Value Lasting Impressions



Advice from the Oracle of Omaha: Be Thrifty

(Photo by Allan Maxwell)



Aristotle Contemplating the Bust of Homer

Charles T. Munger is known primarily for his work as girls’ rifle team instructor and

secondarily for his role as vice chairman of Berkshire Hathaway.

Lasting Impressions The Story of Warren Buffett



Warrence of Arabia

Buffett is riding high, perhaps after negotiating the purchase of the oil wells in the

background.

(Photo courtesy of Omaha World-Herald)



New York Stock Exchange Embracing Woodstock

Buffett, history’s greatest stock picker, rings the opening bell for trading at the New York Stock Exchange May 9, 1997. On the left is Jim Maguire, the specialist for Berkshire’s stock. Next to him is then–New York Stock Exchange chairman, Richard Grasso, who resigned in 2003 after an uproar about his $140 million pay package. Maguire was one of the people calling for Grasso’s resignation. To the right are Buffett, Buffett’s wife, Mrs. Susan Buffett, (although only the top of her head is visible); and Buffett’s daughter, Susan.

(AP/Wide World Photos)

Of Permanent Value Lasting Impressions



329





BEN GRAHAM SUMS IT UP


Ben Graham, the creator of value investing and Buffett’s beloved teacher, turned 80 years old on April 11, 1974.

At a seminar that year, he said:

Let me close with a few words of counsel from an 80-year-old veteran of many a bull and many a bear market. Do those things as an analyst that you know you can do well, and only those things. If you can really beat the market by charts, by astrology, or by some rare and valuable gift of your own, then that’s the row you should hoe. If you’re really good at picking the stocks most likely to succeed in the next 12 months, base your work on that endeavor. If you can foretell the next important development in the economy, or in technology, or in consumers’ preferences, and gauge its consequences for various equity values, then concentrate on that particular activity. But in each case you must prove to yourself by honest, no-bluffing self-examination and by continuous testing of performance, that you have what it takes to produce worthwhile results.



On his 80th birthday, Graham, an admirer of Tennyson’s “Ulysses” (“To follow knowledge, like a sinking star,/Beyond the utmost bound of human thought”), gave a speech summing things up. Graham’s talk appears as the epilogue of Benjamin Graham, the memoirs of Ben Graham, published by McGraw-Hill and edited by Seymour Chatman in 1996.

The poem, from the Victorian era, recounts Tennyson’s description of an aging Ulysses. As the hero gazes out to sea, he longs to venture forth again from his domestic scene to which he has returned. The final lines in measured iambic pentameter suit the Victorian spirit of industry and optimism.

Here are Ben Graham’s words at the end of his life:

It is strange that the Odyssey has meant so much to me, since Ulysses’ character is so different from my own. He was a great fighter and plunderer, while I have never fought with anyone or plundered anything in my life. He was crafty and devious, while I pride myself on being straightforward and direct. Yet he has attracted me all my life, as he has attracted countless readers for the past 2,500 years.



Now for my final message. What better one can I choose than the closing lines of Tennyson’s “Ulysses” (p. 315), those words well-loved and oft-repeated in the Graham family:



Come, my friends, ’tis not too late to seek



A newer world. Push off, and sitting well in order, smite



The sounding furrows; for my purpose holds



To sail beyond the sunset and the baths



Of all the western stars, until I die.



It may be that the gulfs will wash us down:



It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles,



And see the great Achilles, whom we knew.



Though much is taken, much abides; and though



We are not now that strength which in old days



Moved earth and heaven; that which we are, we are;



One equal temper of heroic hearts,



Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will



To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.



For his gravestone, Graham chose that last line.



Graham died at age 82.



The Story of Warren Buffett



Tennyson’s “Ulysses”:

“To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.”

(Photos by

Mary Porter)



Tennyson’s autograph from an 1881

edition of The Works of Tennyson



Alfred Tennyson

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Ben Graham Sums It Up



330





FAITH, HOPE, AND CHARITY


“If there’s another world he lives in bliss.

If there is none he made the best of this.” (Robert Burns)

Starting from scratch, Warren Buffett grew up to create one of the largest companies in the U.S., educated the public about investing, helped rescue the American economy with words and actions in the 2008–2009 financial meltdown, and now is revolutionizing philanthropy worldwide.

Having journeyed all his life to make money, Buffett is now in the process of giving it away.

In what could well become the biggest philanthropic effort of all time, Buffett and Bill Gates have called upon fellow billionaires everywhere to pledge a majority of their wealth to charity.

Carol Loomis revealed the ambitious fundraising drive in a Fortune story July 5, 2010, which said the idea was hatched at a dinner in New York in 2009. Attending were Buffett, Gates, Oprah Winfrey, Eli and Edythe Broad, Ted Turner, David Rockefeller, Chuck Feeney, Michael Bloomberg, George Soros, Julian Robertson, John and Tashia Morgridge, and Pete Peterson.

The plan will focus on the members of the Forbes 400 list, but anyone is welcome to make such a pledge to take effect in one’s lifetime or at death.

Buffett has said that 99% of his wealth is going back to society and that the bulk of his fortune will be distributed, in annual installments during his lifetime, to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Gates of course has donated large sums to his foundation.

Buffett and Gates called upon billionaires to make the pledge which Buffett said would be morally, but not legally, binding.

Among the first to make the pledge was Paul Allen, Gates’s friend who co-founded Microsoft. Allen said he had long planned to leave most of his estate to charity via his own foundation.

Buffett and Gates announced on August 4, 2010, that 40 people, including 30 billionaires and other wealthy families, had signed the Giving Pledge to donate more than half their fortune.

Among the new names were financier Ronald Perelman, Citigroup founder Sandy Weill and his wife Joan, hedge fund manager Jim Simons, and private equity manager David Rubenstein. Venture capitalist John Doerr and his wife Anne, Pierre and Pam Omidyar, Jeff Skoll, Barron Hilton, and George Lucas signed the pledge as did Barry Diller, Larry Ellison, and Boone Pickens (The Wall Street Journal, August 4, 2010).

By late 2010, the Buffett-Gates effort had enlisted more than 50 billionaires including CEO Mark Zuckerberg, AOL cofounder Steve Case, investor Carl Icahn, and former punk band king Michael Milken.

____________________

It all began on on June 25, 2006, when Buffett took to the world stage, as did Bill and Melinda Gates to announce that he would give the bulk of his money to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Word of the historic philanthropic event came via a Fortune article written by Carol Loomis, who quoted Buffett beginning with, “Brace yourself.” Over the years, Buffett had repeatedly said his fortune would go to the Buffett Foundation following his death, but, over time, plans sometimes change. His fortune would still go back to society—that hadn’t changed—but the means changed. No one had a clue that he would make the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation the vehicle for his gift—the largest charitable commitment in history going to the largest charity.

Buffett first brought the idea up to Gates about a year and a half before the announcement as Buffett said to TV’s Charlie Rose, “How can we do the most good for the most people, particularly the people who had gotten the short straws in life?”

With his dramatic shift, Buffett said that he will give 85% of his stock to five foundations: the Gates Foundation, Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation (the Foundation renamed for his late wife), and individual foundations established by each of his children, Susan, Howard, and Peter.

Buffett pledged five-sixths of the 85% to the Gates Foundation, which has focused on world health problems, particularly diseases such as AIDS, TB, malaria, and childhood diseases in developing countries. Gates has said, “Public health is amazing. It’s not just about saving lives. As health improves, life improves by every measure. Every other problem you’re dealing with—education, transportation—becomes far easier to manage. As you improve health, literacy goes up dramatically, people have smaller families, and all the factors that drive a stable, prosperous society come together” (Fortune, January 22, 2007).

Speaking to 26,000 researchers and public health workers at a conference hosted by the International AIDS Society of Toronto, Gates said, “Melinda and I have made stopping AIDS the top priority of our foundation” (New England Journal of Medicine, September 14, 2006). Bill and Melinda Gates have often said they are aware of the health disparities between the rich and the poor. The Gates Foundation has already been credited with preventing perhaps millions of deaths because of its work in making vaccines more available against such diseases as flu and yellow fever. The Foundation, among a number of causes, focuses on fighting childhood diseases.

The Gates Foundation also seeks to improve libraries in U.S. high schools.

Buffett’s gift to the Gates Foundation will have neither strings nor his name attached. Though the Loomis’ story said Buffett would join the Gateses on the board of the Gates Foundation, Buffett said it would have free rein in its operation. Still, he plans to check progress “daily.”

Buffett plans to handle the gift transactions by donating 5% of the balance of his wealth in July of every year; thus, there will be 5% less each year in the number of shares he owns. Buffett’s 2009 gift to the Gates Foundation amounted to about $1.6 billion. The amount given to the four Buffett foundations was more than $300 million. The yearly amount will fluctuate according to the value of Berkshire shares.

The New England Journal of Medicine article said Buffett’s gift will increase the Gates Foundation “annual giving from $1.36 billion last year to about $3 billion, or approximately $1 per year for every person in the poorer half of the world’s population. By comparison, the World Bank estimates that total health-related aid to developing countries in 2004 (from governments, international organizations, and private sources) was about $12.7 billion.”

Buffett’s A shares will be converted to B shares (1/30 of the A shares). Those B shares will be allocated thusly: 10 million to the Gates Foundation, 1 million to the Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation, and 350,000 to each of the children’s foundations. This breakdown was made before Berkshire’s B shares were split 50-to-1 in 2010.

In July of each year, Buffett donates 5% of the remaining earmarked shares to the Gates Foundaation.

Since 2006, Buffett has given almost $10 billion to the Gates Foundation.

Although the Gates Foundation sells some Berkshire shares each day, amounting to less than 1% of the daily volume, it also holds many shares. As of November 11, 2010, it held more than 90 million B shares. In the third quarter of 2010, the Gates Foundation was a buyer of Berkshire stock, adding 17.9 million B shares. The Berkshire holding is the foundation’s largest amounting to 52% of the portfolio.

The Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation has focused on reproductive health, family planning, pro-choice efforts, and reducing the nuclear arms race. The other three Buffett family foundations address a variety of needs. The Susan A. Buffett Foundation has focused mainly on early education for children from low-income families. The Howard G. Buffett Foundation has helped conservation efforts in more than 40 countries and advocated protection for African wildlife. Peter Buffett’s NoVo (“I alter”) charity has worked for educational opportunities, environmental causes, human rights, and the promotion of respect among various cultures.

It was Einstein who said, “Intellectuals solve problems; geniuses prevent them.”

Some called the announcement Buffett’s “finest hour.” Others called their brokers to sell their stock, thinking he was either ill or had lost his marbles. A blogger wrote a satirical story about Buffett’s relatives declaring him “incompetent.” Gates, however, heartily endorsed Buffett, calling him “the greatest investor for good” and told Buffett the Gates Foundation was now responsible for making good use of “your life’s work.”

In an interview with Loomis, Buffett said he was not ill, but that his wife’s death had had an impact on him. “Susie was two years younger than I, and women usually live longer than men. She and I always assumed that she would inherit my Berkshire stock and be the one who would oversee the distribution of our wealth to society, where both of us had always said it would go.”

Buffett’s children agree with his decision. His daughter Susan said, “It would be insane to leave us that much money.”

Buffett himself joked, “There is more than one way to get to heaven, but this is a great way.”

Buffett said:

I came to realize that the Gates Foundation was a terrific foundation that was already scaled up—that wouldn’t have to go through the real grind of getting to a megasize like the Buffett Foundation would—and that would productively use my money now. The larger answer is that over the years I have gotten to know Bill and Melinda Gates well, spent a lot of time with them having fun and, way beyond that, had grown to admire what they were doing with their foundation. I’ve seen them give presentations about programs and am always amazed at the enthusiasm and passion and energy they’re pouring into their work. They’ve gone at it, you might say, with both head and heart.



Bill reads many thousands of pages annually, keeping up with medical advances and means of delivering help. Melinda, often with Bill along, travels the world looking at how well good intentions are being converted to good results. Life has dealt a terrible hand to literally billions of people around the world, and Bill and Melinda are bent on reducing that inequity to the extent they possibly can.



If you think about it—if your goal is to return the money to society by attacking truly major problems that don’t have a commensurate funding base—what could you find that’s better than turning to a couple of people who are young, who are ungodly bright, whose ideas have been proven, who already have shown an ability to scale it up and do it right?



You don’t get an opportunity like that ordinarily. I’m getting two people enormously successful at something, where I’ve had a chance to see what they’ve done, where I know they will keep doing it—where they’ve done it with their own money, so they’re not living in some fantasy world—and where, in general, I agree with their reasoning. If I’ve found the right vehicle for my goal, there’s no reason to wait.



Compare what I’m doing with them to my situation at Berkshire, where I have talented and proven people in charge of our businesses. They do a much better job than I could in running their operations.



What can be more logical, in whatever you want done, than finding someone better equipped than you are to do it? Who wouldn’t select Tiger Woods to take his place in a high-stakes golf game? That’s how I feel about this decision about my money.



In a press conference with the Gateses at the New York Public Library the day after the Loomis story appeared, Buffett said, “I’m not an enthusiast for dynastic wealth, particularly when six billion others have much poorer hands than we do in life.”

The New York Public Library system was founded and nurtured by an earlier generation of philanthropists, including John Jacob Astor and Andrew Carnegie who seeded the nation with 2,800 libraries.

On hand for the Buffett announcement, philanthropist David Rockefeller praised Buffett’s originality and called the gift “unpretentious.” Bill Gates Sr., Gates’s father, also a noted philanthropist, was there as well.

Simply put, Buffett said his reason for giving to the Gates Foundation is because, “I’ve got some people who can give it away better than I can.”

One of the few dictates Buffett gave to the Gates Foundation was that his money be distributed in the year that it’s given and not just piled up in the Foundation. Buffett’s contributions mean that the Foundation will have to give away about twice as much as it now gives each year (about $2 billion in 2009).

Bill Gates has said Buffett inspired him to think more deeply about charity. “Warren has not only an amazing intellect but also a strong sense of justice. Warren’s wisdom will help us do a better job and make it more fun at the same time.”

Several weeks before Buffett’s announcement, Gates said he planned to phase out of his duties at Microsoft and focus on the Foundation’s efforts. Buffett said that had nothing to do with his decision; he would have made the donation even if Gates remained with Microsoft.

Buffett’s huge gift has inspired others as well. Quickly thereafter, action star Jackie Chan said because of Buffett’s example, he planned to leave half of his personal wealth to charity. Composer Andrew Lloyd Webber said he planned to sell his Picasso masterpiece, worth about $60 million, and turn the money over to good causes, including the theater and arts. “The sale of my Picasso masterpiece may not be a Warren Buffett, but hopefully be a mini-buffet. I am passionate about the training and education of young performers,” Webber told the British Broadcasting Company.

Later, Sandy Weil, the former Citigroup CEO, pledged to donate his $1.4 billion fortune to charity, saying it was a “deal with God,” and U.S. Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson will give his $800 million fortune largely to environmental causes. And Charles Feeney, co-founder of the Duty Free Shoppers Group store chain, joined Buffett and Gates in pledging most of his fortune to charity. Feeney had already transferred most of his wealth to his Atlantic Philanthropic foundation, which has given away more than $5 billion.

“The most seismic event in the New Establishment this year was surely Warren Buffett’s landmark decision to donate $31 billion of his personal fortune to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation,” said Vanity Fair magazine (October 2006). “With that gesture, the bar has been raised for other members of this group [world leaders and billionaires]. Many members of the Vanity Fair 100 have received gifts of inheritance, talent, and tenacity. In the post-Buffett future, a willingness to lend others a helping hand through philanthropic acts will be a major factor.”

For Buffett, though still on the board of the Gates Foundation, his gift allocation means he can devote more time to what he does best: invest. Charity will be Gates’s job. If he does his job well, the Gates Foundation, by far the world’s largest charitable foundation, and the Buffett family foundations will wind up with even more money. Many hail Buffett’s gesture as a defining moment in charitable giving.

What can be done with that money? Many are hopeful it will lead to great health care advances.

The Washington Post publisher Donald Graham called Buffett’s gift “the most creative thing that anyone had done and the way he has done it underscores how much admiration he has for Bill” (The New York Times, June 27, 2006).

Founded in 1994, the Gates Foundation, already ramped up to 275 employees at the time of Buffett’s gift announcement, had grown to 870 employees in 2010 and has been deepening its focus, mainly on health care.

Not long after the announcement of Buffett’s gift, things hit a hectic pace at the Gates Foundation. The Foundation went on a hiring spree and hired a World Book vice president, a genetic engineer from Monsanto, a founder of an Internet Company in Africa and the former CEO of a $100 million cattle-breeding company, among others. The flood of job applications was averaging 100 a day (Seattle Times, October 22, 2006).

New employees were coming from such sources as Microsoft and Boeing, as well as the government and nonprofit groups. The story also reported that

the Foundation’s office space has been continually reorganized to make room for more employees. Bill Gates moved into Melinda’s office to share space, handing his office over to four staffers.

The Foundation broke ground in 2007 on a $350 million headquarters located on a 12-acre site in Seattle. By the end of 2009, the foundation was overseeing about $34 billion in assets.

ROTARY INTERNATIONAL

The Gates Foundation seeks to leverage its dollars by working with other charities and governments much as it has done with Rotary International on its Polio Plus program to wipe out polio worldwide. Since 1985, Rotary has raised more than $600 million to wage war on the disease, which now has only traces in four countries: India, Nigeria, Pakistan, and Afghanistan.

Over two decades, some one million Rotarians have volunteered time and money to help vaccinate more than two billion children in 122 countries.

Partly because of the friendship between Bill Gates Sr. and the Rotary members, the Gates Foundation has assisted Rotary’s effort to the tune of more than $300 million in recent years, the biggest portion of which was a $335 million grant in 2010. It is one of the largest grants given by the Gates Foundation and the largest received by Rotary in its more than 100 year history. Other organizations and individuals including WHO, UNICEF, and Ted Turner have also contributed to Rotary’s effort.

The Rotary campaign was hailed in major newspapers and, according to Rotary official Ken Schubbert of Decatur, Alabama, some talk has surfaced about nominating Rotary for a Nobel Prize for its unstinting effort to wipe out polio.

When Gates was asked if he plans gifts for cultural efforts, he said, “We’re not against culture, but we can’t do everything.” He said the focus was mainly on curing diseases. “There is no reason we can’t cure the top 20 diseases.”

Buffett may well deserve much of the credit for the new concept in charity captured in the opening line of a Dow Jones story (December 6, 2007): “In the new pecking order of inheritance, charity is emerging as the new favored son.”

BILL GATES IS THE NEXT WARREN BUFFETT

Buffett is passing “de facto” control of Berkshire to board member Bill Gates, who personally owns a block of Berkshire’s stock. His foundation will own an enormous block, much of which Buffett has used to control Berkshire. At the very least, Gates will have an enormous interest in Berkshire’s welfare. It seems as though a torch is being passed from Buffett to Gates (certainly where the Foundation’s plans are concerned—and maybe eventually, in other ways, too). The next Warren Buffett, in a sense, may be Bill Gates.

But make no mistake: Berkshire is so unique and perfectly amalgamated with the man who built it, that no matter how bright Berkshire’s future might yet become, there will never be another Warren Buffett.

HELLO, BONO

U2’s rock star Bono was in a restaurant in France with a group of his friends who work on such problems as world debt relief, the fight against AIDS and poverty, when he got a call from Gates.

“‘Are you sitting down?.… Listen, you need to sit. I’ve got somebody who wants to tell you something.’” Buffett came on the line and announced his gift to the Gates Foundation. Bono related the story in Fortune (January 22, 2007): “So Warren Buffett was talking to all the people who really do the work.… To see their faces as the man gives away his life’s work to their work, to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, was quite a remarkable moment. It was the first call they had made.”

GIFT INVOLVED A TRIP TO A BANK AND A COURIER

Carol Loomis reported (Fortune, July 11, 2006) that on July 3, 2006, Buffett drove himself to downtown Omaha, walked into the U.S. Bank of Omaha, and opened his large safe-deposit box.

Like so many people, Buffett simply went in and pulled out a stock certificate—only his numbers were vastly different from those of most other people.

“He took out a 1979-dated certificate for 121,737 shares of Berkshire Hathaway, on that day worth about $11 billion.” As of July 6, 2007, it was worth about $13.6 billion since Berkshire’s stock was trading at $111,500.

Loomis said he took it back to his office (along with a few smaller certificates) pondering how to get the certificates to the Wells Fargo office in Minneapolis where each of the Class A shares could be converted to 30 Class B shares in order to begin his charitable donations. “He considered FedEx and elected instead to turn one of the 16 people working at Berkshire headquarters into a courier.” That person was Berkshire’s Debra Ray.

The large certificate will provide enough B shares for much of his giving for the next decade. The excess shares were deposited into a brokerage account. Can you imagine the broker reporting the incident to his branch manager:

Broker: Hey, boss, we’re getting some B shares in today.

Manager: How many?

Broker: About $11 billion worth.

Manager: Oh, really.

Loomis reported that almost 70 years before, when Buffett was six, his father gave him $20 to open a savings account at the same bank. “It took him five years of gifts, chores, and moneymaking schemes to build the account to $120. Having accrued this fortune, he bought, at age 11, his first stock: three shares of Cities Service preferred for $114.”

The rest, as they say, is history.

His crusty partner, Charlie Munger, kidded him about the gift to the Gates Foundation, “You finally had a good idea.”

_____________

On September 20, 2006, Gates and Buffett both attended the Clinton Global Initiative (CGI) in New York. CGI is designed to make the world better by spurring action on poverty, health care, global warming, and religious/ethnic conflict. Among the 1,000 people attending the second annual CGI—many paying $15,000 each—were Buffett, Gates, British businessman Richard Branson (who pledged $3 billion over the next decade to combat global warming), First Lady Laura Bush, U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan and 50 current and former heads of state.

Clinton was quoted as saying: “Yeah, I’m glad Warren Buffett came this year because, you know, first of all, he’s a great example, a philanthropist.... When he gave his money, he gave it to Bill Gates’s foundation, and I called him and I thanked him. And I said, ‘Warren, what’s the deal here?’ He said, ‘Well, you know, I could build a monument to myself, but I made all this money because people thought I could make money better with their money than they could.’ And he said, ‘They were right.’ But he said, ‘Bill Gates can spend my money better than I could.’ And he said, ‘It’s really crazy; it’s wrong for me not to do this.’ So I think not only do I find him a delightful man, but he set an example that we should all remember, that none of it’s about our egos, it’s about the most effective way to invest whatever money or time we have. So I’m especially glad that he came.”

In 2006, the Gates Foundation said that all its assets are to be spent within 50 years of the death of the remaining trustee with the idea of “doing as much as possible, as soon as possible.”

“Americans are becoming more philanthropically aware. I think it’s a growing trend. I hope it is,” Buffett has said (Bloomberg, June 26, 2007).

In 2007, Buffett distributed 572,375 Class B shares to five charities to which he has pledged most of his stocks. The worth was $2.12 billion on July 6, 2007, somewhat greater than the dollar amount in 2006 because the shares appreciated more than 5% since then.

In 2008, he gave away smaller amounts to other unnamed charities, donating about $14 million, or 3090 B shares, to the charities.

PATTY STONESIFER

Bill Gates was helped by Patty Stonesifer in starting his foundation. She stepped down at the end of 2008.

Stonesifer, who had already made millions as a Microsoft employee, worked for $1 a year for years as the founding CEO of the foundation.

She managed its growth to the point that it was four times as large as the next largest foundation and was dispensing $3 billion a year, more than five times the amount given away by the Ford Foundation (The New York Times, February 7, 2008).

Stonesifer, who is married to political columnist Michael Kinsley, oversaw about 800 employees in their attempts to find a vaccine to prevent AIDS, eradicate malaria, and spark an agricultural revolution in Africa. She was replaced by Jeff Raikes, a longtime top executive at Microsoft and close associate of Bill Gates.

Stonesifer said that the book that influenced her the most came via Buffett (Omaha World-Herald, July 27, 2008). The 420-page book, I Remember: The Autobiography of Abraham Flexner, is now out of print except for a few copies online. Buffett gave “a dog-eared copy” of the book to the Gates family a decade ago and it found its way to Stonesifer.

Buffett said his own ideas on philanthropy were influenced by the Flexner book which exposed poor teaching practices at U.S. and Canadian medical schools as a cause of substandard medical care at the time. The original report, written in 1910 for the Carnegie Institute, prompted the Rockefeller Foundation and others to back higher standards in medical schools. The book was first published in 1940 and reissued in 1960 by Simon & Schuster.

BERKSHIRE STOCK SALES

The Gates Foundation planned to sell 550,000 of its Berkshire B shares over a three-year period that began April 1, 2008. It was worth about $2.4 billion at that time. The sale was to help comply with federal tax rules.

A WAR AGAINST TOBACCO

In 2008, Gates and New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg announced a joint $500 million effort against smoking.

The billionaires planned to support efforts that raise tobacco taxes, help smokers quit, ban cigarette ads, and protect nonsmokers from smoke.

Nearly four million people worldwide—about 10,000 people a day—die each year from tobacco-related illnesses.

BIG DONATION

On January, 29, 2010, the Gates Foundation announced the biggest gift ever to a single cause: A $10 billion donation to develop vaccines in the world’s poorest countries.

The 10-year goal to reduce child mortality was announced at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland.

CHINA

When Buffett and Gates extended their Giving Pledge program, which included a trip to China to visit with Chinese billionaires, the effort at first was met with a lukewarm response. The Chinese feared being put on the spot. “Some people have wondered if we’re coming to China to pressure people to give. Not at all,” Buffett and Gates wrote in a letter. They said China should develop its own culture of philanthropy.

SYNERGY, AFTER ALL

If synergy began at Berkshire about 20 years ago with the setting up of a See’s Candy cart at the Nebraska Furniture Mart, perhaps the earthly fruition of that movement will be with the wind and solar farms along the Burlington Northern railroad tracks.

Decades from now maybe Buffett will be looking down from the heavens on even grander synergies between Berkshire and the Gates Foundation.

$500 MILLION TO HELP POOR OPEN SAVINGS ACCOUNTS

The foundation in late 2010 pledged $500 million to help poor people establish savings accounts. The pledge, over five years, will let millions of people who live on $2 a day or less open the accounts in such places as Bangladesh and Tanzania.

THE “HOLLYWOOD PLEDGE”

Taking a call from the Buffett-Gates “Giving Pledge,” a member of Hollywood celebrities have stepped up and pledged the majority of their fortunes to the causes of their choice. Among them are Justin Bieber, Kim Kardashian, Lawrence Fishburne, Richard Gere, Jewel, Hugh Jackman, Ricky Martin, and Denzel Washington.

VACCINES

In 2011, Bill Gates pledged $1 billion for what he said were “vaccines rich kids take for granted.”

GATES FOUNDATION’S HOLDINGS

The positions and market value of the foundations largest holdings as of mid-2011 are as follows, according to Bloomberg News:





Cheerful Givers

Bill Gates, Melinda French Gates, and Buffett are shown during a town hall discussion on June 26, 2006, at the New York Public Library, a locale representing gifts of business titans of earlier years.

(AP Photo)

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Faith, Hope, and Charity

Faith, Hope, and Charity The Story of Warren Buffett



Andrew Carnegie

Arthur M. Shlesinger Jr.’s blurb on the back of this book says: “David Nasaw’s Andrew Carnegie is a fine and fascinating tale by a master biographer. Professor Nasaw brilliantly illuminates Carnegie’s mad gathering of riches and then giving a great fortune away. Carnegie’s children are certainly Bill Gates and Warren Buffett.”




The Bank of America

Gates and Buffett, called the Rockefeller and Carnegie of our time, following their mega-charity merger, at the Clinton Global Initiative (CGI) in New York on September 20, 2006.




Brace Yourself, Carol.

Carol Loomis and Buffett during the Berkshire annual meeting weekend in Omaha in 2005.

(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Of Permanent Value Faith, Hope, and Charity



Jeff Raikes



Patty Stonesifer



I Remember: The Autobiography of Abraham Flexner



(Photo by Mary Porter)

Faith, Hope, and Charity The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Faith, Hope, and Charity



330





THANK YOU


How do you properly thank someone for the random act of kindness of turning over, say, $30 billion to your foundation?

In a press conference at the New York Public Library on June 26, 2006, Buffett formally announced his gift. As a tribute to Buffett’s generosity, Gates gave him a copy of Adam Smith’s The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759).

Gates read the first words of Moral Sentiments to a room full of journalists: “How selfish soever man may be supposed, there are evidently some principles in his nature, which interest him in the fortune of others, and render their happiness necessary to him, though he derives nothing from it, except the pleasure of seeing it.”

Gates, a rare-book collector, earlier had given Buffett a first edition of Smith’s Wealth of Nations, a seminal work of great genius, which calls for the individual’s right to free enterprise. It is regarded as the foremost classic of modern economic thought. It is one of the earliest attempts to study the rise of commerce in Europe and offers rationales for free trade and capitalism. A first edition lists for about $150,000 in rare-book catalogs.

Rare book dealers say no record of the printing run of the first edition has survived, but the probable press run was 500 or 750 copies. Most of the

books, of course, would have been lost over the years, since it was published in 1776. Although it is difficult to say how many copies are in private hands, booksellers think as few as several hundred or perhaps only several dozen

copies remain.

Henry Thomas Buckle’s History of Civilization in England calls Wealth of Nations “probably the most important book which has ever been written, whether we consider the amount of original thought which it contains, or its practical influence.” Smith’s book had a profound effect on the founding fathers of the United States, including George Washington, John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, Alexander Hamilton, and James Madison. At one point, Smith discussed his book with Benjamin Franklin.

Although Smith never visited America, he showed an incredibly accurate view of the fledgling country in Wealth of Nations, “They are weak who flatter themselves that, in the state to which things have come, our colonies will be easily conquered by force alone. The persons who now govern the resolutions of what they call their Continental Congress, feel in themselves at this moment a degree of importance which, perhaps the greatest subjects in Europe scarce feel. From shopkeepers, tradesmen, and attorneys, they become statesmen and legislators, and are employed in contriving a new form of government for an extensive empire, which they flatter themselves, will become, and which, indeed, seems very likely to become, one of the greatest and most formidable that ever was in the world.”

Smith, a Scotsman reputed to have had one of the highest IQ’s ever, matriculated at age 14 at the University of Glasgow. There he came under the tutelage of a great teacher, Francis Hutcheson, whose “the greatest happiness for the greatest number” became Smith’s world view. He then went on to Oxford University in England.

Smith developed the principles of laissez-faire saying that duties, bounties, and prohibitions of the old mercantile order interfered with the free flow of goods. The Beatles later refined Smith’s thinking in their classic “Let It Be.”

The oft-quoted phrase “invisible hand” appears only once in Wealth of Nations. It is in this passage:

But the annual revenue of every society is always precisely equal to the exchangeable value of the whole annual produce of its industry, or rather is precisely the same thing with that exchangeable value. As every individual, therefore, endeavours as much as he can both to employ his capital in the support of domestic industry, and so to direct that industry that its produce may be of the greatest value; every individual necessarily labours to render the annual revenue of the society as great as he can. He generally, indeed, neither intends to promote the public interest, nor knows how much he is promoting it. By preferring the support of domestic to that of foreign industry, he intends only his own security; and by directing that industry in such a manner as its produce may be of the greatest value, he intends only his own gain, and he is in this, as in many other cases, led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his intention. Nor is it always the worse for the society that it was no part of it. By pursuing his own interest he frequently promotes that of the society more effectually than when he really intends to promote it.



In his book The Mind and the Market (p. 51), Jerry Muller writes: “Though Wealth of Nations is in good part about commerce, it was not written for businessmen and merchants. A book focused on the analysis of market processes motivated by self-interest, it was written by one of the most admired philosophers of the Enlightenment, a former professor of logic, rhetoric, jurisprudence, and moral philosophy, in order to influence politicians and rouse them to pursue the common good.”

Muller continues: “As a moral philosopher, Smith was concerned about the nature of moral excellence, but like many enlightened intellectuals, he tried to begin by describing humanity as it really is.

“His project was to take man as he actually is and to make him more like what he should be, by discovering the institutions that make men tolerably decent and might make them even more so. Smith drew upon more than a century of reflection on the possible social benefits of the individual’s propensities to self-love, egotism, self-interest, pride, and approbativeness, when these were properly channeled by social institutions.”

Warren Buffett’s unflagging pursuit of excellence as an investor, along with his exemplary and selfless philanthropy, embody Josiah Tucker’s “summation” quote in Muller’s book: “Josiah Tucker, an Anglican divine who was the foremost British advocate of free trade before Adam Smith, summed up his approach: ‘The main point to be aimed at is neither to extinguish nor enfeeble self-love, but to give it such a direction, that it may promote the public interest by pursuing its own.’”

Buffett has said, “I actually gave the stock away 15 years ago in my mind; I created a trust mentally. When my wife died, I was forced to do something. Soon after I discussed my plans with Bill and Melinda, they gave me an original copy of Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations. In the first chapter, Adam Smith talks about specialization of labor, which talks about markets and allowing countries to specialize and work on what they are good at. Mike Tyson doesn’t try to run Berkshire, and I don’t try to get in the ring with Mike Tyson. This is how I look at philanthropy. I started looking for people that were younger, smarter, more experienced, and doing it with their own money. I looked for people who had similar goals, who would do the best with the money. In effect, I outsourced the handling of my philanthropy. It was a no-brainer” (Sham Gad’s notes from a student visit with Buffett in Omaha, January 2007, at Georgia’s Terry College of Business).

Buffett, Gates, and his wife have started asking the nation’s billionaires to pledge at least half their net worth to charity in their lifetime or at death. If the effort is successful, it could raise hundreds of billions of dollars for charity (Fortune, June 16, 2010).

P.S. When Ben Franklin visited Glasgow in 1759, he met with Adam Smith and may have given him a heads-up about Buffett: “Keep an eye on Buffett. He’s smart and he’s really going to take this free enterprise idea and run

with it.”



Rare Find

A first edition of Wealth of Nations is exceptionally rare: it is another wonder from the year 1776.

(Photo courtesy

of Bauman Rare Books)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Economic Wordsmith

Adam Smith spent 12 years

writing Wealth of Nations.



“Probably the Most Important Book” in Economics

Title page from the first edition of Wealth of Nations shows its entire title.

(Photo courtesy of Bauman Rare Books)

Of Permanent Value Thank You



332





THE GEORGE SCHOOL


Buffett noted a specific act of charity stemming from Berkshire’s stock rise when he told CNBC (September 17, 2007) of the $128 million gift from the daughter of David Dodd, his former teacher, mentor, and partner at Columbia University. Dodd and his colleague Benjamin Graham wrote the 1934 classic Security Analysis.

Dodd’s daughter, Barbara Dodd Anderson, pledged the money from a trust over a 20-year period to the George School in Newtown, Pennsylvania. It’s one of the largest single gifts to a school in the U.S., dwarfing the current endowment at the school of $77 million. The gift was inspired by Buffett’s own gift of the bulk of his fortune to the Gates Foundation.

The money came from David Dodd’s early investment in Berkshire. Barbara Dodd Anderson was a member of the 1950 class of the George School, a private coed Quaker prep boarding and day school for grades nine through twelve.

Dodd bought shares of Berkshire when it was a struggling textile mill and put the shares in his daughter’s name.

A news release from the George School quoted Buffett as saying, “Any longtime shareholder of Berkshire is appreciably wealthier because of the indirect influence that David Dodd had upon our company. As both a teacher and a friend, I revered Dave. I am delighted that his decision to invest in Berkshire has enabled Barbara to honor her father and George School through this wonderful gift.”

Dodd was responsible for Buffett being admitted to Columbia after his rejection from Harvard. Buffett wrote Dodd after the deadline for admission to Columbia, and Dodd saw to it Buffet was admitted.

Born in 1932, Anderson grew up in New York City. After attending the George School, she went on to St. Laurence University and there earned an M.A. from Columbia Teachers College before marrying and settling in Fresno, California.

Anderson said in an interview with The New York Times (September 19, 2007), “I’m 75 years old, I have Alzheimer’s, and I am probably not going to be around a lot longer. So I might as well see the money do some good.”



George School

Founded in 1893, the George School has 540 students. Annual tuition is $37,500 for boarding students and $27,500 for day students. Famous graduates include civil rights leader Julian Bond, actors Blythe Danner and George Segal, Broadway director-producer James Hammerstein and lyricist-composer Stephen Sondheim.



Barbara Dodd Anderson

and granddaughter,

Mollie Dodd Anderson

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value The George School



333





WEDDING BELLS


Buffett, spent his 75th birthday playing bridge and painting with friends including Bill Gates, but topped himself on this 76th birthday.

Wedding bells rang for Buffett and his longtime companion, Astrid Menks, in a private ceremony held at his daughter’s home.

Buffett and Menks, then 60, were married in a 15-minute civil ceremony about 5 p.m. August 30, 2006, according to Omaha World-Herald (August 31, 2006). Veteran reporter Steve Jordon, who has written dozens of Buffett stories over the years, was the first with the news.

He quoted Buffett’s daughter Susan as saying, “It’s her only and his last (wedding).”

The couple went from the wedding ceremony to dinner at the Bonefish Grill, a casual seafood restaurant in Omaha’s Regency Court shopping mall (where Borsheims is located) but had no plans for a honeymoon. “Warren honeymoons every day in his office,” Susan said.

Five years later, on Buffett’s 81st birthday and the couple’s fifth anniversary, they were back again for dinner at the Bonefish Grill.

After the first Mrs. Buffett left Omaha in 1977, she arranged for Buffett to meet Menks, who fixed homemade soup. Menks moved in with him within a year. The two have lived as a couple since that time.

Mrs. Susan Buffett and Menks got along well, often shopping together at Borsheims and sitting together at annual meetings.

Mrs. Buffett later called Menks “a very helpful, giving person,” who is happiest when she is helping someone. In press reports, Buffett’s daughter, Susan, was quoted as saying: “She has been with my father all these years for all the right reasons. I’m so thankful. She loves him and takes care of him. If Warren didn’t have a cent, she’d be with him.”

Born in Latvia, Menks came to Omaha as a child and later worked as a waitress at the French Café where Susan Buffett used to sing. Menks lost her mother when she was young and her father, a waiter, sent his children to an orphanage.

Menks is known for her thrifty, streetwise ways; avid recycling efforts; and her charity work, particularly Omaha’s Henry Doorly Zoo.

Of course the real question about the happy event is whether Buffett followed the advice he once gave Bill Gates about buying wedding rings. Buffett long prodded Bill Gates to spend 6% of his net worth (at Borsheims) for Melinda’s ring because that’s what Buffett spent at the time of his first marriage. So did Buffett spend 6% of his current net worth for Astrid’s ring? Apparently, Buffett bought a 6-carat ring for Astrid.

As it turns out, Buffett, accompanied by his daughter, went to Borsheims a few days before the wedding and bought a ring, very likely at a discount. Price: undisclosed.



(Photo courtesy of the Omaha World-Herald)

Steve Jordon



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Astrid Menks at Borsheims in about 2003.



(Photo by Mary Porter)

No-gifts Wedding Announcement

The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Nancy Line Jacobs)

Astrid Menks, late investor Phil Carret, and the late Mrs. Susan Buffett

during the Berkshire Annual Meeting weekend in 1997.



(Photo by LaVerne Ramsey)

Astrid Menks in 1996

Of Permanent Value Wedding Bells



334





BACK TO A $100,000 STOCK


After a surge of buying on the afternoon of October 5, 2006, Berkshire

traded at the long-dreamed of price of $100,000.

It ticked up to $100,100, but closed for the day at $98,995. Still, Berkshire was a $100,000 stock. Forty shares traded at $100,000 and another 30 shares traded at $100,100.

It was the first time that a stock had ever traded in six digits in the U.S.

A cheer went up at the Berkshire trading post on the floor of New York Stock Exchange. Shareholders hit the message boards with the likes of: “BRK.A just hit 100k, then a minute a later, it’s at $100,100. Today’s the day. Oct. 5, 2006. I don’t care if it closes there or not; it made it! I’m breaking out the $80 bourbon tonight!”

Another wrote: “It has been a long wait but well worth it. Tonight, to celebrate, I’m splurging on a 2-liter bottle of Diet Coke and after dinner, dessert at the Dairy Queen. My wife can pick up anything on the board. Everyone in my office has been coming up and congratulating me (or trying to borrow some money). Anyway it feels good now that we hit $100k.”

A shareholder with a literary bent wrote: “We’re at the Gates of Investors’ Heaven.”

Berkshire’s stock price hit $10,000 a share in 1992. So, from 1992 to 2006, Berkshire’s Class A share grew at a compounded annual percentage rate of 17.88 [17.8708% to be more exact]. At that rate, in 10 years, the share price will be at $517,947; and four more years, $1,000,000. Dream on!

The $100,000 moment came at a time when the Dow Jones Industrial Average was hitting new highs and when the 2006 hurricane season appeared to be coming in surprisingly light, signaling a boon for Berkshire’s insurance businesses.

Relief was expressed that the computers worked for the $100,000 rollover in price.

Michael Kane, of Alpharetta, Georgia, was one of the first investors to enter an order after the $100,000 mark was reached. He sold six shares of Class A stock, valued at about $600,000. In spite of the high dollar value, he only paid $33.42 in commission because the trade was based on the number of shares and not on the stock’s price. Kane had bought the shares six years earlier at $69,800. He planned to use the money to build a vacation home on Cape Cod (The Wall Street Journal, October 6, 2006).

Berkshire has been and remains the most expensive stock in the U.S. The second highest-priced stock was Allegiant Physician Services, which traded at $15,250 on January 7, 1993, newspaper reports said.

Round numbers may be meaningless, as Buffett has indicated, but they do

provide a sort of milestone. One shareholder said that the really meaningful

number will be $1 million. “It will deserve a little more attention since Buffett

will be 88.” That’s in reference to the shareholder’s hopes that Berkshire will rise 10-fold over the next dozen years, as it has at times in the past.

The stock closed at $100,000 on October 23, 2006, making Buffett one of a few CEOs who said his stock price and salary were the same.

Buffett told CNBC (October 25) that he never splits Berkshire A shares because then he would have to take a pay cut.

He said, tongue in cheek, he and the board had a deal that he gets paid the amount of one share. “So if the stock is $100,000, I get paid $100,000... if you split hundred-for-one, my salary would go down to a measly $1,000 a year,” he joked.

It has been a long and winding road since Buffett formed his partnership in 1956. But for now, $10,000 is now worth at least $450 million. At the end of 2007, Berkshire’s stock price was $141,600. Quite a journey. Quite an odyssey.

BACK TO $100,000

The world’s financial meltdown caught up with Berkshire in 2008, and the stock fell on November 13, 2008 to $96,050, but closed at $102,800, and then hit a low of $70,050 on March 5, 2009, before closing at $100,000 on August 3, 2009.

The stock went back and forth over the $100,000 line so many times in 2009 that maybe Buffett thinks he gets paid for the number of times Berkshire crosses $100,000.

The stock perked up to close at $120,450 at the end of 2010. But later in 2011, it plummeted right back toward $100,000 following the trading in Lubrizol stock by trusted Berkshire executive David Sokol, the devastating earthquake in Japan, and other disasters leading to major insurance losses. Also, a severe hit to world stock markets as the U.S. debated the federal debt limit ceiling and as political uprisings one after the other occurred in Arab nations and financial woes multiplied in the Euro Zone.

On September 22, 2011, amidst credit downgrades for major banks and recession fears, Berkshire’s stock plunged back below $100,000.

The stock closed that day at exactly $100,000, meaning the stock was trading at roughly book value, the lowest book value in relation to the stock price in decades.

Even at a low point of about $73,000 on March 6, 2009, the stock traded above book value.

Talk about no Buffett premium.



“May You Live Until Berkshire Splits.”

Sitting pretty and still not splitting the stock

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Back to a $100,000 Stock



335





A STOCK BUYBACK


At $100,000, with Berkshire trading at about book value, Buffett clearly felt the stock was undervalued and said so on September 26, 2011, when he announced an authorization for a stock buyback, the first in Berkshire’s history.

The share repurchase authorization for both the A and B shares came as the board decided “the underlying businesses of Berkshire are worth considerably more” than where the stock was trading. When Buffett uses a word like “considerably,” he means, well, considerably.

The company said in a statement it planned to buy back shares up to a 10% premium to the then-current book value. So Buffett was willing to pay 90 cents for a dollar of book value and he has said Berkshire is worth more than book value.

“If we are correct in our opinion, repurchases will enhance the per-share intrinsic value of Berkshire shares, benefiting shareholders who retain their interest.”

That’s because buying shares back into the company gives the remaining shareholders a larger proportionate share of the company’s profits.

Berkshire stock had been trading down all year apparently for a variety of reasons ranging from succession concerns, a dour stock market, and a sluggish economy.

In the statement, Berkshire said the buyback would be with available cash on hand, but that Berkshire’s cash position would not fall below $20 billion. Berkshire planned to buy the shares in the open market or through negotiated private purchases. No price for the purchases was set for the buyout which was to last “indefinitely.”

The stock jumped about 5% on first word of the buyback and ended up 8% for the day, approaching the price of 10% above of book value.

In the past Buffett has generally shunned buybacks for Berkshire, saying that if times were good for buying, there probably were better buys than Berkshire.

In the 1999 Annual Report, during a period of heavy declines for Berkshire and the market generally, Buffett announced a buyback at roughly $40,000, but the stock rose quickly and Buffett never bought back any shares at all.

When Buffett considered buying back shares in 2000, the stock was still trading at a 50% premium to book. At $100,000 in 2011, Berkshire was trading at about its lowest point ever as far as stock price to book price. Also, book value generally understates the company’s intrinsic value. That’s because Berkshire carries its operating businesses at the original cost of the purchase. For example, See’s Candies would be worth many times its original on-the-books cost.

Buffett has also said that, at times, he has erred in not buying back Berkshire stock. He says buybacks make sense only when there is ample extra cash on hand and when a stock is trading well “below intrinsic value, conservatively calculated.” Buffett has never said what his number is for intrinsic value.

Some investors have pegged Berkshire’s intrinsic value at about $150,000.

The September 2011 statement about share repurchases said Berkshire is not obligated to repurchase any dollar amount or number of Class A or Class B shares.

At the end of June 2011, Berkshire’s book value for the A share was $98,716 ($65.81 book value for the B share), meaning Buffett would be willing to buy at a price up to 10% higher than that.

The buyback authorization gives the stock a “floor” and gives Berkshire a choice to buy in a bad moment.

This sea change at Berkshire came at a time when not only Berkshire appeared cheap but so did a lot of its stock holdings. On CNBC (September 30, 2011), Buffett said Berkshire had actually bought back some of its stock, but he didn’t say how much.

Maybe the “elephant” Buffett has been looking for is Berkshire itself.

But so far as to Berkshire, Buffett had bagged only a mouse, buying a mere $18 million of Berkshire’s stock in the third quarter of 2011.



Backing Up the Truck

Buffett thought fall 2011 was a time to buy Berkshire, to “back up the truck” in investor lingo. Berkshire shareholder Richard Sercer described the moment: “Beep... beep... beep... mohmback... mohmback... mohmback.”

The Story of Warren Buffett



OK, Gentlemen, Buy Berkshire

(Photo courtesy

of Omaha World-Herald)

Of Permanent Value A Stock Buyback



336





HAPPY HOLIDAYS


Back in 1996, Buffett started a tradition of sending out humorous holiday cards. In 1995, he had his picture taken atop a camel. That photo became fodder for Buffett’s 1996 holiday card “One of the Three Wise Men.” Omaha World-Herald’s Chris Christen Nelson reported Buffett’s recollection of the pictured event: “I got in a race with Bill (Gates) and won” (Omaha World-Herald, December 20, 2003).

Over the years, Buffett has played Mickey Mouse, posed with the San Francisco 49ers cheerleaders, and impersonated Elvis Presley.

The cards are often accompanied by a box of See’s candy, and thus Buffett’s holiday card list has become known as the “candy list.”

Buffett’s assistant Debbie Bosanek was quoted in Nelson’s story as saying the list fluctuates from year to year, but between 125 and 150 cards go out.

Who’s on the list? “People he thinks might get a kick out of the card,” Bosanek said.

The 2003 card was a photo of Buffett and Arnold Schwarzenegger striding into a business meeting in England. The caption said, “The two finalists in the Arnold Schwarzenegger look-alike contest—I’m the one on the left.”

“Maria [Shriver, Schwarzenegger’s wife] and Susie [Buffett] can’t even tell us apart,” Buffett quipped on one of the cards (Omaha World-Herald, December 20, 2003).



To Finish First, You Must First Finish

This photo of Buffett was taken in China where he and Bill Gates traveled together in 1995. Buffett says, “My camel, starting from a terrible pole position, crossed the finish line first.”

1996

(Photo courtesy of Omaha World-Herald)

The Story of Warren Buffett



Disney Characters

Buffett and his wife, Susie, celebrate as Mickey and Minnie Mouse with Michael Eisner, then Disney CEO, and Michael Ovitz at a Cap Cities management meeting in Phoenix, Arizona, about the time of the Disney–Capital Cities merger.

(Photo by Maria Melin-ABC)

1997

Day at the Races

Buffett learns what Winston Cup driving is like at Disney World. Maybe the unidentified driver is really Charles Munger. Maybe Lou Simpson is in the back seat.



(Photo courtesy of Warren Buffett)

1998

Of Permanent Value Happy Holidays

Quarterback Sneak?

The San Francisco 49ers cheerleaders and their new coach Buffett are out having a good old time. Whatever sets your pants on fire.





Billion-Dollar Brain

Uncovered

Buffett in bald cap dresses up as Daddy Warbucks, or “Daddy Warrenbucks.”

(Photo courtesy of Warren Buffett)

(Photo courtesy of Warren Buffett)

(Photo courtesy of Warren Buffett)

1999

“What You See Is What You Get with Us”

—Warren Buffett

Elvis lives in the body of Warren Buffett. The King of Compounding impersonates the King of Rock ’n’ Roll. Buffett sent this Elvis photo to some friends for Christmas in 2001. Maybe he is singing the Yiddish proverb: “With money in your pocket you are wise and you are handsome and you sing well, too.”



(Photo by Astrid Menks)

Pictured here is the CEO of the most respected company in the world.

2001

Happy Holidays The Story of Warren Buffett





Who’s Who? Holiday Greetings vin 2003

(Courtesy of Warren Buffett)



Advisory Boards or Advisory Broads?



2002

2003

Nebraska Football Explained



2004



(Courtesy of Warren Buffett)



Taxes for Uncle Sam

2005



Of Permanent Value Happy Holidays



Berkshire Doubles its Board Members

(Courtesy of Warren Buffett)

2006



Team Berkshire Blocking for Buffett

(Courtesy of Warren Buffett)

2007

Happy Holidays The Story of Warren Buffett



(Courtesy of Warren Buffett)

Miss America Contest

2008



Strike up the Band

(Courtesy of Warren Buffett)

2009

Of Permanent Value Happy Holidays



Travel and Adventure in Canada

(Courtesy of Warren Buffett)

2010

Happy Holidays The Story of Warren Buffett



Occupying Santa

Buffett told Fortune (January 4, 2012), “I just wrote out the list without much thought to pick companies that we already owned as ‘completed’ and then just pulled the other names out of a hat—with an eye toward ridiculousness. The implication I hoped was that they were a list designating those I hoped to own in their entirety, not just shares.”

2011

(Courtesy of Warren Buffett)

Of Permanent Value Happy Holidays



337





BERKSHIRE GOES ON THE S&P 500


Standard & Poor’s announced on January 26, 2010 that Berkshire would go on the S&P 500 and S&P 100 indices, replacing Burlington Northern Railroad which Berkshire planned to buy in February 2010.

That night Berkshire’s Class A shares had dipped sharply to $101,751 and the newly formed B shares closed at $68. The stocks soared in after-hours trading.

Selection to the S&P came days after Berkshire approved a 50-for-1 stock split for its B shares as a prelude to buying Burlington Northern. After the split, “liquidity is no longer an issue,” said David Blitzer, chairman of S&P’s index committee (The Wall Street Journal, January 27, 2010).

Berkshire was the biggest U.S. firm not to be in the index.

Berkshire’s inclusion in the index meant that fund managers who track it needed to buy Berkshire shares. Many index funds, such as Vanguard Group, are benchmarked to the S&P 500 as a way of achieving market-performing returns.

Estimates were that new fund owners might need to buy about six or seven percent of Berkshire’s stock.

The stock rises the next day were subdued compared with what might have been expected. The A shares closed at $107,000 and the B shares closed at $71.36.

By the time the merger with Burlington Northern was completed on February 12, 2010, Berkshire’s stock had risen about 11%, meaning Berkshire issued fewer of its shares for the buyout. The savings amounted to about $1.2 billion for Berkshire (The Wall Street Journal, February 13, 2010). Pretty sexy stuff.

On January 28, 2010, Buffett issued a statement, in response to several inquiries, that Berkshire would not issue more shares than already planned at the time of the Burlington buyout. There would be no additional shares for what is often called an “index ad” issuance.

That Berkshire would not increase the number of shares could lead to more difficulty in fund managers’ getting shares since they would have to rely on already existing—and possibly reluctant—sellers.

The stock pop after the 50-for-1 stock split and the S&P news brought rejoicing far and wide for current owners. The mood was a huge change from the one created in recent years by an economy in the bathroom, huge selling by the Gates Foundation, succession worries, and all the rest.

Shareholders began e-mailing one another again about the good news. Small and large owners watched the stock fly almost every day. Some accounts were saved from death-by-margin calls. But few owners were happier than mutual funds holding a large percentage of Berkshire. According to Morningstar, those heavily invested in Berkshire shares were: Blue Chip Investor, 26.3%; Midas Special, 26.3%; Sequoia, 20.6%; Academy Select Opportunities, 12.7%; Weitz Value, 11.8%; Fidelity Select Insurance, 11.2%; Weitz Partners III Opportunity, 10.7%; Clipper, 10%; Weitz Hickory, 9.7%; Tilson Focus, 9.7%; Meehan Focus, 9.3%; Gratio Values, 9.1%; Weitz Partners Value, 8.7%; Oak Value, 7.3%; FIMCO Select, 6.8%; Matthew 25, 6.7%; Bread & Butter, 6.6%; Ariel Focus, 6.3%; BlackRock; 6.2% and Wintergreen, 6.2%.

Of course those who came out best just owned the stock—100% exposure.

Buffett has often said anything can happen in the stock market. Temporarily, these events showed that value investing and intrinsic value are for the birds. Just find the next company going on the S&P.

In mid-2010, Berkshire was included in the Russell indexes.

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value Berkshire Goes on the S&P 500



338





ODYSSEY SUMMARY


“It is the writer’s privilege to help man endure by lifting his heart, by reminding him of the courage and honor and hope and pride and compassion and pity and sacrifice which have been the glory of his past.” (William Faulkner)

“Quiet takes back her folded fields. Tranquille thanks. Adew.” (James Joyce’s Finnegans Wake)

Three seminal works in literature have cast and recast the story of hero as wandering adventurer: Homer’s Odyssey (roughly 850 BC), James Joyce’s Ulysses (1922), and Nikos Kazantzakis’ The Odyssey: A Modern Sequel (1938).

Warren Buffett is something of a modern-day hero in the same vein. Certainly in life and in finance, he’s made an Odyssean journey of travel and adventure.

THE ULYSSES OF LITERATURE

A founding work of Western literature, Homer’s original Odyssey of three thousand years ago is the timeless story of Odysseus, the hero most favored by the gods, who has since emerged in Greek, Hellenic, Alexandrian, Roman, Renaissance, medieval, and modern themes.

Odysseus remains the central figure in one of the greatest cosmic adventure stories, a most compelling look at the human condition. Odysseus fights wars, journeys to foreign lands, explores on the shores of wine-dark seas, encounters gods and heroes and monsters and shipwrecks, and emerges victorious through his passions for glory, love, vengeance, and his longing for home during his 10-year journey from Troy to arrive back in Ithaca. “The story of Odysseus, as told by Homer, is the celebration of a great survivor” (Harold Bloom, Genius, p. 505).

The Greek epics The Iliad and The Odyssey, forerunners of the literature of Western civilization, were at first believed to be the writings of many authors, but the final work is believed to be the work of one great literary genius about whom nothing of his personal life is known. What is known is that his works addressed justice, manliness, humor, and humility.

The most comprehensive renditions of the Odyssean themes have occurred in modern times. One is The Odyssey: A Modern Sequel by Greek poet and novelist Nikos Kazantzakis. His poetic masterpiece of 33,333 lines begins where Homer’s Odyssey ends—Odysseus’ return home to Ithaca. It tells of Odysseus’ decision to leave Earth in search of new adventures throughout the galaxy. He becomes a traveler and adventurer.

The other masterpiece following the Odyssean theme is James Joyce’s Ulysses, the book even T.S. Eliot called “the most important expression which the present age has found.” Edmund Wilson called Ulysses “perhaps the most faithful x-ray ever taken of the ordinary human consciousness.” The hero of Ulysses conducts his odyssey in the space of roughly one square mile in Dublin; whereas, Kazantzakis’s hero ranges out from Ithaca to Crete, Egypt (finding the source of the Nile), Africa, and Antarctic regions.

The Odyssey, The Odyssey: A Modern Sequel, and Ulysses, all portray an intelligent, clever, multifaceted hero who, in his travels, has adventures which include Sirens and Cyclopes, and endures many setbacks, yet he prevails in the end to arrive home at a remembered shore—his home and family. Odysseus, Homer’s wily hero of many turns, seeks to return to his hearth and home, and to his faithful wife, Penelope. “Yea all my days are consumed in longing—to travel home and see the day of my arrival dawn” (Homer, Odyssey, p. 75).

The Kazantzakis hero is a self-propelled, centrifugal soul and puts out to sea again, abandoning his home and seeking a bold new life of freedom and joy: “Erect on freedom’s highest summit, Laughter leaps. My soul, your voyages have been your native land.”

In the Kazantzakis poem, Odysseus seeks to become God’s companion in the search for freedom.

Joyce’s Ulysses is a modern-day retelling of The Odyssey. The work is the reconstruction of only one day—June 16, 1904—in the life of everyman Leopold Bloom, a 38-year-old newspaper ad salesman for a Dublin newspaper, The Freeman’s Journal. Bloom wanders the streets in a small, imperfect, real world of work and home. Despite his everyday musings and the ordinariness of activities of making breakfast, feeding the cat, reading the mail, attending a funeral, and assisting people in small ways—Bloom is, this one day, the great Odysseus in many ways. Bloom befriends a sonlike figure, Stephen Dedalus, after he’s knocked down in Nighttown. After a long day of potentially devastating setbacks and mythically reverberating victories, Bloom returns to his home at 7 Eccles Street, his “Ithaca.” Just another day. The interacting characters embody a series of parallels to Homer’s Odyssey. The modern hero’s day encompasses “the universal” as did Odysseus’ years on the high seas.

Joyce’s tribute to Leopold Bloom is, “He has traveled.”

The hero in each of these works, in each of their settings, provides hope that although humankind faces a hostile world, one can wrestle with and even extend humankind’s boundaries. Buffett illustrates the same principles in his own life.

Buffett has hunkered down in his modest home and office in Omaha most of his life and yet has also seen the bright lights of the world, while chalking up extraordinarily vast achievements and riches—riches which he has generously and selflessly started handing back to society.

His life is analogous to a life suggested by the cartoon showing a to-do list on James Joyce’s refrigerator to the left.

Wallman Investment Counsel’s Steve Wallman said:

In some respects, there never will be another Warren Buffett for the same reason there will never be another Babe Ruth. They’re both far larger than the sum of their total skills and records. They’re heroes in the true sense of the word. People may break Ruth’s records and Buffett’s, too, but it will be generations before a player or investor captures the public’s imagination the way Ruth and Buffett have. Babe Ruth was the first great home run hitter. I think Buffett is much the same—the first great stock market investor.



Iscar’s Eitan Wertheimer said (Bloomberg, June 25, 2008), “Warren has a message to the world. It’s balance.” He points with his index finger to his head, to his heart, and finally to his wallet. “And he does it in a fair, clean, and nice way.”

A great student and teacher, Buffett shows us that honesty and traditional values can prevail. By any measure for heroes, Warren Buffett has made a long transcending voyage—an exalted odyssey. He is the Odysseus for our time.

As Warren Buffett’s odyssey continues, collateral beneficence abounds when he makes us think, makes us laugh, and makes the world abundantly enriched. And all these are of permanent value. His is not a shabby performance on this bit of dust in the infinitely vast cosmos.

His life was gentle, and the elements

So mix’d in him that Nature might stand up

And say to all the world, “This was a man.”

Mark Anthony in

Julius Caesar 5-5-72-74

—William Shakespeare



“On the Knees of the Gods” Homer



James “The

Irishman” Joyce



Nikos “Zorba the Greek” Kazantzakis

The Story of Warren Buffett



(Photo by Michael O’Brien)

Net Worth:

About $50 Billion

Buffett, whose net worth today is about $50 billion, looks out over his beloved Omaha. He says he can think more clearly about the stock in front of him in Omaha than he can on Wall Street. To count Buffett’s money now in $1 bills would take a person about a thousand years. A truly Odyssean accomplishment.

Of Permanent Value Travel and Adventure Summary



Andy Meets Leopold Bloom

This is the door to 7 Eccles Street photographed in 2005. It is now in the James Joyce Museum in Dublin.

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)



(©2002 The New Yorker Collection from Cartoonbank.com)



James Joyce

Statue of James Joyce on O’Connell Street in Dublin

(Photo by Lisa Nichols)



The Odyssey of Homer by T. E. Shaw (Lawrence of Arabia)

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Travel and Adventure Summary The Story of Warren Buffett

“You can never be too thin, too rich, or have too many books.”

(Carter Burden in Vogue, March 1987)



A Cathedral of Literature: Six Books, One Hero, Many Cosmic Voyages

Homer’s Odyssey, Dante’s Divine Comedy, (in which Hell’s “Inferno 26” is reserved for liars, thieves, and “consultants” and is a special place where Dante encounters the wily hero Ulysses), Tennyson’s “Ulysses,” Kazantzakis’ The Odyssey: A Modern Sequel, Joyce’s Ulysses, and Charles Lamb’s The Adventures of Ulysses: All have, in one way or another, Odysseus as their hero. The muses of Mount Parnassus have sung.

(Photo by Mary Porter)

Of Permanent Value Travel and Adventure Summary



339





2060 ANNUAL REPORT


Michael Assael and I imagine this is about the way the Berkshire annual report may read for the year 2060:

BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY

To the Shareholder-Citizens of Berkshire Hathaway Inc.:

My partner, Charlie Munger, and I think of Isaac Newton as history’s greatest scientist, and we were alarmed by Isaac’s letter predicting the apocalypse in 2060 or thereafter.

As you know, our insurance units did take a substantial hit from global warming last year; but no plagues, floods, or locusts occurred. In short, Isaac got it wrong—for this year at least—and we wound up with a decent year. In fact, we’re in heaven.

Our gain in net worth during 2060, was $10 gazillion, an increase of 21.3%. For those who are not World Bank economists, that’s enough to buy the productive capacity of China and Texas. In 2060, we added a few museum-quality businesses to Berkshire. I’ll tell you about our new gems later in my report.

Over the last 96 years (that is, since Charlie and I took over Berkshire’s management during the dawn of the Woodstock era) Berkshire’s per-share book value has expanded at a rate of 20.1% compounded annually.

We can’t keep it up much longer. Though we will try our best, it is unlikely—make that impossible—to grow Berkshire at even 15% a year forever. Berkshire’s increasing capital base will unfortunately create a financial drag on our future growth rate. In due course, we will meet our Maker. Pray it’s not soon.

There’s no reason for you to do handsprings over Berkshire’s banner year, nor for that matter any single year’s stock market performance, because it’s your investment lifetime that really counts.

Short-term investors beware: The enthusiasm of the Wall Street crowd fueling heart-throbs one year often leads to heartaches the next. Just ask Woody Allen. His latest financial love story— Dot.Com Baubles—a helium Christmas, bombed by New Year. You cannot court short-term performance and expect lovable long-term returns.

What counts for you as a lifelong investor—more than a pulsating price rush—is the rise in the intrinsic value of the business you own over your lifetime. Why? Because stockprice generally tracks intrinsic business value over the long term. One example that comes to mind: Berkshire Hathaway. As Charlie says, it will pay you more to ignore the darn experts who would have you trade stocks at the rate teens trade texts.

It may surprise you that Charlie and I cannot determine Berkshire’s intrinsic value with the precision of a formula NASA would employ to land Enron’s and Bernie Madoff’s accountants in a hellish valley on Venus. Valuing a business is an inexact science. In fact, it’s part art. Charlie and I haven’t mastered that vague art of reading even Berkshire’s intrinsic value altimeter down to the last dollar.

Having said that, right now we think our shares are not undervalued. As Yogi Berra might say: If you invest money, you get no bargain overpaying. In fact, when Charlie and I heard the Social Security Trust Fund sold their underperforming index funds to buy more Berkshire Class US shares, we suggested to the President they wait, because we think Berkshire’s stockprice will soon slide into a buying zone during next week’s misguided cover story about Berkshire in Barron’s. Charlie has heard through the grapevine that Barron’s again will forget that in addition to our so-called “boring” stock portfolio, we also wholly own a group of all-star insurance, finance, utility, food, beverage, transport, media, building materials, construction, home furnishing, apparel, and direct sales businesses. (Did I leave anything out?) Charlie thinks Barron’s gross underestimate of Berkshire’s intrinsic value will present a buying opportunity.

The Barron’s tipoff to Charlie came from a gal (with better curves than a Coke bottle) who appears in next week’s Barron’s swimsuit issue: Barron’s will refer to Charles Darwin (one of Charlie’s contemporaries) and call Charlie and me “prehistoric cave men.” Then they’ll irrationally set the intrinsic value of Berkshire Class A at $30 million a share. But it won’t pay for you to panic. If Berkshire’s stockprice sinks dramatically below our rough approximation of Berkshire’s intrinsic value—remember, this is not an exact science—Charlie and I will boost our ongoing stock buyback. With our fists full of money wrapped around our baseball bats, Charlie and I and Babe Ruth will be pointing to the bleachers and swinging at this fat pitch in our buyback zone. As Yogi Berra said: “90% of the game is half mental.” The misguided Barron’s story would be an opportunity for the Social Security Trust Fund, too.

CHARLIE AND I FEEL YOUNGER AND WISER

Charlie and I, at age 71 and 64, respectively—I mean, the way we actually feel as we solar-scooter to work on our BYDs in our Berkshire “Geico” blue baseball caps and solar shoes—have energy that practically outdistances the energy Mrs. B (who was reincarnated in Y2K and is now a spring chicken of 60) brings to millions of her loyal customers at Berkshire’s Original Nebraska Furniture Mart, which now serves more than 100 cities on all continents.

When business school students ask how Berkshire is able to spot winners like the Furniture Mart ahead of the crowd, I tell them that I benefited from the greatest teacher in the history of finance, my role model, Ben Graham. Ben taught his students at Columbia that stocks are not figures that float on the tickertape but are pieces of living businesses. Ben taught his students to stay within their circle of competence when evaluating business concerns and to allow a margin of safety in their evaluation and in the purchase price they pay. Remember, you get no bargain by overpaying. Ben’s students learned it right.

In applying Ben’s guiding principles, Charlie and I try to be thorough and methodical. We must also be realistic. We look for a business we can understand, where we’re familiar with the product, the nature of the competition, and what might go wrong over time. We search around the corners whether the economics of the business—including its earning power over the next 5, 10, or 15 years—is likely to resemble a fine wine—to be good and getting better. Then we decide whether we would be buying into a business managed by people we feel comfortable being in business with—people with intelligence, energy, and, most importantly, integrity. Though this business evaluation process may sound straightforward, it’s far from easy. (Try it at home at your kitchen table.)

It hasn’t hurt that Charlie and I have a few more gray hairs this year and have reached an age where, as Spinoza said, we prefer “what is old and safe to what is new and dangerous.” Names like See’s, Furniture Mart, Dairy Queen, NetJets, Garanimals, and The Pampered Chef make our jobs a joy.

COMMON STOCK INVESTMENTS

In this section we present our “Sweet 16,” itemizing those of our 16 most financially fattening—Charlie calls them voluptuous—common stock positions with the largest market values (you know, Coke, American Express, Wells Fargo and so forth.) Our lineup of steady cash flow generators doesn’t change much, so there’s little current we add here.

As for our younger high-voltage stockholdings, we’ve adopted a don’t-ask-don’t-tell policy in honor of my usually silent partner, Charlie, who was again named America’s #1 Silent Director of the Year by the Corporate Raters Society. Charlie knows that ultimately lovable investment ideas are rare, valuable, and subject to competitive appropriation, so neither he nor I, normally discuss them.

If you’ve come to our annual shareholders’ weekends and attended our marathon, six-hour Q&A sessions, you know that Charlie appears tongue-tied (invariably brushing off your thoughtful queries with a concise, “I have nothing to add,” which he occasionally embellishes and renders unfit for general audiences). You see, as vice-chairman, Charlie quite properly leaves the soapbox limelight in Omaha to me.

But things aren’t always what they seem. That’s why I encourage you to hear the real Charles Munger in action and I personally invite each of you to attend “Charlie’s Annual Meeting of Worldly Wisdom” in Pasadena, where Charlie talks for hours and shares his wisdom as if he gets paid by the word. It’s in Pasadena where you can see and hear Charlie in his natural habitat—where he’s gregarious—and rarely ducks a question—and is as brilliant a modern man as you’ll ever meet. But beware: Charlie and his pragmatic wisdom are habit-forming. Fly to Pasadena with an IQ of 125—fly back at 140. Go to one of Charlie’s meetings and you’ll be hooked.

Getting back to our common stock investments—our Sweet 16 most financially fattening positions—remain enticingly in place and virtually untouched, though we marginally increased our holdings in Coca-Cola and in the ever-evolving Microsoft-Apple-Disney-TimeWarner-AT&T consortium. We’ll talk more about Gates and Coke later.

One personal item (concerning common stocks) that I’m always happy to share with you is a new “theory” I’ve been working on. (I’m not quite sure whether it qualifies as a principle.) My maxim, still a work in progress, goes like this: “We can predict the motion of heavenly bodies, but not the direction of short term stock prices nor the folly of crowds.” If my new aphorism sounds like a lesson from a ninth-grade science project, well, that’s about my speed. A folly expert like David Hume I’m not. Nor was Isaac Newton whose deductions I borrowed in devising my maxim. Newton learned all about the folly of crowds during the South Sea Bubble of 1720. Sir Isaac lost his shirt. My theory is still in development, and I’d appreciate more help with it. If you have a thought, specifically about this theory, drop me your brief. You can now e-mail me at warren@brk.a. (I’ve finally learned how to open e-mails.) You’re never too old to learn.

UNCONVENTIONAL COMMITMENTS

Though many of you think of me as the Pope, I’m by no means infallible. As Berkshire’s spiritual pilot, I’ve had my share of off-runway landings. (I’m only human, after all.) From warehouse clubs and luxury shops to robo-wash drive-throughs and karaoke pinball parlors, I’ve often veered off course.

But this time will be different. (As Charlie says, “The wish is the father of the thought.”) With Charlie preaching that the most profitable models in Marketing 101 are product differentiation and famous brand names, my eyes have finally connected with my brain. The proof: Berkshire entered the bidding for the Vatican, and lo and behold our bid was accepted by the Catholic Church and Berkshire is now the proud owner of that classic edifice. Now owning the Vatican along with The Louvre and the Metropolitan Museum of Art, which we acquired in 2050, we operate the most superb museum franchises on earth. Charlie’s first words upon hearing the Vatican pronouncement: “We’re infallible!”

As an added shareholder bonus, Berkshire’s NetJets ’copter service (piloted spiritually by Pope Coca Colus himself—who else?) will fly you nonstop between the Louvre and the Vatican. It’s an uplifting experience no shareholder can afford to miss before rising to investor heaven. What’s the bonus? Shareholders fly for half-price. (Charlie and I though, will pay full fare to boost Berkshire’s earnings.)

We bought several small countries (principalities really) last year, but I don’t want to name them because their citizens don’t know it yet.

I can tell you that Ireland is a country Charlie and I have had a line out to for years. But the good folks there couldn’t understand us, so we sent our emissary board member Tom Murphy, who is Catholic. Even his skills couldn’t land us our target, but Murphy was able to buy Martello Tower. You know, that’s where James Joyce lived briefly, and the place was immortalized as the setting in the opening pages of Ulysses.

We had been long the euro and took that with some silver from our London vaults and bought the tower, which is now the James Joyce Museum, from which we expect to earn decent money.

FEEL THE REAL COCA-COLA

Berkshire’s 70-year romance with Coke rocks on gracefully. In 2060 we enlarged Berkshire’s lalapalooza holdings in Coca-Cola. Though Coke has been slow dancing—growing earnings annually at only 10%—for a number of decades, that’s fine with Charlie and me. We’re Coke’s partner for life’s long haul. Berkshire now owns 66% of this deliciously unique unregulated leviathian, the result flowing from The Coca-Cola Company’s ongoing share repurchase plan. Plus, Berkshire gulped down a few more shares in 2060 when Coke’s stockprice sank momentarily in anticipation of Coke’s July 4th OneWorld Free Coke Giveaway. Imagine, we feed the world.

Each year, Charlie and I review (cover to cover) tons of annual reports (I’m not exaggerating; Charlie weighs them). We brush up on the financial history of every company in Value Line. We believe Coca-Cola has no equal. In the end we took the investment advice of Mae West: “A girl in a convertible is worth five in the phone book.”

The simple reason for our unwavering belief in Coca-Cola is no secret: People desire quenching their thirsts—even in air-conditioned rooms. (Who says investing has to be complicated?) This great American institution, The Coca-Cola Company, thanks to its dream products and powerful distribution system (and thanks in part to my own drinking habits), now supplies civilization with 30% of its liquid nutritional intake. So it’s only natural that again this year, when consumers voted, The Coca-Cola Company won the top ten slots in the Global Village Soft Drink Hall of Fame:

#1 Coca-Cola Classic (everyone’s favorite)

#2 Diet Coke (Charlie’s favorite for obvious reasons)

#3 Cherry Coke (your Chairman’s favorite)

#4 Vanilla Coke

#5 Coca-Mooka-Moola (kids worldwide love the creamy rich taste)

#6 Ginko Cocoba (If you aren’t worth its rich price, who is?)

#7 Diet Cherry Vanilla Coke

#8 Low-carb Coke with Lime

#9 Ginger Coca-Cola

#10 Coke Zero

I’m still drinking five Cherry Cokes and four Vanilla Cokes a day and hope you are too. (I can’t count high enough to tell you how many I drink at night.) I am told that when no one is looking, the president of Pepsi drinks Coke.

ACQUISITIONS OF 2060

Incidentally, we continue to play the Clintonian game of “More-Rather-than-Less and Sooner-Rather-than-Later.” We placed our arms around 60 privately held enterprises in 2060—everything from ABC Carpets to Zagat.

We bought a dozen more power plants from Kalamazoo to Kumamoto. At my age, I can’t remember them all, but Charlie’s got a list and will have mimeographed copies for you at the annual meeting.

Each of our new businesses was built by a superstar who knows how to widen her moat so not even a self-sustaining, armored submarine could penetrate. Every one of our new powerful business franchises is driven by the Mrs. B of its category.

Of course, I’d like to tell you about all our new superstars and winning teams that help society move forward but space allows me to mention only one: Lee Smee and her associates at 1-800-Lease-Me!.com. As you probably know, it took Lee Smee fewer than three decades to build her leasing company into what Charlie and I believe to be the largest leasing and sales operation in the world.

It’s no secret that I’ve been a big fan of leasing. That my own leasing habits were irrevocably formed during my high school years—the product of a wildly successful pre-puberty business career in pinball and auto leasing. But Lee Smee takes the cake. I’ve been a Lee Smee customer for 30 years (yes, that’s where I get my Elvis costume), and Lease-Me! products, prices, and personal service are the best I’ve ever experienced.

Every day millions of Lease-Me! customers click and call on Lee Smee and her team of miracle workers for peak leasing experiences. From Orlando to Ephesus, the world calls Lee for everything from paper clips (I’m serious!) and tricycles, to oil rigs and motorized wheelchairs. From cradle to grave Lee’s customer-friendly angels will take your leasing experience a step (or more) higher.

Lee tells me that managing a successful service-oriented leasing, sales, and supply-chain operation is all quite simple, even easy for her, as her heroes as a kid were Warren Avis and Saul Steinberg. When I asked Lee how she stays so focused on giving her customers peak delivery experiences, she quotes Joe DiMaggio: “I always try my hardest because there probably is a kid in the stands who is watching his first game.” It’s the one-on-one relationship between Lee’s associates and each LeaseMe! customer which is the key to Lee’s success. We’re proud to be on Lee’s team.

––––––––––––––––––––

I mentioned Orlando and Ephesus a moment ago for a reason. At this time, near mid-century, Berkshire is ready to launch its greatest product sendoff ever. The press got it only partially right when it reported the acquisition of more acreage for the expanded Berkshire Products Launch Center in Orlando. Well, Orlando is our main U.S. location, but Ephesus will continue to be the Global Center.

Charlie and I figured if a center of ancient civilization was good enough for the Virgin Mary, then, in our admittedly humble and secular way, it should be good enough for the Global Berkshire Products Launch Center.

According to legend, the Virgin Mary lived within walking distance of our Global Launch Center. (They didn’t have cars then—but they didn’t know that yet.) Although I’m known as an agnostic, occasionally I do like to hedge my bets, so I remind you of the See’s fight song: “What a Friend We Have in Jesus.” (See’s, of course, books most of its revenues from Christmas to Easter.) The only way Mary could have done better for See’s business would have been to have twins.

I have therefore included our second photo ever in a Berkshire annual report; this one shows the future site of our expanded launch center.

Further, I’ve asked my invaluable assistant, Debbie, to e-mail Berkshire shareholder Dr. John Houbolt, the NASA engineer who helped the U.S. land a man on the moon, and ask him for new ideas about the most cost-effective way to launch our products into outer space. He’s come up with another amazing plan to move our products by some gizmo to Mount Ararat (where Noah’s ark landed) and fire the products off at the highest point of the mountain. It will save us $2 billion annually in fuel costs, an extremely conservative figure in light of current gas price escalations. So light a sky rocket this July 4 in appreciation for shareholder Dr. Houbolt.

––––––––––––––––––––

We remain eager to hear from principals or their representatives about businesses that meet our purchase criteria. Charlie says you just don’t want to compromise on certain things—brain surgery, parachutes, and a final resting place for your business. If you have a business to sell us, just call Charlie or me

and you will have our answer, customarily in five seconds. Call collect if your business has a market cap of $200 billion. I’d say call on the smartphone I just bought, but I’m not 100% competent at using it yet. If your company has a market cap of more than $500 billion, please call my assistant Debbie collect on her smartphone and ask her to walk the few paces to my office and wave frantically.

BERKSHIRE BANK, MINT, AND TREASURY

Charlie and I are dead serious when we tell you we plan to out-issue USA Today and outshine Fort Knox. Last year our jewelry division Borsheims helped us buy more precious stones and shiny metals. I can’t pronounce the names.

When Charlie and I were deciding which gleaming metals and rare earth resources to buy, instead of just grunting a few syllables into the phone to each other as we usually do, we made two calls for advice, one to Woody Allen and the other to Yogi Berra. Woody told us, “Precious resources are at the root of all happiness.” Yogi told us, “When you come to the forks in the road, take them.” So Charlie and I went on a precious resource shopping spree.

We invested heavily and throughout 2060 Berkshire’s warehouses, which we collectively call “Arnold,” were overbulked. So... Borsheims began minting titanium Berkshire “OneWorld” ice cream spoons, which as you know, are ringing cash register bells across the universe of cultures. The current titanium spoon mania has Charlie singing the outdated words of an old rap song: “A silver spoon makes a sterling man.” Berkshire’s new precious resource purchases add backups of financial integrity to Berkshire’s rich mix of businesses and gives new meaning to the term storehouse of permanent value.

Our value storehouse means Charlie and I are always prepared for trillion-dollar acquisitions that make Berkshire, our perpetual motion value machine, stronger and extra superfaceted. It’s for this reason that Berkshire’s balance sheet is the world’s deepest. We are more liquid than Uncle Sam (we can earn profits faster than Uncle Sam can print money) and again have more current and ready assets than the Microsoft consortium. Even the captains of technology, bless their hearts, are convinced that Berkshire is the ultimate yardstick of steady growth and growing value. Their incubation time to realization should have been speedier—only now are they beginning to incorporate Berkshire Class P into their pension plans.

––––––––––––––––––––

One final note about our new endeavors: We’re now opening new Nebraska Furniture Mart locations worldwide at the rate of one a month. I know I’m supposed to be good at math, but I’ve been remiss in something that should have been in my circle of competence. All these decades, Charlie and I have been asking our managers to look for “add-ons” to our current businesses. But when I reached age 120 years ago, I realized the real concept is MULTIPLY! So, I’ve asked my assistant Debbie to e-mail our managers each quarter with the one word of guidance from headquarters - MULTIPLY!

MISTAKE DU JOUR

Mistakes occur at the time of the sin. We can only make our mistake du jour award, however, when we learn of our foolishness as our blunder becomes obvious. The year 2060 was a vintage year with keen competition for our blunder of the year award.

And the nominees.… Hold everything! Rather than embarrass myself unnecessarily, please allow me to mention only one comical blunder. The mix-up I have in mind occurred late in 2060 at Dairy Queen. Midnight Christmas Eve I picked up the phone thinking it would be Santa Claus but received a call that one of our Pasadena stores accepted a bogus $200 George W. Bush bill. “How could that be?” I reasoned, because the largest bill DQ is supposed to accept is the $100 Charles Munger bill. (Charlie now thinks he is Ben Franklin.)

Charlie will tell you about our costlier mistakes during “Berkshire Weekend” in May. Don’t miss our divine comedy of errors, so be sure to join us in Omaha. (More on “Berkshire Weekend” at the end of my report.)

INSURANCE OPERATIONS

Our main business—though we have others of great importance—is insurance. Berkshire’s long-time expertise and superannuated deep pockets allowed our insurance operations—the sale and servicing of “margin of safety” tools for the benefit of our customers—to reach new heights in 2060. Because of the leadership of Ajit Jain, whose praises I sing annually, Berkshire Hathaway Insurance Group continues to be the most trusted name in insurance. Don’t worry about my health, worry about Ajit’s. Charlie and I each are just approaching 100 years managing Berkshire and have never had an employee portrait in the annual report, so here’s a first: Ajit’s photo. If he has another good year in 2061, Ajit will be on next year’s cover—and he gets to pick the color!

Our DP Mann unit that we bought back before the turn of the Millennium—which had long ago bought out its longtime friends, Lloyd’s of London and Tokio Marine and Fire Insurance—recently purchased Swiss Re during the credit-derivative implosion. This will greatly bolster our presence in the world insurance market. You all know Mae West’s famous line: “I like two kinds of money—foreign and domestic.”

Our float—the money we hold in trust for policyholders—continues to be attracted to us in ever larger amounts and at no cost. Our success is derivative based: derived from Berkshire’s trust, service and efficiency.

Because of our sterling reputation, we’re making more money holding and investing float—other people’s money we temporarily retain—than ever before in Berkshire’s history (or in anyone’s history, Charlie happily tells me). But insurance is a most demanding business, even for old, established companies like Berkshire. We’re virtually certain to be called on to come to the rescue during a super-catastrophe—a monster earthquake, tsunami, bio-hurricane, or nuclear meltdown. Though nobody does it better than our Ajit, insurance is unpredictable, and Ajit and his team have their work cut out for them. So light a candle for us if the lights go out on Broadway like they did back in 2003, or if a quake in Kyoto causes the temple bells to ring in Beijing.

NEW TECHNOLOGY

I am writing this part of my letter to you from my new, high-tech, name-brand mattress, “The Warren,” in my small office at our cramped but cozy headquarters in Omaha. (Heaven only knows why the boards allow executives to be paid in proportion to their office size.) This year, we increased our coziness level at Berkshire and hired our first new temp since 2050. We also did the unthinkable: upgraded our computer system back to pencil and paper. If this doesn’t help with the continuing Y2.06K financial software crisis in a cost-efficient way, we’ll switch back to the older Microsoft technology. We just try to do what makes sense—it’s part of our thrifty, mattress-on-the-floor, Woodstock mentality here at Berkshire. “The Warren,” by the way, is now springless and organic—try this amazing mattress out when you come to Omaha in May.

Though I’ve used a cell phone a few times on life’s business stage (the first time around Y2K, when there was no crisis, by the way), I decided to buy an upgraded smartphone model last year so I could conveniently speed-dial Charlie from Dairy Queens in China. When I found a top-of-the-line BYD titanium composite iPhone type for $29.99 at the Nebraska Furniture Mart, I quickly snapped it up. Debbie, my assistant and technology tutor, a great-grandmother now, has been teaching me how to use all its new apps. Though friends I meet at my local Costco continue to snicker at my techno-naïveté, Charlie eggs me on by favorably comparing me to his pet chimpanzee Warren.

Nine weeks ago Santa brought your chairman BYD’s revolutionary, next-generation iC3Dad player and extra Berkshire theme song discs. (I was a good boy!) This may sound a bit odd for a 130-year-old man, but it’s only the third player I’ve ever owned. I bought my first digital player the year I sang Berkshire’s company song in our company movie at our Y2K Annual Meeting. My new BYD iC3Dad allows me to vary the speed and direction so I can hear Berkshire’s theme song in 3D, backwards and forwards and in slow motion. Your Chairman’s neurons are slowing down.

THE FORBES 400

Yes, again my buddy Bill Gates is on top. The simple reason is this: His last check to his Gates Foundation hadn’t cleared when Forbes went to press. I’ve asked him to give me a fair chance at the top spot again by paying his pledge bills on time. When he came to Omaha—Bill calls it “hanging out” for his “Oracle of Omaha” lessons—I said to him, “Bill, why don’t you pay your pledge bills earlier, before Forbes’ cutoff dates, please.” Bill’s “Oracle” lessons, by the way, are going well, though Bill insists there is no next Warren Buffett.

Though my good friend is a few zillion richer and years younger than I, you should be assured that notwithstanding my slowing neurons I have never felt friskier. I love running Berkshire, and if enjoying life promotes longevity, Methuselah’s record—as well as Gates’ momentary status on the Forbes list—is in serious jeopardy.

REPORT ON WOODSTOCK

I wanted to insert an ad here to say that Charlie and I are looking particularly to shoot a few elephants, not mice, overseas. We love the U.K. and Ireland and Europe generally and have been looking hard at China, Korea, India, and Japan. Well, you know, everywhere on earth for good returns. Last year, we bought NASA’s international space station. We’re sending Woodstock Charlie to the moon this year and expect him to have a cosmic impact. And I keep hearing rumors that we’re about to buy Mars Wrigley or something.

REPORT ON CHINA

Last year China began investing its spare cash in Berkshire; this will be its reserve currency and we think everyone will live happily ever after.

BERKSHIRE’S ANNUAL SHAREHOLDERS WEEKEND

Charlie and I look forward to sweeping you off your feet in Omaha—the Cradle of Capitalism—the first weekend in May this year during “Berkshire Weekend.”

The bash at our jewelry store, Borsheims, will take place, as usual, on Sunday. Gosh, I almost forgot to announce: Borsheims bought Mikimoto, which will be added to Berkshire’s jewelry and collectibles segment.

You’re all gloriously dynamic shoppers, so Borsheims will remain open 24 hours a day, straight through Shareholders Weekend. Sales records are made to be broken you know—so stop by and see Mikimoto’s chocolate and vanilla pearl Dilly Bar collection (center aisle at Borsheims), and let it be your inspiration. If you feel more daring, get high in FlightSafety’s gemstone flight simulator, the perfect pick-me-up for your back yard. Remember, this is Woodstock for Capitalists, so bring your checkbook for the perfect impulse purchase. And if you trip home from Omaha for the very first time in your very own NetJet, I’ll personally throw in Mikimoto’s Dilly Bar pearl earrings, nose ring (unpierced), or cuff links—on the house! We offer amazing shareowner discounts all weekend long.

Charlie will be camped out all weekend at Borsheims cash register to autograph your receipts, no matter how large or small—but bigger is better. Charlie never gets writer’s cramp no matter how many receipts he autographs, so double your purchases this year and let’s see if we can give him tennis elbow.

We’ll continue our tradition of having dinner together Sunday at my favorite steakhouse, Gorat’s. Remember, just mention my tech-tutor’s name, Debbie, and you’ll be served a free order of hash browns.

Our annual meeting this year will be held in Omaha’s award-winning architectural masterpiece Omadome—the football stadium at the University of Nebraska. Please indulge me if I mention that President Howie Buffett, my grandson, will be in the audience at this year’s meeting.

Last May more than 500,000 of you—including 23 heads of state—journeyed to Omaha. You came from every country to the greatest show on earth, beat your own sales records, and asked six hours of high-grade, off-the-charts questions. This year—come early—we expect an even larger crowd at the Omadome—as well as a few hundred million more viewers via the Internet. Don’t be confused when Nebraska’s national championship football team and marching band run onto the field at high noon. There will be no football game. During the lunch break, Marc Hamburg, our chief financial officer, will feature his latest world premiere, multimedia, soap opera, epic 2060 extravaganza: Follies Berkshire.

At our noontime break, Charlie and I will come around to each of you with Cokes, Dilly Bars, and See’s Candies. To speed the lunch process, please have the correct change as we come by. (At our age, Charlie and I don’t make change.) After we collect your money, we’ll take more of your questions until we fall out—or until Charlie says something optimistic.

––––––––––––––––––––

Here’s one last piece of good news for Charlie and me and we think for Berkshire fans as well. Charlie and I are getting older, but we have found a solution in the Woody Allen credo: “I don’t want to achieve immortality through my work. I want to achieve it through not dying.”

Yogi Berra hit the ball out of the park on this subject back about the turn of the century when he was at Yankee Stadium to throw out the first pitch on Opening Day. The team honored the Yankees who had died in the previous year by listing their names on the scoreboard. Yogi said, “I hope I never see my name up there.” Well, just put me in the same dugout with Yogi.

Though Charlie and I are growing grayer, allocating capital is a business in which a few more gray hairs can’t hurt. Charlie and I don’t need great hand-eye coordination or hard abs to push money around (thank heavens), and you can take comfort that we still make a winning duo. Our minds feel as sharp as Gillette’s newest surface-to-air Diamond 007s. That’s what counts.

Well … I’m not that sharp. I almost forgot to remind you that in addition to showing your tickets to get into our annual meeting, you must wear your Fruit of the Looms as well as something from Borsheims. Oh, and also something from that other company we just bought ... with the little polo man.

So come to Omaha in May and see us in action. Unite, enjoy, and maybe even reproduce with your fellow shareowner-comrades. MULTIPLY! We’ll see you soon.

Best regards,

Your Chairman

March 1, 2061

P.S. Remember all that talk that went on for decades about succession at Berkshire? Well, one afternoon after the market closed—when I had just wrapped up the largest order in history for “garbage” bonds and was sweating profusely—I poured a tall glass of Coke’s new Cherry Ginko-Cocoba and tried to sort out the succession plan. I called Charlie, and he came up with a John Gault-like solution: What we did was clone a dozen of each of us. Charlie, who reads all those books like Genome, figured out how to do it. Cloned future leaders of Berkshire are stationed around the world looking for bargains as I write. I’m disappointed Clonaid and Rael beat us to the punch on this. Charlie and I took a look at Clonaid, by the way, and we decided not to pull the trigger after getting a close look at the white space outfit. You know, Charlie and I sometimes make some investment decisions in five minutes, but this one took me three seconds and Charlie two seconds. If you see Charlie and me sporting a Top Knot or a white space outfit, dump your stock. Just for backup and a margin of safety, we plan to hire every person in India whose first name is Ajit. So, for better or worse, for richer or poorer, you are blessed with us forever—like Strawberry Fields.

And, really, too much attention has been paid to the succession issue. My great-great-grandson Howie has had a business card for years, and so far at age 25 he has made more money (adjusted for inflation)—and has given more away—than Bill Gates or John D. Rockefeller by age sixty. Howie, you’re the one.

I practically forgot. The wind and solar farms and electric transmission units along our Burlington Northern Pathway made more money last year than the railroad itself.

Way, way back in that odd year of 2011, I mentioned we might like to buy such companies as Archer Daniels Midland, General Dynamics, and Exelon. Late last night we bought all three. We have our work cut out for us merging them into an ever-expanding Berkshire.

The merger of Wells Fargo and Bank of America, now called Berkshire/USA Bank, is going well and lends to almost all Americans. Finally, on another happy note, actress Anne Hathaway has given birth to a healthy son, named Berkshire Hathaway. Charlie says he’s the father.



Isaac Newton’s

Early Warning

The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value 2060

2060 The Story of Warren Buffett



Martello Tower

The Martello Tower in Dublin was built in 1804 by the British Army to protect against a feared invasion by Napoleon. It had become the private residence of Oliver St. John Gogarty in 1904, when James Joyce at the age of 22 was invited to stay there. He did stay briefly, and the tower served as the location of the opening scene in Ulysses. In 1962, Sylvia Beach, publisher of Ulysses, opened the tower as a Joyce Museum.

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

(Photo by Pat Kilpatrick)

Of Permanent Value 2060

2060 The Story of Warren Buffett



Amphitheater at Ephesus

The harbor city of Ephesus, Turkey, one of the most important economic centers of antiquity—gateway between east and west—is the logical site for the GLOBAL Berkshire Products Launch Center. Here where St. Paul spoke, where Christians fought tigers and where Cleopatra met Mark Antony, seems an historic spot to launch Berkshire’s most ambitious business entry ever.

Of Permanent Value 2060



(Photo by

LaVerne

Ramsey)

Ajit “One-of-a-Kind Manager” Jain

2060 The Story of Warren Buffett

Of Permanent Value 2060



(Photo by Mary Porter)

God by Woody Allen



(Photo courtesy of Michael Assael)

Starsky and Hutch

From this mid-1970s photo, we now know where Michael Assael gets his best lines. Yogi wants his tombstone to say, “It’s over.” (Larry King, Remember Me When I’m Gone, p. 55). Michael may want his to say, “I wish this were over.” And I’m partial to Fannie Flagg’s: “Does this mean the book tour is over?” (King, p. 73).



Anne Hathaway



The Story of Warren Buffett



(Courtesy of Vermont Historical Society)

Under Repair for the Next Edition

John Milton called the printing press “that mighty engine of liberty.” This smoking old printing press had to be retired for repairs after the printing of the 2011 Edition. But it will be back in working order for the next edition with all its emendations.



What Happens in Omaha Does Not Stay in Omaha

This incongruous photo shows an over-the-hill reporter with Fox Business Network anchor Liz Claman.

(Photo courtesy of Liz Claman)

